---
title: 'National Assembly - 31 May 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-05-31
---

TUESDAY, 31 MAY 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

Acting Speaker Mr N P Nhleko took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or mediation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): Please be seated. Order! Order! Hon
members. Does any member wish to give a notice of motion?


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mrs D VAN DER WALT: I hereby give notice on behalf of the DA that I shall
move:

   That this House -

     1) discusses the growing crisis in the care of the elderly due to the
        failure of the Department of Social Development to pay subsidies to
        organisations in institutions caring for the aged and the failure
        by the government to review the subsidy amount allocated for the
        care of the aged in light of inflation.


[Applause.]


                          TIME ALLOCATED TO PARTIES


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move without notice:


    That notwithstanding Rule 106(5), time allocated for party responses to
    the Minister’s statement today will be as follows:

       ANC: five minutes; DA: three minutes; IFP: two minutes; and all
       other: parties one minute each.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I am sorry to be difficult but in fairness, I
think, to all parties and certainly to the DA, we received notification
earlier today - probably at 10:30 or 11:00 - that the DA had 5 minutes and
I don’t think it is right that the time should summarily be changed now,
sir. I would request that we have our 5 minutes as planned.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): Order! Hon members, I would suggest
that the Whips try and sort out that issue. Are you objecting to the time
allocated or to . . .?

Mr M J ELLIS: Yes, Mr Chairman, we are. We would prefer that we go back to
the original suggestion which was, I think, the ANC, eight minutes; the DA,
five minutes; the IFP, four minutes; and other parties, one minute each.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): Order! Hon members I’ll give some time
for Whips to be able to sort out that issue amongst themselves. Thank you.
We will probably come back to that motion.

Decision of question postponed.


                      QUESTIONS NOT TO HAVE PRECEDENCE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move without notice:


   That notwithstanding the provisions of Rules 29(8) and 113(1), Questions
   shall not have precedence tomorrow, the 1 June 2005.

Agreed to.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): Order! Hon members, we will now proceed
to the statement by the Minister of Correctional Services. We also appeal
to the Whips in the meantime, whilst the Minister is dealing with the
statement, to sort out the question of the time allocation, please. Thank
you. [Applause.]

            SPECIAL REMISSION OF SENTENCE FOR SENTENCED OFFENDERS

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, hon members, allow me
to quote from the book of John, Chapter 8. I am a little bit shy to do this
because my theology teacher is sitting over there:

   They brought a woman unto him and they said to him: Teacher this woman
   was caught sinning. Then those who had been convicted by their conscience
   went out one by one beginning with the oldest even to the last and Jesus
   was left alone and the woman was standing in the midst. When Jesus had
   raised himself up and saw no one but the woman, he said to her: Woman
   where are those accusers of yours. Has no one condemned you? She said: No
   one Lord and Jesus said to her. Neither do I condemn you. Go and sin no
   more.
[Applause.]

Hamba ungabuye wone. [Go and sin no more.]
While delivering my Budget Vote address in this House on 13 April, I gave
notice that an announcement would be made in due course that would impact
positively on corrections and related matters in the correctional
environment.

On Freedom Day, I stated that serious consideration was being given to
granting a special remission of sentence to sentenced offenders. This is a
power derived from section 84(2)(j) of the Constitution of the Republic of
South Africa, Act 108 of 1996, through which the President may pardon or
reprieve offenders and remit any fines, penalties and forfeitures. This
power was last exercised on 18 July 1998.

With the White Paper on Corrections in South Africa having been adopted by
Cabinet earlier this year, a new policy direction in the correctional
system now places the emphasis on correcting offending behaviour and
development and care with the objective of ensuring the rehabilitation of
offenders and ultimate re-integration of these offenders into communities.
It’s a policy direction that we believe will contribute to the dual aims of
reducing incidents of repeat offending and fighting crime in our
communities.

Offenders must accept responsibility for their actions. They must
acknowledge their wrongdoings and work with those in the correctional
system to positively change their lives. This can never be achieved where
the correctional system is punitive or vengeful. I want to repeat this.
This kind of approach can never be achieved where the correctional system
is punitive or vengeful. It must be a system where the focus is on
corrections, if we want to succeed in convincing offenders that crime is
totally unacceptable.

This proposed remission of sentence for offenders is in line therefore with
our policy of correcting offending behaviour and development. It is
directed at those who display a willingness to change. It’s not government
being soft on crime. On the contrary our intolerance of crime is reflected
in the fact that anyone who presents a danger to society will not be
released under the terms of this envisaged remission of sentence.

In considering a general and conditional reprieve of sentence for sentenced
offenders, probationers and parolees, a number of factors were considered.
These included: One, the powers and functions as outlined in our
Constitution with regard to pardoning or reprieving offenders; two, the
granting of remission of sentence to offenders is an international practice
that’s exercised in most democracies; three, the adoption of the White
Paper on Corrections in South Africa; four, entering our second decade of
democracy with the objective of building on and strengthening the
achievements of our first years of democracy; five, a continued zero
tolerance towards aggressive, firearm related, sexual and drug-related
crimes; six, public interest and concern and the integrity of the justice
system; seven, the safety and security of the public; eight, the interests
of victims of crime; and lastly, repeat offending by those who gain from
this remission of sentence.

Hon members, it’s never easy when a decision of this kind is taken. It
probably would have been easier to avoid giving consideration to a
remission of sentence. It would be very easy to just run away from it and
not face it square on, but that would be an avoidance of our
responsibilities as a responsible government. At times decisions might be
taken that are perceived to be against the best interest of the public. In
this instance, I sincerely do not believe this to be the case. This
decision has been taken after careful consideration and much, much soul
searching as regards the current situation that prevails in our
correctional centres.

If we want to be seen to be fighting crime effectively, correcting
offending behaviour and ensuring the rehabilitation of offenders, then our
actions must be such that those in our correctional centres would want to
adopt a life-changing attitude for themselves. Through granting this
remission of sentence - ingqawuza or inyawuza as hon Trevor Manuel calls
it. He calls it inyawuza. Its called ingqawuza or ingqawule. Mr Mlangeni
would know it very well. Through granting this remission of sentence we are
sending a message to all offenders that society is prepared to give them a
second chance despite their behaviour. We are saying to offenders that in
our second decade of democracy they can play a positive role and that as a
society we are giving them that chance.
To the offenders who stand to be released once the remission of sentences
is implemented a very, very strong warning to you: Do not construe this as
government or society being soft on crime. We abhor the crimes that you
commit. While we do not reject or condemn you as human beings, we reject
your behaviour and your crimes and would not hesitate to again incarcerate
you and others who believe that you can continue with lives of crime with
impunity.

As Jesus said to the woman in Chapter 8, we also do not condemn you. All we
are saying: Go and sin no more. Go and commit no other crimes in your
lives. Together with other agencies in the criminal justice system we will
remain vigilant to your behaviour and we will not hesitate to go after you
if you spurn this second chance that society is granting you.

I want to assure the public at large, our families, and the whole community
of South Africa that the prison doors will not be suddenly opened and allow
offenders to flood our communities. We are taking every measure possible to
ensure that the release of qualifying offenders will be controlled, will be
manageable and will be      co-ordinated. My teams in correctional services
are standing by all over the country waiting for the announcement to be
made tomorrow morning – an announcement that will release some of these
offenders.

No offender who committed aggressive crimes against human beings, firearm
related, murder, sexual or drug-related crimes will be released. None of
those offenders will be released. [Applause.] No offenders who are a risk
to society will be released. Every offender who qualifies for release will
have to attend pre-release programmes. These programmes will involve the
participation of community organisations and families to ensure that
adequate support systems are in place. We have spoken to all the
stakeholders, the NGOs who work with us, the churches and the faith-based
organisations to assist us with this release.

In considering remissions, priority will also be given to qualifying
children. There are children, hon members, in our prisons. Some of those
children will qualify tomorrow to go home. There are young people,
juveniles, in our centres. Some of them will qualify to go home tomorrow.
There are females who are in prison; women with children, with babies –
some of them will also qualify to go home, depending on their sentences.
[Applause.] There are elderly people: 70-year olds and 63-year olds who are
in our centres. Some of those elderly people with disabilities will also
qualify to go home. There are people with chronic illnesses in our centres.
Minister of Health, some of those will, on medical grounds, be released to
go home.

Certain identified crime categories will be excluded, as I have said, as
there are certain crimes that we will not touch at all. Sentenced offenders
facing further charges will also not be released. I will be announcing the
operational details of this remission of sentences tomorrow. And if you
have noticed what I have said in the categories, awaiting-trial detainees
who have not been sentenced by the courts will not be touched by this
remission. They still have to await their chance to go through the courts.

Tomorrow morning at 07:30, I’ll be announcing this at Pollsmoor female
prison, from which some of those women will be walking home. This would
include details of the staggered release of qualifying offenders; we’ll do
it over a period of 10 weeks. Families and committees will also play a
vital role in ensuring that those released are reintegrated successfully.
I’m under no illusion about the challenge that is facing us. While every
effort is made to ensure that those that are released stay out of prison,
we should not be so naïve as to believe that some of them might not
reoffend. Some of them . . .

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Is the hon member prepared to take a question?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Yes, I am, hon member.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: When they leave tomorrow, will they continue to do
physical exercise? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: They will be walking Vuka South
Africa; they will be led by the Minister to do exercises.
So, we are not so naïve as to believe that they will not commit any
offences. If they do commit offences, then the law should take its normal
course. It will mean that they have rejected the overtures of a humane
society, and they will deserve nothing less than to be put back in prison.

I therefore want to appeal to you as hon members, to the public at large,
and especially to business, to reach out to those who have been released
and to assist them in acquiring gainful employment that could contribute
towards them turning their backs on crime for the rest of their lives.

Ndenza ke eso simemezo kwiintsapho zonke ezinabantu ebebekade bengaphakathi
ezitrongweni zethu ukuba zibamkele bafumane imisebenzi. Singabathyaleli
ekwenzeni izinto ezingalunganga. Ndiyacela nakosomashoshini abakhulu ukuba
nabo babamkele ngokubanika imisetyenzana emincinci ukwenzela ukuba
basebenze. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[I am making an appeal to all the families who have family members in our
prisons to welcome them back and to help them get jobs. We must not drive
them to do the wrong things. I am also asking big businessmen to welcome
them by giving them small jobs so that they can work.]

To the offenders: This is a second chance that’s being given to you by this
humane society and that is being given to you by Almighty God. When you’re
advised tomorrow that you qualify for remission and a possible release as
an offender, please, lift up your hands and say: “You are a wonderful God!”
Thank you.


                          TIME ALLOCATED TO PARTIES


                      (Decision of Question on Motion)

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): Hon members, we have to go back to the
motion without notice that was moved in the name of the Chief Whip. Party
Whips have been consulting amongst themselves; therefore the question is
whether there are objections to the motion as read out by the hon Deputy
Chief Whip. Are there any objections to the motion being adopted?

Motion agreed to.


                   PARTY RESPONSES TO MINISTER’S STATEMENT


Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, it is a fact that the majority of South African
prisons are extremely overcrowded. Under these circumstances it is small
wonder that gangs thrive and that very little rehabilitation occurs. It is
clear that the problem of overcrowding must be tackled; but it is equally
clear that this must happen in a way that does not undermine the deterrent
effect of imprisonment, nor must it endanger society.

The Ministry of Correctional Services, today, proposes reducing the
sentences of several categories of what he describes as minor offenders, so
as to achieve this aim. The Minister’s proposal is, with respect, well
intentioned, but misdirected. Any across the board reduction of sentences
undermines the criminal justice system. One has to assume that people are
serving time in prison because a judge or magistrate applied his or her
mind to an appropriate sentence, after considering the seriousness of the
crime, the history of previous convictions and the interests of society.
Remission of sentences undermines the deterrent effect of imprisonment, it
trivialises the sentences of courts and it is a slap in the face of the
many hundreds of thousands of victims of crime in South Africa.

A much more significant contributor to overcrowding in our prisons, is the
huge number of awaiting-trial detainees. There are currently about 51 000
of them in our prisons, constituting about 30% of our prison population and
costing the taxpayer a staggering R5,8 million every day. So, we must
reduce this burden.

Solving the problem has preoccupied several interministerial committees for
a very long time without any discernible result. Has the Minister no
influence on this process; has he not been able to persuade his colleagues
to deal with the awaiting-trial detainees? Because, what we are in effect
doing is releasing convicted prisoners to make room for awaiting-trial
prisoners; that is the real issue at stake.

Finally, the Department of Correctional Services must develop a coherent
and logical release policy that would reward those inmates that have
successfully rehabilitated themselves. The DCS has correctly placed
rehabilitation at the centre of its activities. A release policy that
simply reduces sentences arbitrarily for some categories of inmates, while
excluding others simply because of the crimes for which they have
originally been convicted, undermines the basis of rehabilitation, which is
that each inmate must be individually assessed to determine whether he or
she has corrected his or her offending behaviour, has been rehabilitated
and is ready to be reintegrated into society. I thank you.

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, hon members, whilst one understands that the
President has the authority, in terms of the Constitution, to grant such
special remissions, and one understands the Minister’s need to see to it
that these prisons are emptied a little – because we all know that they are
vastly overcrowded – it does raise some concerns.

This is not the way to go about it. Whilst we accept that something has got
to be done, Minister, the problem is not, as Mr Selfe said, the fact that
there are prisoners who need to be released because they have been
sentenced. It is the detainees or the awaiting-trial prisoners that need to
be attended to.

This is a problem in the judicial services system. We have a major problem;
the justice delivery system is failing and we in Correctional Services are
trying to deal with it piecemeal. This is not the way to go about it.

One would hope that the people that are going to be released would accept
that they have been given an opportunity to mend their ways, to prove to
society that they are worthy to go back into the community. And, one would
hope that the decision to let these people go would include the 384 IFP
political prisoners that we have been fighting for years to have released.
[Interjections.]

I would sincerely hope that if we are going to start releasing people they
will not only be ANC members, but that they will be people from across the
board and will include political prisoners that should have been released
many years ago.

It is acceptable that we are going to do this only on the basis that we are
sorting something out in the short term. We will not agree, in the long
term, that releasing prisoners is the answer. Let’s get our justice
delivery system sorted out and perhaps we will achieve a lot more in this
country.
Mr M STEPHENS: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, sentence remission
is indeed a very drastic measure, and we submit that it cannot be allowed
to become a permanent feature of the judicial process in South Africa.

Sentencing is a matter that is best dealt with in a court of law by the
presiding officer who has heard all the evidence and who can balance the
interests of society with that of the accused, and can look at them on an
individual basis. If the executive starts meddling in that situation we are
going to have an unfair and unjust system that does not do the process of
justice any good in South Africa.

At the same time, however, we agree that incarceration is not necessarily
the best way of dealing with crime; it is quite often counterproductive,
especially when dealing with juveniles and also other offenders. Therefore,
the problem is best dealt with by developing sentence alternatives.
Incarceration is virtually the only alternative today and we need to
develop, in South Africa, alternative sentencing that will give a wider
variety of choice to presiding officers to decide how to deal with a
particular criminal. Giving them further alternatives, we then suggest,
would be a better way of dealing with this matter. I thank you. [Time
expired.][Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, as far as the hon Minister’s quote from the Book
of John is concerned, it is for the victims of crime to extend forgiveness,
and for the state to wield the sword of justice in protecting its citizens
from crime, as set out in Romans 13. [Interjections.]

Sentences, quite correctly, should be tempered with mercy, but once a
sentence has been passed the sentence should be served. The ACDP,
therefore, believes that this proposal undermines the integrity of
sentences passed by the judiciary, and sends the wrong message to would-be
criminals. It also ignores the rights and concerns of victims of crime.

Furthermore, we would like to know what steps the hon Minister intends
taking to ensure that these prisoners do not re-offend. The department does
not have the capacity to effectively supervise the hundreds of prisoners
who are to be released, especially in view of the 1 100 vacancies for
correctional supervision officials.

Whilst we, like Jesus, have compassion for those who are imprisoned we do
not believe that the answer to prison overcrowding lies in a special
remission of sentence. The solution to prison overcrowding lies in
addressing the large numbers of awaiting-trial prisoners. Approximately 14
000 are in custody due to their not being able to afford bail, even as
little as R50. This, we believe, is the solution to overcrowding. I thank
you. [Time expired.]
Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Geagte mnr die Voorsitter, die kernvraag aan die agb
Minister is, word gevangenes vrygelaat om humanitêre redes of omdat die
tronke oorvol is? Dis die kernvraag.

Die agb Minister sê dat hy ‘n boodskap gee aan gevangenes en dat hul ‘n
tweede kans het ten spyte van hul optredes. Die vraag is egter: Wat is die
boodskap aan wetsgehoorsame burgers? Die boodskap aan wetsgehoorsame
burgers is egter dat die strafregstelsel ondermyn word en dat misdadigers
se regte hoër geag word as die regte van wetsgehoorsame burgers.

Vrylatings van gevangenes dien nie die belange van slagoffers van misdade
nie. Die stelsel het al bewys dat misdadigers met ernstige oortredings,
soos moord, deur die stelsel vrygelaat is, en weer moord gepleeg het.

Ek wil vir u sê dat vrylatings ook ‘n belediging is vir die slagoffers van
misdaad, en die agb Minister sal dit weer ‘n keer moet opweeg vóór hy mense
weer eens vrylaat. Dankie, Voorsitter. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, the crucial question to the hon
Minister is: Are prisoners being released on humanitarian grounds or
because the prisons are overcrowded? That is the crucial question.

The hon Minister says that he is delivering a message to prisoners and that
they have a second chance in spite of their actions. The question is,
however: What is the message to law-abiding citizens? The message to law-
abiding citizens is, however, that the criminal justice system is being
undermined and that the rights of criminals are considered to be superior
to the rights of law-abiding citizens.

Releasing prisoners does not serve the interests of victims of crime. The
system has proved that criminals who have committed serious offences, like
murder, have been released by the system, and have committed murder again.

I want to tell you that releasing prisoners adds insult to injury for the
victims of crime, and the hon Minister must think twice before releasing
people again. Thank you, Chairperson.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, we in the UCDP support the
remission of sentence for some sentenced offenders, but advise that it has
to be done with the greatest circumspection.

We believe that the justice cluster of our government should reconsider
some legislation that has usurped the duties and functions of the judiciary
by prescribing minimum sentences without leaving it to the judiciary to use
their discretion, depending on the merits of the case.

We propose that consideration for remission be given to those who are
incapacitated and whose sickness may affect others due to overcrowding,
those beyond the ages of 60 and 70, and women who have babies in prison and
are sentenced for minor offences.

We strongly advocate, though, that, in keeping with the law, those serving
life sentences who are in good health should not be considered for
remission until they have served at least 25 years of their sentence.

Finally, we accept the gradual release of deserving inmates and concur that
to err is human, but to forgive divine. Let those being so released show
that they are men and women of substance who will countenance no wrongdoing
on their release. I thank you.

Mr N T GODI: Thank you, Chairperson. Comrade Minister, we want to indicate
the PAC’s support for this programme to release certain categories of
prisoners. We believe that there should be a shift, a mind-shift, in our
attitudes towards dealing with offenders that seeks to change the behaviour
rather than to be retributive.

We, however, want to bring to the Minister’s attention, sir, that there are
some of our members who have appeared before the TRC, and who were not
given amnesty. We’ve made representations to the Department of Justice and
more than two years later we have not received any response, and it’s quite
heartbreaking for us to get reports about them being assaulted by common-
law prisoners; some of them are not in the best of health. We think that
these are some of the issues that may need to be looked into in due course.
Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. Crime is one of the most serious
problems that faces South Africa and our overcrowded prisons are a
testimony to that. The MF has no objection to petty criminals receiving
lesser sentences, or serving sentences that impose community service as an
alternative to imprisonment.

Also, the same should apply to all rehabilitated offenders. Rehabilitated
offenders must be assessed individually before remission, as this would
serve to reduce the number of prisoners in the prisons.

The MF also strongly objects to the mixture of minor crime offenders,
juvenile delinquents and major crime offenders. We seek a separation of the
three because that is the reason for much more major crime, such as rape,
robbery, homicide and murder. Thank you very much.

Mnr D V BLOEM: Voorsitter, die Minister het gepraat uit die Bybel uit; wel,
ek gaan praat uit die Vryheidshandves uit en nie uit die Bybel nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Ek lees, almal sal gelyk voor die reg gelyk wees. Gevangenisstraf sal slegs
vir ernstige misdade teen die mense gegee word, en sal gerig wees op
heropvoeding en nie op wraak nie. Dit is presies wat vandag gebeur. Ons het
nie wraak teen die mense wat foute gemaak het nie; ons sê vir dié mense,
“Julle het ‘n tweede kans, ons gee julle ‘n tweede kans. Ons haat julle
nie. Wat julle verkeerd gedoen het, ons vergewe julle.”

Maar dis ook die plig van almal wat hier sit om hul harte oop te maak, hul
arms oop te maak, en vir dié mense te sê, “Kom terug, jy’t fout gemaak,
maar ons vergewe jou vir die fout wat jy gemaak het.”
Sien, daar is predikante wat in dié Huis sit, wat elke Sondag preek vir die
mense om vergifnis, maar wat nie vergifnis in hul hart het nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] [Applouse.] Mnr Truman Prince is ver weg, nou.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Ons praat van politieke gevangenes: Ek het vir die PAC en die IVP gesê om
dié politieke gevangenes vir my te wys. En tot nou toe het hulle nie vir my
die mense gewys nie. Ek weet nie waar die politieke gevangenes is wat
vrygelaat moet word nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, the Minister quoted from the Bible. Well, I am
going to quote from the Freedom Charter and not the Bible. [Interjections.]

I read: All shall be equal before the law. Imprisonment shall only be for
serious crimes, and shall aim at re-education, and not vengeance. This is
exactly what happens today. We do not take revenge against people who have
made mistakes; we say to those people:  “You have a second chance, we are
giving you a second chance. We do not hate you. Whatever you have done
wrong, we forgive you.”

But it is also the duty of everyone sitting here to open their hearts, to
open their arms, and say to these people: “ Come back, you have made a
mistake, but we forgive you for the mistake you have made.”

You see, there are clergymen sitting in this House who preach to the people
about forgiveness every Sunday, but who do not have forgiveness in their
heart. [Interjections.] [Applause.] Mr Truman Prince is far away now.
[Interjections.]

We speak about political prisoners: I have told the PAC and the IFP to show
me these political prisoners up to now they have not shown me these people.
I do not know where the political prisoners are who must be released.
[Interjections.]]

Mrs S A SEATON: On a point of order, Chairperson: The hon Bloem is not
aware, perhaps, that one writes to the Minister and to the President and to
people like that when one is trying to get these sentences removed.
[Interjections.]

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): That is not a point of order.

Mnr D V BLOEM: Minister, ons wil sê, van die ANC se kant af, dat ons u
heeltemal ondersteun. U moet die boodskap oordra aan die President dat
hierdie regering ‘n regering is wat mense vergewe. Daar’s kinders wat in
die tronke sit, wat gesteel het omdat hulle honger het. Daar is mammas met
hul babas wat daar binne sit wat nie met ’n doel voor oë verkeerd gedoen
het nie. Ons steun dié beweging.

Ons weet, Minister, dat die opposisie . . . . u weet, dit is die rede
waarom daar ‘n opposisie is, want enige ding wat die regerende party sal
sê, moet hulle teëgaan, al is dit ‘n goeie ding. Maar, hulle sal dit doen,
al is dit wat. In die komitee stem hulle saam, hulle stem heeltemal saam,
en nou “overcrowding”, en “overcrowding”, en “overcrowding” hulle net die
heel tyd. Maar julle sien, as hulle . . [Tussenwerpsels.]

Dr C P MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, sal die agb lid so vriendelik wees om ‘n
maklike vraag te neem?

Mnr D V BLOEM: Ja, vra maar, ek is nie bang nie, ek het hare op my kop; ek
is sterk. Vra maar. [Gelag.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[Mr D V BLOEM: Minister, we want to say, from the side of the ANC, that we
support you wholeheartedly. You must convey the message to the President
that this government is a government that forgives people. There are
children sitting in prison who stole because they were hungry. There are
mothers with their babies sitting inside who did not do something wrong on
purpose. We support this movement.

We know, Minister, that the opposition… you know that that is the reason
why there is an opposition, because they must oppose everything the ruling
party says, even if it is a good thing. But they will do it, whatever it
may be. In the committee they agree, they agree wholeheartedly, and now
they are simply "overcrowding", and "overcrowding" and "overcrowding" all
the time. But you see, if they . . . [Interjections.]

Dr C P MULDER: Mr Chairperson, would the hon member be so kind as to take
an easy question?

Mr D V BLOEM: Yes, ask away, I am not afraid, I have hair on my head; I am
strong. Ask away. [Laughter.]]

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): Hon members, let’s try and avoid a
direct exchange across the floor. You would like to put a question to the
hon member at the podium? Hon Bloem, would you like to take the question?

Mnr D V BLOEM: Ja, ek stem saam, Voorsitter, maar net ‘n kort ene en nie ‘n
lang ene nie. [Gelag.]

Dr C P MULDER: Agb Voorsitter, dit klink vir my dat die regering sy hele
argument baseer op vergifnis, en nou’s dit vir my vreemd dat net party
mense vergewe word en ander nie. Die vraag wat ek vir hom wil vra, is: U
het so pas vir die IVP gesê dat u nie bewus is van politieke gevangenes
nie; kan ek daarvan verstaan dat, indien partye soos die VF Plus vir u name
gee van mense wat in die tronk sit vanweë politieke dade, hulle ook sal
kwalifiseer vir dié kwytskelding? Dankie.

Mnr D V BLOEM: Die antwoord is: Kom ons gesels daar in die teekamer oor dié
storie, want ek besoek altyd gevangenes en ek sê vir u dat ek nog nooit
teëgekom het dat iemand vir my sê hy’s ‘n politieke gevangene nie. Nie een
mens nie. Elke week is ek in ‘n ander gevangenis - 241 gevangenisse in
totaal - en nie een mens het al vir my gesê, “Ek is ‘n politieke
gevangene”, nie.

Lede in dié Huis, aan die linkerkant, het almal politieke gevangenes en ek
weet nie waar dié politieke gevangenes vandaankom nie, want die ANC het
politieke gevangenes. Ek weet nie waar dié ander vandaankom nie. Maar u is
welkom om met my te kom praat hieroor.

Minister, ek was besig om vir u te sê oor die oorbevolking en die
verhoorafwagtendes, die “awaiting-trialists” en dat ons weet daarvan. U
besoek elke dag gevangenisse. Dit is nie iets nuut wat u nou hoor nie.

Maar, daar is stappe en tyd én metodes hoe dié probleem aangespreek kan
word. Dié is ‘n spesifieke punt wat ons bespreek. En die punt van
verhoorafwagtendes, ons sal daarby uitkom. Baie dankie. [Tyd
verstreke.][Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: Yes, I agree, Chairperson, but only a short one and not a
long one. [Laughter.]

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Chairperson, it sounds to me as if the government bases
its whole argument on forgiveness, and to me it seems strange that only
certain people are being forgiven and others are not. The question I want
to ask him is: You have just told the IFP that you are not aware of
political prisoners; is it right for me to assume that this means that if
parties such as the FF Plus give you names of people who are in prison
because of political activities, they would also qualify for this remission
of sentence? Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: The answer is: Let us discuss this issue there in the
tearoom, because I always visit prisoners and I am telling you that I have
never come across anybody who has told me he is a political prisoner. Not a
single person. I am in a different prison every week – 241 prisons in total
– and not one person has yet told me: "I am a political prisoner".

Members in this House, on the left hand side, all have political prisoners
and I do not know where these political prisoners come from, because the
ANC has political prisoners. I do not know where these others come from.
But you are welcome to come and discuss this with me.

Minister, I was telling you about the overcrowding and the awaiting-trial
prisoners, and that we are aware of it. You visit prisons every day. This
is not something new you hear about now.

But there are steps and time and methods of addressing this problem. This
is a specific point that we are discussing. And as far as the question of
awaiting-trial prisoners is concerned, we will get to that. Thank you very
much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Party responses concluded.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): Hon members, the PAC alleges that I was
not looking in their direction. I thus now want to recognise the PAC. We
will take their motion without notice before we proceed.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                          (The late Mr V N Nkumane)

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That this House –


  (1) notes with regret and sorrow the passing away of Visindlu Nelson
        Nkumane on 24 May 2005 in Johannesburg;


  (2) appreciates Nkumane’s immense contribution in the struggle for a free,
        democratic, non-racial and prosperous South Africa;


  (3) recalls that he was sentenced to twelve years on Robben Island in 1963
        as part of the “Daveyton Eight”, who included Comrades Johnson
        Mlambo and Ngila Muendane amongst others;


  (4) notes that he served in the NEC and NWC of the PAC as Secretary for
        Education and later as Finance Secretary;


  (5) celebrates his life and contributions as a researcher, a writer, a
        teacher, a poet, a musician and an artist; and


  (6) wishes his soul to rest in peace.


  Izwe lethu! [Our land!]

[Applause.]

Agreed to.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                (Decision of Question on Votes and Schedule)

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): Hon members, I wish to thank parties
for advising members of staff on which Votes they will make declarations,
on which they will record their objections and on which they intend
dividing. This information will greatly assist the process this afternoon.
I will put each Vote and ask parties for declarations of vote as they have
indicated. Members may make declarations of vote from floor microphones if
they wish, after which I will put the vote for decision.

As in the past, declarations will be limited to two minutes each. The bells
will be rung for five minutes for the first division on a Vote, but for
only one minute for subsequent divisions.

Vote No 1 – The Presidency - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr R COETZEE: Chairperson, the DA is going to oppose the budget for the
Presidency. [Interjections.] President Mbeki is remembered for saying that
South Africa is a country of two nations, but the truth is that the nation
has come to know two President Mbekis. On the one hand there is the man of
reason, and occasionally of inclusiveness and reconciliation, but on the
other there is the narrow, racial nationalist, obsessed with centralised
control. [Interjections.] The budget of the Presidency serves both agendas
and too often the bad one dominates the good.

But the budget of the Presidency also funds the work of the Deputy
President and the Minister in the Presidency. The DA simply cannot support
a budget that sustains the hopelessly compromised Deputy President, or the
government’s bully-in-chief and self-proclaimed expert on liberalism, the
Minister in the Presidency.

Finally, I would say to the hon Chief Whip of the ANC, after his
disgraceful performance in the House last week, that if idiocy were a
crime, you would be the one languishing in jail. You could spend your time
profitably there reading the Constitution of the Republic, which shows that
the DA is in this House by right, and not because of the magnanimity of the
ANC. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, while the ACDP will support this Budget
Vote, we would plead with the President to make additional time to address
the concerns of the people that are rioting in our streets. As he has
devoted much of his time to bringing peace and reconciliation on our
continent, we believe the people of South Africa deserve as much attention
as other nations on the continent are getting from him.

We will indeed support the Vote. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, the ANC supports the
Budget Vote of the Presidency and takes this opportunity to salute the
Presidency for its sterling leadership. We believe that the strengthening
of the Presidency as a co-ordinating centre to fight poverty will enhance
the implementation of the people’s contract to create work and fight
poverty.

The stewardship of the Presidency of our country in ensuring peace in
Africa, and the success of Nepad will bring to fruition the vision of the
Freedom Charter, particularly when it says: “There shall be peace and
friendship!”

Umbutho Wesizwe uluxhasa ngokupheleyo oluhlahlolwabiwo-mali lwe-ofisi
kaMongameli. Lo mbutho mkhulu owalwela inkululeko yabantu bonke beli lizwe
neAfrika iphela ukhahlela kuMongameli kunye neSekela lakhe ngomsebenzi
omhle wokukhokela eli lizwe kakhuhle nangobuchule. Uyalibulela igalelo
lokuvuswa kweAfrika ngokukhokelwa yile-ofisi kaMongameli. Uthi Nkosi
sikelela iAfrika. Maluphakame uphondo lwayo. Enkosi.(Translation of Xhosa
paragraph follows.)

[The ANC supports the Budget of the Presidency. This giant organisation
which fought for the liberation of all the people of this country and the
whole of Africa, salutes the President and his deputy for the good work of
leading this country so well and so strategically. It salutes the office of
the President for its leading role in rejuvenating Africa. It says God
bless Africa. Let it fly high. Thank you.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 2 – Parliament – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, the debate on the Parliamentary Budget Vote was
a very heated affair, and quite rightly so too, because, quite frankly,
Parliament is not the well-run institution it should be, and far too often
those who suffer the most as a result of the mediocre administration are in
fact the MPs themselves.

Decisions on a wide range of issues, from the new travel system to the cost
of meals, have been taken by officials, without any consultation or spirit
of co-operation with MPs. Structures within Parliament simply do not
function, despite the constant pressure from parties, and obviously here
again we refer to Hansard. In addition we have to put up with our
Parliamentary budget receiving no more than a qualified audit report, and
we see that R169 million of our budget was not spent.

Quite frankly, the decision to take Parliament to Kliptown without proper
consultation with political parties is unacceptable, while the ongoing poor
handling of the Travelgate scam is also totally unacceptable.

I want to say that there is a general feeling among more and more MPs from
all parties that Parliament is no longer run from the Speaker’s office, but
in fact from the Secretary to Parliament’s office. Increasingly we are
being told what to do and how to do it, whereas MPs should be the ones
telling officials what to do and how to do it. If everything was running
smoothly, maybe it would be a different story, but it isn’t.

The DA will support this Budget Vote, but we will watch with ongoing
concern the growing trend that is occurring in Parliament where MPs are
being ignored and officials, in fact, are setting the pace as to how we
operate. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, the IFP will be supporting this Budget Vote,
but as we expressed on 24 May, we are really very concerned about the
massive, accumulated rollover of funds at the end of this last year. We
would hope that serious consideration is going to be given to
prioritisation of the important issues of Parliament. We would agree that
Parliament is not operating properly. We are underperforming, there is no
service delivery, members are not being advised of what should be happening
in this Parliament, decisions are being taken without consultation and its
time that this is sorted out.

We have indicated that we believe that serious training needs to take place
amongst the staff. Members of Parliament need to be specifically trained on
issues of importance, and really we need to start resourcing our committees
and our members adequately. We have to ensure that members can perform
their duties as expected of them, and the only way we can do this is to
provide adequate facilities and adequate resources, and we are hoping that
the Speaker will really apply this this year, and that we will, together,
be able to make this a Parliament to be proud of.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, the ANC supports
Parliament’s Budget Vote. We support the vision contained in the Freedom
Charter of a South Africa that belongs to all who live in it and in which
the people shall govern. We support the democratisation of the state and
governance as necessary pillars in our struggle to create a united,
nonracial, nonsexist, democratic, prosperous nation in which the people of
our country play an active role in determining their own future and in the
creation of a better life for all.

We support a democratic people’s parliament and strong institutions of
participatory democracy at national, provincial and local level that allow
the people to participate actively in processes of governance and to hold
accountable those they have mandated to govern. It is for this reason that
we support the vision and mission of Parliament to build an effective
people’s parliament that is responsive to the needs of the people and that
is driven by the ideal of realising a better quality of life for all the
people of South Africa.

We believe that this budget starts allocating the resources necessary to
realise this vision, and therefore we support it. We do not support the
negative sentiments raised, as usual, by the DA. [Interjections.] They put
before us a litany of complaints, but refuse to accept collective
responsibility by participating in making this Parliament what we want it
to be, and that is a genuine people’s parliament. Thank you. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 3 – Foreign Affairs – put.

Declarations of vote:
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION: Chairperson, South Africa’s
foreign policy has had some brilliant successes and a few critical
failures. Our President’s access at the highest levels of world councils is
something to be proud of. The government has devoted time and resources to
interacting with other countries in promoting peace and these efforts have
borne fruit in Burundi, the DRC and the Ivory Coast.

The single greatest failures of the government have been on Swaziland and
Zimbabwe. In Swaziland we seem to be unable to exert a moderating influence
on a young king who continues to squander his nation’s scarce resources on
personal extravagance. Zimbabwe is a modern tragedy. Having brought his
country to its knees, President Mugabe is finishing the job in brutal
fashion by arresting 20 000 people – I know you approve of President
Mugabe, but I don’t; go and get some of those prisoners out of jail and try
them in court – bulldozing shacks and nationalising all land. South
Africa’s happy acceptance of the flawed election and of human rights
breaches there, undermines our international credibility and our own
future.

South Africa’s complicity in events in Zimbabwe, will hamper our ability to
attract much-needed job creating foreign investment. Despite the President
being in denial, unemployment is the single greatest challenge facing South
Africa. Therefore foreign policy, like any other government policy, must be
focused on job creation. If we continue to remain silent on Zimbabwe, then
there is every possibility that the foreign policy successes of this
government will be forgotten by history in the face of such a gross and sad
failure. With these reservations, we will support this Vote.

Adv Z L MADASA: Thank you, Chairperson. We support the Budget but we would
like to declare as follows: International relations are not an exact
science. Consequently, one’s ideological opponents are not necessarily
one’s economic opponents. One’s ideological friends are not necessarily
one’s economic friends.

The ACDP is concerned that when we enter into relationships like South-
South, we need to check the capacity of our country to take economic
advantage of these relations and assess, for example, in the case of India
and South Africa, whether South Africa has the capacity at economic level
to take advantage of the Indian economy and not allow the Chinese or the
Indians to only have the advantage over our economy, when we cannot
reciprocate and take advantage of their economies. We therefore urge that
these concerns should be taken into account before we enter into the
exciting realm of entering into political relationships.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Thank you, Chairperson, I want to state that the PAC
supports the Budget Vote. We want to salute the work that is being done by
the department, especially in relation to the African continent and in
particular in the DRC, Burundi, the Ivory Coast and also in Darfur in
Sudan. We would want to see our government, within its limited means, to do
more to assist the African continent to move forward. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr D J SITHOLE: Thank you, Chairperson. The ANC supports the Budget Vote
and reaffirms itself on the foreign policy of South Africa, which is
anchored by a programme of building a better world and a better Africa.
Through constructive engagement diplomacy as opposed to meganoisy empty
diplomacy advocated by others like the DA, we are indeed scoring victories,
besides very few isolated incidents, in the DRC, Burundi, Somalia, Eritrea,
Côte d’Ivoire and others.  In these places we are now beginning to witness
hope and indeed that peace will prevail. Also, we are encouraged by a
report by the United Nations that has already indicated that conflicts on
the continent of Africa are on the decline.

Unfortunately, there are parties whose foreign policies focus only one
particular country, Zimbabwe, as is the case with the DA. Their foreign
policy starts and ends with Zimbabwe and nothing else. They keep on
projecting this meganoisy empty diplomacy, which is not helpful in the
settlement of disputes in the world. Thank you. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 4 – Home Affairs – put.

Declarations of vote:

Prof E S CHANG: Chairperson, hon Minister of Home Affairs, many children
living in child-headed households are not able to access the different
government grants available to them because they do not have the relevant
documentation. We therefore think that special efforts need to be
undertaken by the department in order to fast-track the issuing of these
documents. Hon Minister, I have confidence that you will address this
issue. Thank you.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Thank you, very much, Chair. The unfortunate thing is that
we were informed that there was not going to be any objection or any
statement, but nevertheless, let me just put this across.

For the past year we have started to see the changes that are taking place
within the Department of Home Affairs. The Department of Home Affairs has
been operating for the past 10 years without senior management. Our current
Minister has employed all of the senior management.

We have seen a number of campaigns that the Department has put into
practice. One of the successful campaigns that the Department has started
is a campaign to check people’s details, and I am not sure whether my
colleague on that side will be able to understand that one. [Laughter.]
People in the villages and in the townships, whose dates of birth, names
and surnames were not recorded correctly by the Department of Home Affairs
are going to the department, free of charge, to correct those particular
details.

We have seen the mobile units going to the villages, in particular the
launch of the new immigration branch, which shows the new face of the
Department of Home Affairs. These are the achievements attained in less
than a year. I think we need to recognise and applaud our Minister and the
new Director-General who will make sure that the services are provided to
our people, in particular in the rural areas.

The ANC supports the Budget Vote and wishes the Minister and Deputy
Minister well. They have a conference tomorrow on child pornography. This
government has banned child pornography and we really appreciate your
efforts and we support you. You will make sure that this department becomes
a people’s department. [Applause.]
Vote agreed to.

Vote No 5 – Provincial and Local Government – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr W P DOMAN: Chair, the Auditor-General’s recently released report reveals
that the number of qualified audit reports of provincial departments has
risen from 48% to 62%. The establishment of a legal framework, such as the
Public Finance Management Act, to shore up finances is obviously not enough
to ensure that money is not wasted owing to incapacity.

It is quite clear that the failure of most provincial departments to spend
their money fruitfully is because the ANC government has pushed out
experienced civil servants in provincial administrations. The findings in
the Auditor-General’s report demonstrate that the ANC’s version of
transformation puts ideology and racial representivity before service
delivery.

Corruption and financial mismanagement are even more serious at local
level. There is clearly a lack of political will on the part of the
Minister and the ANC to deal decisively with corruption and inefficiency.

The ANC has appointed princes that rule seemingly above the law all over
the country and not just in Beaufort West. The saga of Truman Prince, the
mayor of Bitou’s R104 000 jaunt to Paris and the corruption in Kannaland,
to mention a few examples, in arguably the best-run province, remind us
just how corrupt this sphere of government has become. It is no wonder that
there is growing unrest, often violent, in municipalities all over the
country.

Dit is nie nodig vir Nasionale Intelligensie om die oorsaak te ondersoek
nie. Dit is swak dienslewering deur ANC-beheerde rade wat mense daartoe
dryf. Nou wil die Minister munisipale pensioenfondse deur wetgewing dwing
om te amalgameer, wat verdere destabilisering gaan meebring.
Die stappe wat die Minister wel doen, is om te krap waar dit  nie  jeuk  nie
en met ondeurdagte tref-en-trap-projekkonsolidering nie  die  nodige  aandag
te   gee   waar   dit   wél   jeuk   nie.   Die   endemiese   korrupsie   en
kapasiteitsprobleme  in  provinsiale  en   plaaslike   regering   maak   dit
onmoontlik vir die DA om hierdie begrotingspos te  steun.  [Tussenwerpsels.]
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)


[It is not necessary for National Intelligence to investigate the cause.  It
is poor service delivery by the ANC-controlled councils  that  drive  people
to this. Now  the  Minister  wants  to  force  municipal  pension  funds  to
amalgamate  by  means  of  legislation,  which  will  bring  about   further
destabilisation.



The steps the Minister does take, amount to scratching where it is not
itching and by means of ill-considered hit-and-miss project consolidations
not giving the necessary attention to where it is itching. The endemic
corruption and capacity problems in provincial and local government make it
impossible for the DA to support this Budget Vote. [Interjections.]
[Applause.]]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon members, of late there have been several
public protests from communities in Western Cape townships over housing
shortages. We empathise with communities that are homeless. However, we do
not believe that violent protests by homeless communities will bring about
an improvement in their homelessness.

Many homeless people are in desperate need of basic services, and it is in
this area that municipalities like that of Cape Town could do better with
interim provisions. There is a proliferation of informal housing in big
cities like Cape Town, and the Cape Town Local Authority must have a
workable strategic plan to address the increasing housing needs.

For any South African family a better life for all begins with proper
housing, especially during the cold South African winters. If we have such
a big housing backlog and such a high unemployment figure, why is it not
possible for national, provincial and local government to act collectively
to provide jobs for the unemployed to build homes for the homeless?

We also note that the National Intelligence Agency has been asked to
investigate the riots in South Africa, but we think that the National
Intelligence Agency would be better employed in looking at the drugs
scourge in South Africa, instead of looking at this particular problem. For
this reason, the ACDP will object to this Budget Vote. I thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Geagte mnr die Voorsitter, dit is vir die VF Plus
onaanvaarbaar dat munisipale bestuurders salarisse ontvang wat gelykstaande
is aan dié van die President, en wat dikwels selfs meer is as dié van die
President.

Dit is vir die VF Plus onaanvaarbaar dat munisipale bestuurders van kleiner
dorpe selfs ’n salaris ontvang wat meer is as dié van die agb Minister op
nasionale vlak. Hulle verantwoordelikhede is nie so groot dat hulle daardie
salarisse kan verdien nie.

Dit is ook nie aanvaarbaar vir die VF Plus dat die agb Minister kom en
wanneer dit hom pas, dan sê hy maar plaaslike regering is ’n regeringsvlak
op sy eie en dat hy nie die magte en bevoegdhede het om daarby in te meng
nie. Hy het die bevoegdheid, hy het die magte, hy kan salarisse op ’n
maksimum vasstel, maar die agb Minister is ter wille van politieke
gewildheid nie bereid om op te tree nie.

’n Tipiese voorbeeld is byvoorbeeld Bronkhortspruit-munisipaliteit - ’n
klein plekkie - wat twee jaar gelede hulle munisipale bestuurder se salaris
verhoog het na ’n halfmiljoen rand ’n jaar. Binne twee jaar daarná moet
hulle erfbelasting verhoog met 170% sodat hulle minstens hulle munisipale
bestuurder kan betaal.

Die VF Plus sê vir die agb Minister: gryp in, want dit is nie bekostigbaar
vir die belastingbetalers op plaaslike regeringsvlak om vir munisipale
bestuurders buitengewone hoë salarisse te betaal nie, en daarom sal ons ook
nie hierdie pos steun nie. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, it is unacceptable to the FF Plus that
municipal managers receive salaries that are equal to that of the
President, and often are even higher than that of the President.

It is unacceptable to the FF Plus that municipal managers of smaller towns
receive salaries that are even higher than that of the hon Minister at
national level. Their responsibilities are not so great that they can earn
those salaries.

It is also unacceptable to the FF Plus that when it suits him the hon
Minister comes along and says that local government is a sphere of
government on its own and that he does not have the powers and competence
to interfere. He has the competence, he has the powers, he can determine
maximum salaries, but, for the sake of political popularity, the hon
Minister is not willing to act.

A typical example is Bronkhorstspruit municipality – a small place – that
two years ago increased their municipal manager’s salary to half a million
rand per year. Within two years they had to increase property rates by 170%
so that they could at least pay their municipal manager.

The FF Plus is saying to the hon Minister: intervene, because it is not
affordable for taxpayers at local government level to pay for municipal
managers’ extraordinarily high salaries, and therefore we will not support
this Budget Vote. I thank you.]

Mr P F SMITH: Thank you, Chairperson. The IFP will be supporting this Vote,
but I want to say that we do have problems, which, I think, the department
needs to address. The first is that there are real concerns about the lack
of delivery in this country at municipal level.

People are marching; they are marching in protest. They are not marching
against us or against them. They are marching against ANC councils and ANC
councillors. So the first point to be made here is that delivery needs to
be improved. We don’t need excuses for poor delivery. People must just own
up and say that it is not happening. We don’t need the NIA to investigate
it. We simply need to admit our failings and improve on what we are doing.

The second concern is the state of provinces at the moment. To get an
Auditor-General’s report, as we have got now, at this stage of our
development – since 1994 – is very disappointing for all of us. How is it
possible that the number of qualified audits increases years after the
introduction of the PFMA? How is it possible that there is a decline in
capital expenditure 10 years after provinces were created? It is highly
unacceptable and, again, I think the department needs to admit its failings
here and just correct things.

So, I think, there is much that the department is doing that is right, and
we support all of that. But in respect of these issues and others, these
are really wake-up calls and we expect the department to do more and to do
better. Thank you.

Ms N R NTSHULANA-BHENGU: Chairperson, Deputies, President, hon members, the
ANC supports the Budget Vote. The budget for Provincial and Local
Government is very central to the service delivery process that is aimed at
improving the socio-economic conditions of our people.

The committee unanimously supported the Budget Vote, including the DA.
Their objection today is based on their being the opposition party. The
ACDP did not attend these meetings. Points that are being raised here were
not raised in the portfolio committee.

The FF Plus does not attend any meetings of the portfolio committee and, as
a result, the FF Plus is not informed on issues of provincial and local
government. [Interjections.] That has also denied them the opportunity to
learn what local government and the new order are all about.
[Interjections.]
Our understanding as public representatives is that we have a
responsibility of looking at the challenges and then providing solutions to
those challenges, instead of coming here and saying, “We do not support the
Budget Vote.” [Interjections.] So, they don’t understand the new order.
They cannot provide any solutions to the problems that are being
experienced.

The portfolio committee engaged the Department of Provincial and Local
Government and all other entities over which the portfolio committee
provides oversight. The committee was satisfied with the progress made,
notwithstanding the capacity challenges. We view these challenges as part
of our process of development to which we need to continually find
solutions. The ANC supports this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Freedom Front Plus and African
Christian Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 6 - Public Works – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Chairperson, if we were serious about our oversight role
as parliamentarians, all of us would adhere to the Local Government: Public
Finance Management Act and point out shortcomings, nondelivery and
corruption wherever it is found. We are not imbongis and constructive
criticism is not to embarrass Ministers, but to point out problems that can
cause frustration and anger, that can ultimately lead to eruptions like the
ones we see on television and read about in newspapers.

If parliamentarians negate their oversight responsibilities and pretend
that everything is fine, they undermine honesty, transparency and
accountability, and must therefore take some of the blame for the fires
that are burning on the streets of our townships. We must improve service
delivery and stop looking for scapegoats or threaten people with Nuremberg
trials. In any case, if Mr Goniwe wants to take that route, I want to
challenge him to start with his own caucus. [Laughter.]

The DA’s support for the Public Works Budget Vote is qualified for the
following reasons: Firstly, specific steps have been taken to improve
service delivery and financial management; secondly, representatives from
the department and the portfolio committee will address the issue of the
underfunded mandate in our maintenance portfolio with Treasury; and
thirdly, I believe our chairperson in the portfolio committee takes our
oversight role very seriously.

Although we do not believe that the Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP,
can solve our job creation needs, we see it as a temporary intervention and
support it as such. The fact that no-one has yet been appointed as Deputy
Director-General for the EPWP is worrying, and must be addressed as a
matter of urgency. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr F BHENGU: Chairperson, the ANC supports the Budget Vote. Key and
immediate issues to be addressed by the department are the appointment of
the DDGs for the EPWP and asset management. That delay is not assisting the
programmes. It is heartening to learn that the DDG for the EPWP is
commencing duties tomorrow.

The co-ordinating role of the department is central to monitoring
implementation by other departments, it also assists in measuring the
outcomes, making necessary interventions where required and meeting the
targets spelled out in the President’s state of the nation address last
year. Without proactive, efficient and committed officials, all these noble
objectives will be a fallacy.
There is a strong perception that some officials across the board fabricate
misleading reports and commit the executive to pronounce on lies or
programmes that are nonexistent or not achievable. If this is true, it is
criminal and not acceptable.

The maintenance backlog remains a challenge. We are going to engage and
continue to engage the department as far as this is concerned.

Lastly, it is worrying to learn that the department was not represented at
the Nepad Council International Conference on Trade and Industry that took
place in East London last week. I hope this is being investigated.

I have listened to the hon Opperman. I have to thank you, Chief, but there
are some things that one has to say. You know the challenges of the second
economy are real and the ANC is doing its utmost to address the
inequalities that are there.

Gone are the days when whites prescribed what is good for a black person,
what type of education and skills he or she should have, the type of job he
or she should do, the colour of skin which the person he or she married
must have, and worst of all, that black persons should use separate
toilets, since black and white persons’ night soil must never mix.
[Laughter.]

You must thank the Congress of the People that took place in Kliptown on 27
June 1955. You are here because of the ANC, whether you like it or not,
that’s a fact. Thank you. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 7 - Government Communications and Information System – put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 8 - National Treasury – put.
Declarations of vote:

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Chairperson, the DA’s support of the intelligence budget
does not endorse the previous Minister’s extravagance and lack of focus on
whose baseline it is founded. It is a rather guarded preliminary
appreciation of the current Minister’s prioritisation of core business, but
it is most definitely not an endorsement of the despicable insinuations by
certain ANC members in this House that the DA is instigating the current
widespread unrest in our municipalities.

Let me be very clear. We support our people’s fundamental democratic
rights, such as freedom of speech and association, but we do, and we always
will, condemn any public violence and disorder. Whilst the National
Intelligence Agency must monitor causes of large-scale unrest and
instability to ensure national security, the ANC’s blurred line between
party and state poses a real threat to our democracy.

The Chief Whip of the ANC’s remarks about Nuremberg trials last week
certainly brought a chilling perspective. It reminded us of the Reichstag
fire which the Nazis caused but blamed on the opposition. Will we now have
open season on opposition parties under the veil of national security, the
ANC using state machinery to suppress opinion and criticism?

Another early warning sign of such overreaction may be the decision to
charge 13 protestors in Harrismith with sedition. Is a small group of
protestors capable of planning to and/or overthrowing the state? A more
clearly definable and identifiable third force behind the protest is surely
the destitute people of this country, marginalised for most of their lives,
yet to experience any meaningful service delivery after 11 years of ANC
rule. Perhaps the NIA should study the Daily Sun in order to understand
this. The only way to address these protests is to either effect proper
delivery . . .

An HON MEMBER: Is that your newspaper of record?

Adv H C SCHMIDT: It is yours! . . . or change the government at the voting
polls. Thank you.

Dr S C CWELE: Chair, the ANC supports this Budget Vote. Today we have a
transformed intelligence service, comprising of men and women who work
tirelessly, and sometimes under dangerous conditions, to defend our
democratic order and to ensure that every South African lives under
condition of peace and stability. Intelligence services ensure our national
security and protect and promote our common national interests. They
continue to deal a blow to crime syndicates, to terrorist activity and to
taxi violence and continue to monitor all threats to service delivery.

Every patriot must support these men and women and give them the necessary
capacity to identify threats to our wellbeing. They live up to the spirit
of our Constitution and the spirit of the Freedom Charter, namely that
“there shall be security to all” and that “there shall be peace and
friendship”. Thank you. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 9 - Public Enterprises – put and agreed to.

Vote No 10 - Public Service and Administration - put:

Declarations of vote:

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairman, the ACDP will object to this Budget Vote because we
have serious problems within departments, which are all adding up to the
poor service delivery – in fact, the shocking service delivery – that
people are experiencing right now.

Generally, one of the problems is that salaries are below market value and
this doesn’t attract skilled personnel, and we have this huge flood of
skilled personnel leaving the departments. We’ve got people being placed at
levels above their skills so that they can be paid a decent salary, but
this doesn’t help, because we obviously then still have the lack of
experience and skills at that level to drive the delivery in the
departments.
I believe the Nats had a similar situation in which they didn’t like to
give across-the-board salary increases either, and they dealt with this by
having special budgets for development in which they targeted specific
groups of people. Perhaps we should consider something like that, for
example to deal with the lack of service delivery in the SAPS, our
Departments of Health, Social Development, which is critical, our teachers
in Education, Water Affairs, etc. The ACDP will be voting against this
budget. Thank you.

Mnr W D SPIES: Agb Voorsitter, die VF Plus is bekommerd dat die Batho Pele-
projek, wat teen baie groot koste aangepak is, nie daarin slaag om
dienslewering in die staatsadministrasie te verbeter nie. Prof Michael
Cowling van die Universiteit van Natal het onlangs in ’n TV-program
opgemerk dat dienslewering in sekere staatsdepartemente só agteruitgegaan
het dat die howe nou mikrobestuur van staatsadministrasies moet toepas.

Die obsessie met transformasie veroorsaak dat verskeie poste in die
Staatsdiens eerder vakant gehou word as om dit met wit persone te vul, en
dienslewering lei daaronder. As ’n organisasie dienslewering aan die
publiek wil verbeter, moet hy sy eie mense menswaardig behandel, anders kan
hy nie verandering in hulle optrede na buite verwag nie.

Die VF Plus steun nie die begrotingspos nie, want ons kan nie die feit
steun dat dienslewering op die transformasie-altaar geplaas word nie. Ek
dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chairperson, the FF Plus is concerned that the Batho
Pele Project, undertaken at great cost, has not succeeded in improving
service delivery in the state administration. Prof Michael Cowling of the
University of Natal recently stated in a TV programme that service delivery
in certain government departments has deteriorated to such an extent, that
the courts have been obliged to implement micro-management of state
administrations.

The obsession with transformation has resulted in various posts in the
Public Service being kept vacant, rather than appointing whites to fill
them, and service delivery has suffered as a consequence. If an
organisation wishes to improve service delivery to the public, it should
first treat its own personnel with the necessary dignity, otherwise it
cannot expect a change in their attitude towards the public.

The FF Plus does not support this Budget Vote because we cannot support the
fact that service delivery has been sacrificed for the sake of
transformation. I thank you.]

Mr P J GOMOMO: Chairperson, I’m shocked to see that the FF Plus wants a
division on this item. I’m also shocked to see that the ACDP is objecting
to this, because neither of these parties serves in the Portfolio Committee
on Public Service and Administration. They do not know what is happening in
that department at all.

I want to salute my Minister, Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi, for the role which
she is playing in this department. She’s playing a very central role. She’s
setting a pace for the transformation of South Africa. She has gone so far
as to go to African states to establish public service and administration
there. It is clear that we set policies for service delivery and that our
people are aware of this. We care, we lead, we deliver. We support this
Budget Vote. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to (African Christian Democratic Party and Freedom Front Plus
dissenting).

Vote No 12 - SA Management Development Institute (SAMDI) – put and agreed
to.

Vote No 13 - Statistics SA – put and agreed to.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): My apologies, hon members. I’ve skipped
Vote No 11 - Public Service Commission.

Vote No 11 - Public Service Commission – put and agreed to.

Vote No 14 - Arts and Culture – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Chairperson, South Africa is made up of a rich
diversity of cultural, religious and linguistic communities. Our success
requires the nurturing of a healthy self-confidence in all our people. This
in turn requires that we accept one another’s identities without needing to
resort to either aggression or submission. Therefore, over and above the
broad, constitutionally entrenched rights to freedom of association and
expression, the government has a duty to take active steps to preserve
South Africa’s cultural roots.

Kulturele aangeleenthede het egter agterweë gebly op die kantlyn van
beleidvorming. Pogings om Suid-Afrika se kulturele geskiedenis aan te teken
is besmet met blatante politieke interpretasies deur die ANC. Watter
geskiedenis moet ons as nasionale erfenis beskou? (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Cultural matters have, however, lagged behind and remained on the
sidelines of policy formation. Attempts to record South Africa’s cultural
history have been contaminated with blatant political interpretations by
the ANC. What history should we consider to be our national heritage?]

Ya gago, goba ya ka, goba ya rena? [Yours, mine or ours?] [Interjections.]

Naamsveranderings wat deel is van die ANC se transformasieproses is slegs
van toepassing op Afrikaanse name. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ons kulturele
geskiedenis behoort behoue te bly deur middel van die uitvoerende en
visuele kunste, deur museums, biblioteke, private en
universiteitsversamelings, maar al die bronne van inligting en inspirasie
word voortdurend onder die ANC-bestuur bedreig deur ’n tekort aan
volhoubare befondsing en die onsekerheid oor toekomstige ondersteuning van
die regering.

Onder die dekmantel van veeltaligheid het die regering taal as ’n
instrument gebruik vir maatskaplike uitsluiting. Engels word eksklusief op
byna alle vlakke van regering gebruik en vertalingsgeriewe is minimaal. Die
DA glo dat taal die middel is van denke, kommunikasie en identiteit. ’n
Nuwe benadering vir tale moet gevind word waarin moedertaalgebruikers van
al Suid-Afrika se inheemse tale hulle taal met trots en vertroue kan
gebruik. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Name changes that are part of the ANC’s  transformation  process  are  only
applicable to Afrikaans names. [Interjections.] Our cultural history  should
be preserved through  the  performing  and  visual  arts,  through  museums,
libraries, and private and university collections, but all these sources  of
information and inspiration  are  continually  being  threatened  under  ANC
management by a lack of sustainable funding  and  uncertainty  about  future
support from the government.

Under the guise of multilingualism the government has used language as an
instrument of social exclusion. English is used exclusively at almost all
levels of government and translation facilities are minimal. The DA
believes that language is the medium of thoughts, communication and
identity. A new approach to languages must be found in which mother-tongue
speakers of all South Africa’s indigenous languages can use their languages
with pride and confidence.]

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): Order! Your time has expired, madam.

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Die DA gaan nié die begrotingspos steun nie. The DA
will not support this Budget Vote.] [Interjections.]

Mnr W D SPIES: Agb Voorsitter, die Departement van Kuns en Kultuur huisves
die Pan-Suid-Afrikaanse Taalraad. Die VF Plus wil baie graag hulde bring
aan PANSAT vir die goeie werk wat gedoen word om veeltaligheid te bevorder,
dikwels teen heersende tendense in en dikwels in stryd met die heersende
beleid.

Die departement huisves egter ook die SA Geografiese Nameraad, wat die
afgelope tyd nuus gemaak het oor sy aanbeveling aan die Minister oor die
registrasie van die naam van ’n munisipaliteit as ’n pleknaam. Die VF Plus
is oortuig dat die Geografiese Nameraad in die betrokke geval buite sy
magte opgetree het en dat die proses wat gevolg is, aanleiding kan gee tot
groot ontevredenheid en selfs regstappe. Daarom wil ons graag praat oor
maniere waarop die verskeidenheid in Suid-Afrika erken en versterk kan
word.

Hoewel ons die begrotingspos steun ter wille van die goeie werk wat gedoen
word deur liggame soos PANSAT en andere, doen ons dit met dié voorbehoud
dat ons nie die toenemende druk op die Afrikaanse kultuurerfenis kan steun
nie en dat ons graag oplossings wil soek vir hierdie wesenlike saak.
Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chairperson, the Department of Arts and Culture is home
to the Pan South African Language Board. The FF Plus would like to pay
tribute to PanSALB for the good work being done to promote multilingualism,
often contrary to prevailing tendencies, and often in conflict with current
policy.

The department is, however, also home to the SA Geographical Names Council,
which has recently been in the news on account of its recommendation to the
Minister regarding the registering of the name of a municipality as a place
name.  The FF Plus is convinced that the Geographical Names Council
exceeded its mandate in this particular instance, and that the procedure
followed could give rise to dissatisfaction and even legal action. That is
why we would like to discuss ways in which the diversity in South Africa
can be recognised and enhanced.

Although we support the Budget Vote for the sake of the good work being
done by PanSALB and others, we are doing so with the proviso that we cannot
support the increasing pressure being put on Afrikaans cultural heritage,
and that we would like to seek solutions for this crucial issue. Thank
you.]

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: Chairperson, I rise here in support of the
Budget Vote on Arts and Culture on behalf of the ANC. This budget will
surely promote the languages as stipulated in the supreme law of this
country, the Constitution.

Regarding the name change, we have the SA Geographical Names Council, which
was established according to the statute passed by this Parliament. If
anything done by the council is not correct the committee can call in the
council and correct the matter. I don’t know whether it is street language
or isiZulu that says: “Wa lala, wa sala.” [“You snooze, you lose.”]
[Interjections.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:


    AYES-254: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
    E; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J;
    Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J; Bhengu, P; Biyela, B P
    ; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W;
    Buthelezi, M G; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P;
    Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S
    C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T;
    Direko, I W; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dodovu, T S; du Toit, D C ; Erwin, A;
    Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N
    E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gillwald, C E ; Godi, N T;
    Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Gore, V C; Greyling, C H F;
    Greyling, L W; Groenewald, P J; Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B;
    Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P; Herandien, C
    B; Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R;
    Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Joubert, L K; Kalako, M U;
    Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J; Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E;
    Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A;
    Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T;
    Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C;
    Mabudafhasi, T R; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma , L
    D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G
    B; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate,
    M W; Malahlela, M J; Maluleka, H P; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N;
    Martins, B A D; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Masutha,
    T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
    Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S;
    Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P
    G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S;
    Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J;
    Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A;
    Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morutoa, M R; Mosala, B G;
    Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S
    A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Mzondeki, M J
    G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-
    Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N;
    Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlengethwa, D G;
    Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H;
    Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nzimande, L
    P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H;
    Pahad, E G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P; Pule, B E ;
    Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin,
    M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M;
    Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A;
    Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S; September , C C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J
    B; Sigcau, Sylvia N; Sikakane, M R; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B;
    Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Sotyu, M
    M; Spies, W D; Stephens, M; Stofile, M A; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E;
    Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E;
    Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z;
    Van der Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vos, S C;
    Vundisa, S S; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M ; Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z;
    Zita, L; Zulu, B Z ; Zulu, N E.


    NOES-48: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, C-S; Camerer, S M;
    Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M;
    Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Green, L M;
    Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne,
    L B; Leon, A J; Lowe, C M; Madasa, Z L; Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J;
    Meshoe, K R J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Nel, A H; Ntuli, R S; Opperman,
    S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J
    A; Smuts, M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M;
    Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M;
    Weber, H; Zille, H.


Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 15 - Education – put.

Declarations of vote:

Ms H ZILLE: Chairperson, last year the DA supported the Education budget
and pledged support for the Minister’s commitment to quality for all in
education. This year we oppose her budget and call for a division because
of the divergence between what she says and what her department does.

Every time she has to make a policy decision the Minister chooses ideology
above quality and her budget reflects this. Instead of improving the 24 000
dysfunctional schools, she continues to pressure the 5 000 functional
schools, all of which are working well despite her department and not
because of it.

The same thing is happening in the university system. The Minister blames
them for the spiralling failure rate and instructs them to tighten
admissions instead of acknowledging that the school system is to blame for
the fact that most students are hopelessly underprepared for tertiary
study.

The Minister has acknowledged that many of her provincial departments
actually detract more value than they add to education at the cost of
billions, yet her top officials seem powerless to do anything about it,
using bureaucratic jargon to avoid getting a grasp on mismanagement and
corruption in the provinces.

This budget provides for a luxury head office for officials while so many
learners still have no roof over their heads. The DA supports the real
black economic empowerment through outstanding education and economic
growth this Minister provides through her budget despite the continuing
decline of one of these key pillars.

Prince N E ZULU: Chairperson, the IFP will support this Vote, but would
like to note as follows: The indigenous language policy debate comes at the
right time in the history of education in our country, but of significance
is that the Department of Education needs to ascertain which of the
indigenous languages could be a commercial language, a commercial language
that is the lifeblood of a nation in this world of a globalising economy. I
thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, the ACDP has always stressed the critical role
education must play in South Africa in realising a quality life for all our
people. Education must be a priority and the ACDP therefore welcomes the
increased budget allocation. The huge challenges in delivering quality
education cannot be wished away or ignored and the inequities of the past
have therefore been a necessary focus.

The ACDP, however, has been acutely conscious of the role teachers play in
the equation and is convinced that more effort and money must be invested
in not only raising the standard of teachers’ skills and training, but
ensuring that salaries and incentives attract and retain dedicated and
diligent people to the profession.

The ACDP is also convinced that government is making a grave error in
continuing to erode the critical role school governing bodies should play
in schools. This undermines the role of parents, who are ultimately
responsible for their children and their children’s education.

It is imperative that the state recognises and respects the role of parents
in the lives of their children and works towards strengthening this role
and facilitating greater involvement. The reason why many of our public
schools have attained high standards is precisely that dedicated parents
have sacrificed so much time and effort and played a key role in decisions
affecting their children’s schooling.

Allowing for choice of language is a commendable goal and the ACDP agrees
that mother-tongue education, especially at primary school level, is very
important. We are, however, concerned that making English optional is not
in the best interests of South African children. English links us to one
another, it is the language of commerce and business, the language of most
higher education, the language of our region, the Commonwealth, the AU, the
UN and most world fora and world business. This policy could deprive many
of our people of the opportunity to learn English and further disadvantage
them.

Previous lack of support for learners in the form of textbooks and
stationery has placed many schools at a disadvantage and the delay in
subsidising schools accommodating significant numbers of children whose
parents are struggling financially has placed school governing bodies and
teachers under tremendous strain, which has hampered progress.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, you time has expired.

Mrs C DUDLEY: The ACDP will vote in favour of this Budget, but appeals to
government to stop creating continual uncertainty in education, which will
visibly impact on all stakeholders. Thank you. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired!
Thank you.

Dr P W A MULDER: Geagte Voorsitter, onderwys is, wat ons betref,
waarskynlik die belangrikste portefeulje wat ons hier kan hanteer. Dit gaan
werklik oor die toekoms van Suid-Afrika en dit gaan oor die toekoms van ons
kinders. Ons wil graag die Minister en die nuwe D-G, veral, ’n billike kans
gee betreffende onderwys.

Die VF Plus steun die standpunte wat die afgelope ruk genoem is ten gunste
van moedertaalonderrig, en wil graag die departement aanmoedig om dit nie
net tot op die vierde vlak nie, maar tot die hoogste moontlike vlak uit te
brei, en ons sal haar graag in daardie opsig wil steun.

Artikel 29 van die Grondwet maak ook voorsiening vir enkelmediumskole in
Suid-Afrika. Tans is meer as 90% van alle skole in Suid-Afrika enkelmedium-
Engelse skole. Minder as 3% van alle skole is enkelmedium-Afrikaanse skole.
Nou kom die LUR vir onderwys in die Noord-Kaap en vaardig ’n bevel uit dat
alle skole in daardie provinsie dubbelmedium moet word. Dubbelmedium
beteken die tyd in die eie moedertaal word gehalveer in die klaskamer en
kinders word geforseer om ook in ’n ander medium as hulle eie taal onderrig
te word.

In hierdie stadium is daar drie hofsake omtrent hierdie soort sake aan die
gang. Dit plaas druk op hierdie 3% skole en dit is vir ons onaanvaarbaar,
en ons dink om daardie rede gaan ons in hierdie stadium ons protes wys deur
teen hierdie begrotingspos te stem. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Hon Chairperson, education, in our opinion, is the most
important portfolio that we deal with here. It really concerns the future
of South Africa and the future of our children. We would really like to
give the Minister and the new D-G, in particular, a fair chance regarding
education.

The FF Plus supports the views that have been mentioned recently regarding
mother-tongue education, and would like to encourage the department not
only to extend it to the fourth level, but to the highest level possible,
and we would like to support her in that regard.

Section 29 of the Constitution also makes provision for single medium
schools in South Africa. At present more than 90% of all schools in South
Africa are single medium English schools. Less than 3% of all schools are
single medium Afrikaans schools. Now the MEC for education in the Northern
Cape has come along and decreed that all schools in that province should
become dual medium schools. Dual medium means that the time allocated to
the mother tongue is halved and that children are forced to receive
instruction in language other than their own.

At this stage there are three ongoing court cases in this regard. It places
pressure on these 3% of schools and that is unacceptable to us, and we
consequently feel that at this stage we will show our opposition to this by
voting against this Budget Vote. I thank you.]

Prof S M MAYATULA: Chairperson, I’m happy to report, as I stand here, that
anybody who is anything in education is currently meeting in Durban - the
vice-chancellors, the teacher unions, the student bodies and the parents –
to discuss the practical implications for education. I want to commend our
Minister for being able to bring everybody together.

I sometimes wonder whether we understand what we mean when we say we are
objecting to a Budget Vote. Literally, what that would mean is, everything
that we have done in education currently would have to stop. Fortunately,
people out there do not agree with the DA. Practically, if we were to
respond the way they want us to, it would mean we’re not appreciative of
the millions and millions of rands that we have put aside for our students.

That would mean we are not appreciative of the money that has been put
aside to improve the conditions of service for career-pathing for our
teachers. That would mean we must come to a standstill in our budget that
we have put aside when people in the villages are happy that for the first
time this government is not going to allow them to pay a cent for their
children. [Applause.]

If we were to listen to the DA, we would think that the strategy that we
have to improve science education – we have allocated vast sums of money
for that – should be aborted. Fortunately, the people out there are with
us.

When we talk about 500 working schools, you’d think that we did not know
about those schools, but we do not apologise when we say we are going to go
to the squatter camps and the rural areas, to those kids who are unable to
go to those schools to assist them so that they can be part of this broader
South Africa. The ANC supports this Budget Vote. [Time expired.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES-258: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
    E; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J;
    Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J; Bhengu, P; Biyela, B P
    ; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W;
    Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S;
    Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B
    N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Direko, I W;
    Ditshetelo, P H K; Dodovu, T S; du Toit, D C; Dudley, C; Erwin, A;
    Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N
    E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gillwald, C E ; Godi, N T;
    Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Gore, V C; Green, L M; Greyling,
    C H F; Greyling, L W; Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hanekom, D
    A; Hangana, N E; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P; Herandien, C B; Hogan, B
    A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson, C B;
    Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Joubert, L K; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R;
    Kasrils, R; Kati, Z J; Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E;
    Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A;
    Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T;
    Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C;
    Mabudafhasi, T R; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madasa, Z L; Madlala-Routledge, N C;
    Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E ;
    Magwanishe, G B; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi,
    X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M J; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manuel,
    T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L
    M; Mashigo, R J; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M
    H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M;
    Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V; Meshoe, K R J; Mgabadeli, H
    C; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P
    N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J;
    Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D;
    Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E;
    Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morutoa, M R; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss,
    M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B;
    Mthethwa, E N; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C;
    Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B
    T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya, M L;
    Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C;
    Ntombela, S H; Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M
    D; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L;
    Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P;
    Pule, B E ; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M
    M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H;
    Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D;
    Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C
    C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau, Sylvia N;
    Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S
    T; Smith, P F; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Sotyu, M M; Stephens,
    M; Stofile, M A; Surty, M E; Swart, S N; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tobias,
    T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J;
    Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S
    C; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vezi, T E; Vos, S C; Vundisa, S S; Woods, G G;
    Xingwana, L M ; Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z; Zulu,
    N E.


    NOES-48: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R;
    Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J;
    Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Groenewald, P J; Henderson, R K;
    Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne,
    L B; Leon, A J; Lowe, C M; Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J;
    Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Nkem-Abonta, E;
    Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C;
    Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Steyn, A C; Swart, M;
    Swart, P S; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van
    Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille, H.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 16 – Health – put.

Decarations of vote:

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Over 6 million South Africans are HIV-positive, one in
eight, and over 380 000 people died last year due to Aids-related diseases.
By 2010 we will have 900 000 people dying of full-blown Aids each year. The
time of entertaining the Aids denialists, in fact of allowing them to
operate in this country at all, has passed.

There are provinces that failed to spend their HIV-budgets last year, with
a few notable exceptions. Their performances have been dismal. Even where
the roll-out of life-extending antiretroviral drugs has at last become a
reality, the negativity of the Minister of Health, in relation to this
globally accepted treatment of Aids, her statement that ARVs are killing
South Africans, set the will of our health workers, and has ensured that
the roll-out has slowed to a snail’s pace.

Why should we believe that provinces such as the Eastern Cape will have the
ability, or indeed the will, to utilise their Aids budget during the 2005-
06 fiscal year? This government is allowing South Africa to become the Aids
denialist capital of the world, with Cape Town as its epicentre. The
Ministry of Health must join the Deputy President and state categorically
that nutrition cannot and will never cure Aids.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, please allow the member
at the podium to make her speech. [Interjections.]
Please, please. Nobody should shout, everybody must talk. Hon member,
please proceed.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Thank you. The Minister is still associating with and
pandering to the denialists, allowing them to play their garlic games in
this country, and convincing Aids patients to throw aside their
antiretrovirals, in exchange for a Greek salad. Our teachers are dying in
droves.

Minister, you seem to have a new fixation on obesity. With all due respect,
your side of the House is giving fat cats a bad name. So, when that charity
begins at home, clean up your own backyard, before you lecture the rest of
South Africa on being overweight. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, comedy, tragedy, disgrace, these are the
words that can be applied to certain unhealthy events that are occurring
under the watch of this government and its Health Minister. The current
trial between the TAC and the Dr Rath foundation is a mockery. It is a
direct result of the confusion in Aids policy, the double speak, the lack
of will to treat people with HIV, the lack of capacity, the
overcentralisation in the Health Department, and the betrayal of all those
South Africans who have HIV/Aids, and particularly those under the age of
15, of whom 50% are expected to die before the age of 40.

Another court case that is a travesty and an indication of an impact of the
Department of Health’s misguided policies is that between the
Constitutional Court and the Cape High Court. Whichever way the trial goes,
the patient in the private sector, who government claims to be helping get
cheaper medicines, will continue to pay more for health care. While private
hospitals make good profits, medical schemes save money and put their
prices up.

Pharmaceutical companies maintain their prices slightly higher than the
minimum price that was given to discount pharmacies.

Health legislation is filled with contradictions. It would do well if the
government adopted some of the IFPs policies: Promoting decentralisation,
using public-private partnerships to link one of the best private sectors
with one of the worst public sectors, having less regulation and more
transparency for medicine pricing and medical schemes.

The IFP has a completely different will to support people with Aids. First,
they must receive antiretrovirals, supported by better diets and vitamins.
The most important right, we believe, should not be the populist rhetonic
about privacy, but the meaningful right to protection from non-
discrimination. The IFP supports the budget because we support the
administrative staff in the department and the public servants who work
under a very difficult Constitution and stifling legislation. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, government’s allocation in the national budget, in
response to HIV and Aids in South Africa, shows at least financial
commitment to fighting the epidemic. Yet the Health Minister and the
President continue to downplay the HIV/Aids crisis facing South Africa.
Minister Tshabalala-Msimang has sadly damaged the credibility of natural
remedies in her unbalanced crusade to discredit antiretrovirals.

Even the Finance Minister omitted to make reference to resource allocation
specifically for the newly rolled-out ARV treatment programme. Of the 53
000 target for individuals to receive ARV treatment at public facilities,
28 786 are accessing treatment at these facilities, and this is indicative
of major problems.

Increased resources require improved capacity to manage and spend the
allocations, but the health sector is under increasing strain due to staff
shortages and insufficient management structures at district and local
level. This has negatively affected the roll-out of all vital health
services, including antiretroviral treatment to HIV/Aids patients.

The ACDP calls on government to produce a comprehensive plan for human
resource development, to facilitate effective and efficient spending of the
increased budget. Recent legislation to ensure increased access to abortion
has added to the unbearable pressure already experienced by overburdened
and stressed health workers. This has prompted the nurses union DENOSA to
say that nurses will have no choice but to resign in protest.

Our health professionals are in demand throughout the world, and we cannot
afford to be blasé.  Every individual has a right to conscience,
constitutionally and God given. It is nothing short of insane to force
people to terminate the lives of unborn babies against their conscience and
belief. A letter from a traumatised doctor recently highlighted this as he
expressed his horror at finding a dead 16 – 18 week old perfectly formed
baby boy in a hospital towel. The baby had been aborted, his life taken by
his own mother with the help of doctors, nurses, legislation and our
silence.

The ACDP will not vote in favour of this budget, which facilitates ongoing
atrocities taking the lives of unborn babies, and is responsible for many
premature deaths of HIV patients. Thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Geagte Voorsitter, jaar na jaar wanneer ons by hierdie
proses kom om te stem vir die verskillende begrotingsposte, dan vind ons
dat daar een departement is wat die hewigste reaksie uitlok by die
opposisiepartye, maar ook by die publiek daar buite, en dit is telkens die
Departement van Gesondheid. Iets moet vir ons sê dat daar duidelik ’n
probleem is.

In die vorige bedeling het ons vir Dr Zuma gehad, wat dit op ’n sekere styl
hanteer het en die nuwe agb Minister hanteer dit op dieselfde styl die
afgelope klompie jare, deur die kritiek wat gegee word na haar en haar
departement se kant toe, met minagting af te maak en weg te klap. Die feit
van die saak is dat Suid-Afrika se gesondheidsdienste in ’n krisis is.

Terwyl ons in daardie krisis sit, is die Minister besig om met allerhande
rate te kom – en dit is nie eens boererate nie – om die hele kwessie van
Vigs te hanteer, plaas daarvan dat die regerende party gaan kyk na
internasionale voorbeelde wat reeds gewerk het, soos byvoorbeeld in Uganda,
waar daar nie ’n dubbele boodskap uitgestuur is deur die regering van dag
tot dag in daardie land nie. In Suid-Afrika word ’n totale dubbele boodskap
uitgestuur: dan is dit knoffel, dan is dit oefening, dan is dit lemoensap –
en so gaan ons aan.

Die feit van die saak is dat hierdie departement onder die agb Minister se
leiding ’n gesondheidsituasie bestuur, waar ons jaar na jaar van ons
topmense in die mediese professie verloor, omdat hulle die land verlaat en
geen land in die wêreld kan daardie kostes aangaan en bekostig om mense
jaar na jaar te verloor nie.

Wanneer ons kom by die verpleegsberoep, dan vind ons presies dieselfde
situasie. Die een verpleegster na die ander verlaat Suid-Afrika en gaan
vind werk in ander plekke omdat dit daar vir hulle beter is, want daar word
nie hier na hulle gekyk nie. Laastens, weet die agb Minister ook wat gedoen
is aan die aptekersberoep in Suid-Afrika.

Ons kan dit nie bekostig dat standaarde daal nie en dan het ek nie eens
gepraat oor die standpunt en die stand van ons staatshospitale nie. Gaan
kyk hoe dit daar gaan. Gaan kyk hoe die situasie agteruitgaan. Dit is
werklik tyd dat die Minister erns maak met ’n departement. En daar doen sy
dit weer: ’n hand van minagting na almal in die professie daar buite. Ons
ken haar so. Ons sal daarteen stem. (Translations of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Hon Chairperson, year after year when we come to this
process of voting for the various Votes, we find that there is one
department that evokes the most vehement reaction from the opposition
parties, but also from the public out there, and that is often the
Department of Health. Something must tell us that there is clearly a
problem.

In the previous dispensation we had Dr Zuma, who dealt with it in a certain
way, and the new hon Minister has been dealing with it in the same way over
the past few years, namely by brushing aside and ignoring with disdain the
criticism aimed at her and her department. The fact of the matter is that
South Africa’s health services are in a crisis.

While we are in that crisis, the Minister is suggesting all kinds of
remedies – and they are not even home remedies – to deal with the whole
question of Aids, instead of the ruling party studying international
examples which have already worked, such as in Uganda for example, where no
double message has been sent out by the government from day to day in that
country. In South Africa a completely double message is being sent out: now
it is garlic, then it is exercise, then it is orange juice – and so we go
on.

The fact of the matter is that this department under the leadership of the
hon Minister is managing a health situation where we are losing some of our
top people in the medical profession year after year, because they leave
the country, and no country in the world can incur those costs and afford
to lose people year after year.

When we come to the nursing profession, then we find exactly the same
situation. One nurse after the other is leaving South Africa and finding
work elsewhere since it is better for them there, because they are not
looked after here. Lastly, the hon Minister knows what has also been done
to the pharmaceutical profession in South Africa.

We cannot allow standards to drop and then I have not even mentioned the
standpoint and the condition of our state hospitals. Go and look at what is
happening there. Go and look at how the situation is deteriorating. The
time has really come for the Minister to take a department seriously. And
there she does it again: a gesture of disdain to everyone in the profession
out there. We know her like that. We shall vote against it.]

Mrs M M MADUMISE: Madam Chairperson, the issues that these political
parties are raising today, are in fact, the issues that we ourselves have
highlighted as our challenges and we have been dealing with them, and we
will continue dealing with them as they arise. [Interjections.] Shut up!

You see, people like the leader of this DA; I don’t know where they come
from. [Interjections.] Whether they live outside South Africa, or on Mars,
you are right, that’s where they come from because they don’t come across
the people that we come across. These are our people and we take care of
them. [Interjections.] Listen, this government has increased the
allocations to the programme of HIV and Aids, you cannot find it anywhere
in Africa, not anywhere, only in South Africa. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, hon member, please, one
moment. Please allow the member to make her statement.

Mrs M M MADUMISE: Wena, Mofumahadi Dudley, o a kwatisa ka nako e nngwe.
[You, Madam Dudley, are sometimes annoying.] [Laughter.]

When you talk about termination of pregnancy, this is our brainchild. It
was decided by the majority of the women of South Africa, when you were
still in Zimbabwe. [Laughter.] They like this programme. They support it
with the few nurses who are committed to it. They are there in numbers,
including the whites who support this programme. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The House divided:

    AYES-248: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
    E; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J;
    Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J; Bhengu, P; Biyela, B P
    ; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W;
    Buthelezi, M G; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P;
    Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S
    C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T;
    Direko, I W; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dodovu, T S; du Toit, D C ; Erwin, A;
    Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N
    E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gillwald, C E ; Godi, N T;
    Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M ;
    Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hendricks, L B;
    Hendrickse, P; Herandien, C B; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H;
    Joemat, R R; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Joubert, L K;
    Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kati, Z J; Kekana, C D;
    Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Kondlo, N C;
    Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S;
    Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Mabandla, B S; Mabe,
    L L; Mabena, D C; Mabudafhasi, T R; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madlala-Routledge,
    N C; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E
    ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J;
    Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M J; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P;
    Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashangoane, P R;
    Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F;
    Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M;
    Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C;
    Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N;
    Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng,
    T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R;
    Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D;
    Moonsamy, K; Morutoa, M R; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-
    Hounkpatin, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N;
    Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N
    M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T;
    Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya, M L;
    Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H;
    Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nzimande, L
    P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H;
    Pahad, E G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P; Pule, B E ;
    Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin,
    M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M;
    Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A;
    Seaton, S A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C C; Sibande, M P;
    Sibanyoni, J B; Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau, Sylvia N; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu,
    L N; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Smith , V
    G; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Sotyu, M M; Stofile, M A; Surty, M E;
    Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-
    Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P
    Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vos, S C;
    Vundisa, S S; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M ; Yengeni, L L; Zita, L; Zulu, B
    Z ; Zulu, N E.


    NOES-56: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R;
    Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Ellis,
    M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Green, L M; Greyling, L W;
    Groenewald, P J; Haasbroek, S F; Henderson, R K; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan,
    S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Leon, A J; Lowe, C
    M; Madasa, Z L; Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J; Meshoe, K R J; Minnie, K J;
    Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Nkem-Abonta, E;
    Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C;
    Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Smuts, M; Stephens, M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M;
    Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D; Van
    Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille, H.


Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 17 – Labour – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr C M LOWE: Chairperson, the DA applauded when President Mbeki made it
clear in his state of the nation address that government was putting
employment at the centre of its vision. The job crisis is our country’s
greatest challenge. We have repeatedly asked that it should receive urgent
and direct attention, and we have supported the ANC when they pledged to do
something to put South Africa back to work. But the ANC has failed to
respond whilst President Mbeki has vacillated and changed his mind over
much-needed changes to the labour laws, particularly those that affect
small businesses.

The growing crisis in our country has started to burn in recent days, as
thousands of angry citizens have taken to the streets, demanding service
delivery and the jobs that have been promised. About 11 years into our
democracy, more than 8 million people - 40% of the workforce – are without
work. Whether the unemployment rate is 27%, 40% or whatever Minister Manuel
thinks it is or whatever President Mbeki decrees it is, is of little
consequence and of no relevance to a man or woman who cannot find work.
They are 100% unemployed.

The mining sector and the clothing and textile industries in particular
have all endured brutal job cuts and face even more. Yet, still government
fails to make job creation its number one priority. President Mbeki has
spoken repeatedly about bridging the gap between the formal and informal
economies. He set out on a high road in his state of the nation address but
he has simply failed to follow through. Instead of fighting poverty and
creating work, the ANC has succeeded in creating poverty and fighting work.

As long as they fail to look outside the magic circle of those lucky enough
to have a job, the DA has no choice but to oppose the labour budget. Our
national job crisis is heading for a freefall. Thousands are marching,
burning tyres and barricading the streets. The ANC needs a plan and the
political will to tackle the beast. They need to do so now. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Prince N E ZULU: Chairperson, the IFP will support this Vote but has to
note the following: Without full employment of all the factors of
production, the scarcity of jobs in the country will remain a glaring
phenomenon in the foreseeable future - one that will turn out to be a
mirage beyond our reach.

This is not a challenge to the Department of Labour alone, but a
responsibility of all the departments that hold those factors of
production. One speaker in recent days proposed in this Chamber that an
economic Codesa, in this respect, was necessary. Therefore let the economic
sector in South Africa give him the necessary support.

Mnr W D SPIES: Agb Voorsitter, ek dink almal van ons stem saam dat
werkloosheid die grootste probleem is en dit is ook dikwels gesê. Die
probleem is dat ons toenemend die indruk kry dat die prioriteit op die
oomblik nie noodwendig soseer by die skep van nuwe werksgeleenthede en die
ontwikkeling van vaardighede is nie, maar eerder op ’n herverdeling van
bestaande werksgeleenthede. Ons probleem daarmee is dat bestaande armoede
daardeur herverdeel word, terwyl welvaart nog steeds buite meeste mense se
bereik bly.

Die gelyke indiensnemingskommissie fokus in sy navorsing op slegs daardie
10% van die werksmag, waar wittes oorverteenwoordig is, maar geen vinger
word verroer om die 50% van die werksmag waar wittes onverteenwoordig is,
meer toeganklik te maak nie. Terwyl die Minister ons die versekering gegee
het in sy repliek dat regstellende aksie nie net oor wit en swart gaan nie,
moes ons vanoggend van die gelyke indiensnemingskommissie hoor dat die
sogenaamde Kleurlinggemeenskap vandag slegter daaraan toe is as drie jaar
gelede. Ons moet ook hoor dat gestremde persone nog steeds op grond van ras
beoordeel word, al is daar ook teen hulle in die verlede gediskrimineer. Om
hierdie redes kan die VF nie die betrokke begrotingspos ondersteun nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chairperson, I think we all agree that unemployment is
the biggest problem and this has been said often. The problem is that we
increasingly get the impression that currently the creation of new job
opportunities and the development of skills is not the biggest priority,
but rather the redistribution of existing job opportunities. Our problem
with that is that in this way existing poverty is being redistributed,
while welfare remains out of most people’s reach.

In its research the Commission for Employment Equity focuses on only the
10% of the labour force where white people are over represented, but
nothing is being done to make the 50% of the labour force where whites are
not represented at all more accessible. While the Minister assured us in
his reply that affirmative action is not only about black and white, we had
to hear from the Commission for Employment Equity this morning that the so-
called coloured community is worse off today than they were three years
ago. We also had to hear that people with disabilities are still being
assessed on the grounds of race, even though they were also discriminated
against in the past. For these reasons the FF Plus cannot support the
relevant Budget Vote.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, 11 years after our democracy, the
transformation of the workplace remains one of the key challenges  facing
our country. Although the Employment Equity Act has been passed, we got the
report today that its implementation is not satisfactory. The
representation, in terms of those who have historically been excluded and
also in gender terms, remains far below expectations.

We believe that the failure to implement the Employment Equity Act is not a
result of ignorance but rather a resistance to change. We believe that the
department should start to change its language from gently nudging those
who resist change to an iron-fist approach. [Laughter.]

We also want to agree with those who say that unemployment is one of our
greatest challenges. The reason for this unemployment is, unfortunately,
not government but big capital. Those who are the beneficiaries of the
historic compromises at Kempton Park have not reciprocated. We want to say
to the rich: Share your riches with the poor or they will share their
poverty with you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF will definitely support all improvements
and the delivery that the government is making in this country. Whilst
supporting this budget, the concern expressed by the MF is to find ways, in
whichever way the government can, to cut down on imports and increase
exports of South African products in order to increase employment. Thank
you.

Ms O R KASIENYANE: Chairperson, the ANC supports this Budget Vote and it
will vote in favour thereof. This is a good budget that will enable us to
continue the important transformation needed in the labour market. We note
the objections raised by the DA, IFP and FF Plus. We further advise them
that they should come and raise those objections in the portfolio committee
meetings where they can be discussed.

The Department of Labour performed tremendously well in the past year and
continues to do so under the able leadership of the hon Membathisi
Mdladlana. Both the department and the International Labour Organisation,
ILO, investigated the call by the DA to relax the law regarding small
businesses and the issue of inflexibility in the labour market. The laws
were found to be reasonable and flexible.

Small businesses can apply for exemptions in their own right if they so
wish. The DA will not win anything for them. [Interjections.] Don’t worry,
we are on course and committed to raise the standard of living, and quality
of social and working life of our people in South Africa. We are being
guided by the historic document of our struggle, the people’s charter,
which was adopted half a century ago.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms O R KASIENYANE: We are on course. The ANC supports this Budget Vote.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. I have noticed that
the ANC has so far supported each and every one of these Votes. The Rules
make provision that every party should be entitled to speak. Don’t you
think it’s only fair that, specifically with regard to labour, we at least
give Cosatu a chance to address the House? [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I do not know the Afrikaans word for
“frivolous”, otherwise I would have used it.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES-246: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Balfour, B
    M N; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J;
    Bhengu, P; Biyela, B P ; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I;
    Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M G; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I;
    Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J
    J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H;
    Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Direko, I W; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dodovu, T S; du
    Toit, D C ; Dudley, C; Erwin, A; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Fubbs
    , J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K
    M N; Gillwald, C E ; Godi, N T; Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T;
    Gore, V C; Green, L M; Greyling, C H F; Greyling, L W; Gumede, D M ;
    Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hanekom, D A; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P;
    Herandien, C B; Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H; Joemat,
    R R; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O
    R; Kati, Z J; Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M;
    Khunou, N P; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Landers, L T;
    Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K;
    Ludwabe, C I; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Mabudafhasi, T R;
    Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madasa, Z L; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma , L D;
    Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B;
    Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M
    W; Malahlela, M J; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-
    Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo,
    R J; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
    Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S;
    Meruti, M V; Meshoe, K R J; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlangeni, A;
    Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L
    J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D;
    Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E;
    Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morutoa, M R; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss,
    M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B;
    Mthethwa, E N; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A;
    Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D;
    Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya,
    M L; Nhlengethwa, D G; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S
    H; Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D;
    Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L Pahad, A
    G H; Pahad, E G; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P; Pule, B E ; Radebe, B A;
    Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M;
    Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R;
    Roopnarain, U; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A;
    Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C C; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibuyana,
    M W; Sigcau, Sylvia N; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Skhosana, W M;
    Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Smith , V G; Sonto, M R;
    Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stephens, M; Stofile, M A; Surty, M E;
    Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L;
    Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Vadi, I; Van den
    Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk,
    Annelizé; Vezi, T E; Vos, S C; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Woods, G G;
    Xingwana, L M ; Yengeni, L L; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z ; Zulu, N E.


    NOES-48: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R;
    Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J;
    Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Groenewald, P J; Haasbroek, S F; Henderson,
    R K; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Leon, A
    J; Lowe, C M; Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R;
    Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Nkem-Abonta, E; Ntuli, R S;
    Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J;
    Semple, J A; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S;
    Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; van der Walt, D; van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A
    I; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille, H.


    ABSTAIN-1: Zikalala, C N Z.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 18 – Social Development - put.


Declarations of vote:


Mr M WATERS: Chair and hon Ministers, and may I compliment you on your t-
shirt today, Chair. It is a great day for press freedom and for freedom of
speech.

Job creation is the only vehicle that will eradicate poverty. In the light
of large-scale poverty, largely caused by inflexible labour laws, the DA
understands that social grants bring much-needed relief to the poorest of
the poor.

The ANC government is failing to provide the child support grant to an
estimated 3 million children between the ages of 14 and 18, of whom 2,5
million are living in dire poverty. The DA calls on the ANC to extend the
child support grant to all children.

In addition, the government has refused to introduce the basic income grant
of R110 per month. The basic income grant would close the poverty gap by
74% and effectively reach the millions of South Africans in the poorest
households currently not receiving, even indirectly, any form of social
grant. It would also help tackle the fraudulent applications for disability
grants. The DA calls on the government to assist the 8 million unemployed
South Africans by introducing the basic income grant.

The manner in which subsidies to NGOs were slashed without any consultation
or proper communication is insensitive and suggests a chaotic bureaucracy
that discriminates against some NGOs. Vague and arbitrary requirements
imposed on NGOs seeking funding suggest that the government is acting in a
partisan manner and does not care about the harm and suffering that is
being caused to the most vulnerable in our society, and that is the aged
and the mentally and physically disabled.

The DA will vote against the Social Development budget because this
department and government are failing millions of destitute South Africans.
Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Does the IFP have a declaration?

Mr M V NGEMA: Chair, the IFP will support the Vote but wishes to make the
following important point. There are many children suffering from or
affected by HIV and Aids and who are being orphaned as a result of this
disease.

Community-based organisations have a key role to play in identifying these
vulnerable children and assisting with their various needs. The IFP
therefore believes that additional funding should be made available to
these organisations so as to empower them to assist these children.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the ACDP will vote in favour of this Budget Vote and
acknowledges the concerted effort being made to address the issue of
poverty and to provide protection for the vulnerable in our society.

Last year the ACDP called on the Minister to expand links with faith-based
organisations that are well placed and have the human resources necessary
to identify needs and channel relevant support. We are encouraged by the
Minister’s response in doing just that.

The ACDP’s main concern, however, is welfare services and the fact that
decisions regarding funding are taken arbitrarily. I say this because the
department presently has no idea what its direct responsibility actually
entails and continues to ignore calls for a costing analysis to be done. A
proper audit of sector responsibilities must be done or the guessing will
continue and services will continue to fall far short of what is needed.

The nonprofit child protection agencies which government relies on to
render these services are underresourced and stretch beyond capacity and
the child protection system is in grave danger of collapsing under this
strain.  About 85% of the work done by NGOs is statutory and not even 50%
is subsidised by government.

As the situation is now NGOs are in fact subsidising government and not the
other way round. Yes, there is a new policy on NGO funding but the reality
is that this policy is no different from the previous ones, which have
called for written input from stakeholders.

Government talks of a partnership but without a proper consultative process
there can be no real partnership. Surely, those who actually do the work
and know what it entails should be consulted seriously. In addition,
government’s focus on prevention rather than problem-based work may be a
worthy goal but it ignores the reality of our situation. It is impossible
to focus on preventative work when rooms are flooded with abandoned, raped
and abused children and there are no staff members to help them.

Child-protection weeks and days of activism, with the best intentions in
the world, will not deliver the help women and children in crisis need. The
job will not get done without social workers.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF will support this Budget Vote with
certain concerns and would appreciate it if the child support grant were
increased to the age of 18 years and a review on the state pension grant
was made.

Mr T M MASUTHA: Chair, I rise on behalf of the ANC to express our
unequivocal support for this Budget Vote which comprises some of the most
effective measures aimed at rolling back the frontiers of poverty.

Over 10 million of the poorest of our community members, namely children,
the elderly and persons with disabilities, currently benefit from the
monthly payments of social grants that sustain them and shield them from
abject poverty because this government cares.

Programmes aimed at addressing the plight of poor families and communities
such as poverty relief programmes as well as interventions such as home-
based care for the terminally ill and persons living with HIV and Aids, as
well as social programmes aimed at assisting victims of violence
particularly domestic violence, abandoned and abused children, victims of
substance abuse and others, make it possible for those in great need to
enjoy a quality of life that is equal to the rest of us.

This government cares because it is a government by the people, with the
people and for the people. Let us not be distracted from the main issues
before us by prophets of doom such as the DA, which has never had the
concerns of the poor at the centre of their policies and objectives, and
focus on the real challenges which confront our nation and our people,
namely, to uproot corruption, to uproot abuses in the system and to ensure
that our people have full access to the benefits that they are entitled to,
which government provides.

I thank you. [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES-239: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
    E; Balfour, B M N; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S;
    Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J; Bhengu, P; Biyela, B P ; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M;
    Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M G; Cachalia, I
    M; Carrim, Y I; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F
    I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H;
    De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Direko, I W; Ditshetelo, P H K;
    Dodovu, T S; du Toit, D C; Dudley, C; Erwin, A; Fihla, N B; Fraser-
    Moleketi, G J; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E;
    Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gillwald, C E ; Godi, N T; Gololo, C L;
    Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Gore, V C; Green, L M; Greyling, C H F;
    Greyling, L W; Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hanekom, D A;
    Hendrickse, P; Herandien, C B; Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ;
    Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P;
    Joubert, L K; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J; Kekana, C D;
    Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Kondlo, N C;
    Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S;
    Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Mabandla, B S; Mabe,
    L L; Mabena, D C; Mabudafhasi, T R; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madasa, Z L;
    Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magazi,
    M N; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maine, M
    S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M J; Maloyi, P D N;
    Maluleka, H P; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D;
    Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P
    M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M;
    Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V; Meshoe, K R J;
    Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N;
    Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng,
    T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T;
    Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
    Morutoa, M R; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S
    D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mzondeki, M J
    G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-
    Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N;
    Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya, M L; Nhleko, N P ; Nkuna,
    C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H; Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R;
    Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nzimande, L P M; Oliphant, G G;
    Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E G; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P;
    Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E ; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin,
    M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M;
    Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A;
    Seaton, S A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C C; Sibanyoni, J
    B; Sibuyana, M W; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M
    B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Smith , V G; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E;
    Sotyu, M M; Stofile, M A; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J;
    Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der
    Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vos, S C; Vundisa, S
    S; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M ; Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L;
    Zulu, N E.
    NOES-46: Blanché, J P I; Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O;
    Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson,
    D H M; Groenewald, P J; Haasbroek, S F; Henderson, R K; Jankielsohn, R;
    Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Leon, A J;
    Lowe, C M; Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R;
    Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Nkem-Abonta, E; Ntuli, R S;
    Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J;
    Smuts, M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van
    der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille,
    H.


Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 19 - Sports and Recreation – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr S J MASANGO: Chairperson, South Africa’s sports administrators cannot do
their job under ANC control. [Interjections.] The ANC’s political programme
of transformation runs contrary to the very purpose of sports which is to
bring people together, not to divide them . . . [Interjections.] . . . to
celebrate merit, not to undermine it. Under the ANC, merit has been
replaced by race, quotas have replaced development, and independence has
been substituted with a political agenda.

The ANC’s desire to enforce racial quotas on every level of our society has
now produced a situation where our sports administrators answer not to the
sportsmen or sportswomen of our country, but to the Minister of Sport. The
result is that standards have dropped. Our administration and institutions
are weakened, and sport has become a political battlefield.

Instead of promoting, training and supporting the youth, the government’s
energy is wasted on racial engineering and political control. South African
sports belong to the people, not the ANC. The DA does not support this
Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: The MF supports this Vote, bearing in mind that more sports
and recreation facilities and infrastructure need to be created in the
schools, and especially in our rural areas. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: The ANC supports the Budget Vote. We
are very happy, Minister, with the way sport is going in the country. We
are going to stick to our guns in terms of the question of transformation.
We want representivity in our sports teams. We are going in the right
direction.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES-238: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Asiya, S E; Balfour, B M
    N; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F;
    Bhengu, M J; Bhengu, P; Biyela, B P ; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-
    Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M G; Cachalia, I M;
    Carrim, Y I; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I;
    Combrinck, J J; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H;
    Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Direko, I W; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dodovu, T S; du
    Toit, D C ; Dudley, C; Erwin, A; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Fubbs
    , J L; Gabela, L S; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gillwald, C
    E ; Godi, N T; Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Gore, V C; Green,
    L M; Greyling, C H F; Greyling, L W; Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N
    B; Hanekom, D A; Hendricks, L B; Herandien, C B; Hogan, B A; Huang, S;
    Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M;
    Jordan, Z P; Joubert, L K; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J;
    Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P;
    Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K;
    Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I;
    Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Mabudafhasi, T R; Mabuyakhulu, D
    V; Madasa, Z L; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M;
    Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlawe, N M;
    Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela,
    M J; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N;
    Martins, B A D; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M;
    Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M;
    Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V; Meshoe, K R J;
    Mfundisi, IS; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mnandi, P N;
    Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M;
    Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T;
    Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
    Morutoa, M R; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S
    D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mzondeki, M J
    G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-
    Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N;
    Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya, M L; Nhleko, N P ; Nkuna,
    C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H; Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R;
    Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A;
    Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, E G; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P;
    Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E ; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M
    M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H;
    Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D;
    Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C
    C; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibuyana, M W; Sikakane, M R; Skhosana, W M; Skosana,
    M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Smith , V G; Solo, B M; Sonto, M R;
    Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stofile, M A; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto,
    B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P;
    Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C;
    Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vos, S C; Vundisa, S S; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M ;
    Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, N E.


    NOES-47: Blanché, J P I; Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O;
    Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson,
    D H M; Groenewald, P J; Haasbroek, S F; Henderson, R K; Jankielsohn, R;
    Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lowe, C M;
    Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P;
    Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Nkem-Abonta, E; Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E;
    Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A;
    Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swathe, M M;
    Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M;
    Weber, H; Zille, H.


Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 20 - Correctional Services – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, the Minister of Correctional Services has been in
office for 13 months. He has not yet solved a number of challenges facing
the department, such as the large number of acting and unfilled posts, and
there have been some shocking breaches of security, some of which we heard
about at the portfolio committee only this morning.

However, there have been many achievements that we not only support, but
actually indeed applaud. These include staring down the unions, finalising
the White Paper on Corrections, establishing centres of excellence, and
placing rehabilitation at the centre of the activities of his department.
Yet it is a fact that the rehabilitation of offenders is impossible in
grossly overcrowded facilities, and the vast majority of correctional
centres are hopelessly overcrowded.

As I have stated already this afternoon, the real cause of overcrowding
lies in the 51 000 awaiting-trial detainees held in our prisons. Instead of
dealing with this problem, the Minister proposes to relieve overcrowding by
granting a special remission of sentences. As I have said, this step is
well intentioned, but misdirected. All we will be doing is releasing
sentenced prisoners to make way for awaiting-trial prisoners.

For these reasons, we will not be supporting this Vote.

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Chair and hon members, we are really concerned that
inadequate funds are being made available to the Department of Correctional
Services to bring about real and meaningful change to the department.

The IFP could cast its vote against the Budget Vote. But that is not going
to help. That is going to impact on an already negative situation. So, we
therefore will support the Vote, because if we were to oppose it, we would
be creating more of a problem with regard to overcrowding and
rehabilitation.

Correctional Services is at the receiving end of the justice delivery
system, and must cater for those whose passage through the criminal justice
system is blocked at the point where crime is investigated and processed
through the courts. Changes need to be made throughout the justice delivery
system, and funds need to be sought to bring about substantial and
noticeable change in as short a time as possible for all departments within
the justice delivery system.

We hope that Minister Manuel is listening and will make those additional
funds available to the justice delivery system that we are going to need to
be able to sort out the system. [Interjections.] Perhaps you should come
and visit our prisons with us, Minister Manuel. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, section 36 of the Correctional Services Act
states that with ``due regard to the fact that the deprivation of liberty
serves the purposes of punishment, the implementation of a sentence of
imprisonment has the objective of enabling a sentenced prisoner to lead a
socially responsible and crime-free life in the future’’.

Our problem, hon Minister, is that insufficient funds are available for
rehabilitation. There is a lack of staff and overcrowding. We believe that
more social workers and psychologists should be employed, and as you have
pointed out earlier, the solution to overcrowding, as previous speakers
have indicated, lies in the huge awaiting-trial prisoner population, as
opposed to the special remission of sentences that we believe undermines
the criminal justice sector.

It is ludicrous that there are approximately 14 000 awaiting-trial
prisoners who are not a danger to society but who cannot afford bail
ranging from R50 upwards, and who are costing the state R114 per day. The
ACDP believes that section 63(a) and section 62(f) of the Criminal
Procedure Act are not being correctly or sufficiently implemented to
release these awaiting-trial prisoners.

We also believe that the long-outstanding Child Justice Bill should be
given urgent attention. This, as you are aware, would seek to introduce
innovative restorative justice principles and keep juveniles who are not a
danger to society out of prison. Hon Minister, you indicated in your last
Budget Vote that you would be raising this matter with the security
cluster, but to date this has not been done. Unfortunately, the ACDP will
not be able to support this Budget Vote. I thank you.

Mnr D V BLOEM: Minister, moenie die mense kop toe vat nie, want jy as
Minister het al baie gelewer.

Hier is ‘n Witskrif van die departement. Ek weet nie of die DA die boek
gelees het nie. Julle moet dit lees, mnr Selfe, want daar is vordering in
die departement. Daar is net ‘n blink toekoms voor vir hierdie departement
onder die leierskap van Minister Balfour en Kommisaris Mti. Dit is die
eerste keer in die geskiedenis dat ons ‘n sakboek het om mee op en af te
loop.

Ntate Mlangeni, jy was ‘n ou bandiet, en jy het dit nog nooit geweet.
[Gelag.] Minister Manuel, Mev Seaton sê jy moet die tronke gaan besoek,
maar vertel haar van manje manje, hona jwale, khona manje.

Hy weet van die tronke. Hy is nie ‘n vreemdeling aan die tronke nie. Hy is
‘n Minister van Finansies vandag, maar hy weet wat binne in die tronke
aangaan. As ons sê, ``Manje, manje, ‘n hek asseblief.’’ Hy weet wat is ``’n
hek asseblief.’’ Hy is nie ‘n “stranger” aan dit nie.

Daar is ‘n ou mens. Hy het nie eens geweet wat ‘n Witskrif is nie toe hy 27
jaar in die gevangenis gesit het nie. Hier is dit sodat ons kan op en af
loop . . . Ntate Mlangeni, ek gaan jou hierdie een gee sodat jy op en af
kan loop met dit in jou binnesak. En as enigeen jou vra wat in die tronke
aangaan deesdae, dan moet jy sê, ``Hier is die Witskrif. Hier is die ding
waarvolgens ons tronke deesdae gelei moet word. Niemand kan mishandel word
in ons tronke nie.’’

Ons het boeke, ons het regulasies. Ons het als wat ‘n gevangene moet weet.
Hierdie boek is in die hande van enige gevangene. Almal van hulle het dit.

In die verlede, was hierdie boek verbode. Ons het toe nie eens so ‘n boek
gehad nie. Dit was verbode. Jy mag ook nie eers geweet het wat jou regte in
die tronk was nie. Vandag weet hulle wat hulle regte is in die tronk.
Hierdie mense weet nie hoe ‘n tronk binnekant lyk nie. [Tyd verstreke.]
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: Minister, do not take any notice of these people, because as
Minister you have contributed a lot.

Here is a White Paper of the department. I do not know whether the DA has
read the book. You should read it, Mr Selfe, because there is progress in
the department. There awaits only a bright future for this department under
the leadership of Minister Balfour and Commissioner Mti. It is the first
time in history that we have a pocket book to parade around with.

Mr Mlangeni, you were an old convict and you never knew it. [Laughter.]
Minister Manuel, Mrs Seaton says that you should visit the prisons, but
tell her about ‘manje manje, hona jwale, khona manje’ [‘now, now, right
now, right now’].

He knows about prisons. He is not a stranger to prisons. He is Minister of
Finance today, but he knows what happens in prisons. When we say, “Manje
manje, ‘n hek asseblief.” [Now, now, wait your turn]; he knows what  “’n
hek asseblief” [wait your turn] means. He is not a stranger to it.

Now there is an old person. While he was in prison for 27 years, he did not
even know what a White Paper was. Here it is; so that we can parade up and
down . . . Mr Mlangeni, I am going to give you this one; so that you can
parade up and down with it in your pocket. And if anyone should ask what
happens in prisons nowadays, then you must say, “Here is the White Paper.
Here is the book according to which our prisons must be managed nowadays.
Nobody can be abused in our prisons.”

We have books. We have regulations. We have everything that a prisoner
should know. This book is in the hands of any prisoner. Everybody has one.

This book was prohibited in the past. In those days we did not have such a
book. It was prohibited. You were also not allowed to know what your rights
were in prison. They know what their rights are in prison today. These
people do not know what a prison looks like on the inside. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF supports the Vote with an appeal to the
Minister to utilise funds effectively in rehabilitation programmes in the
prisons so that more offenders can be released to overcome the overcrowding
in the prisons. Thank you.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and African Christian Democratic Party
dissenting).

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, I will now arrange for
an early release for all of you. Ten minutes. The bells will ring for five
minutes.

Business suspended at 16:51 and resumed at 17:02.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Please be seated.

Vote No 21 – Defence – put.

Declarations of vote:

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Deputy Chairperson, the recent protests across
the country against the government’s poor record on service delivery have
served as a timely reminder that poverty and unemployment constitute the
most serious security threat to our country. There is therefore a moral
imperative on the government to ensure that before it commits billions of
rand to defence spending  these priorities are carefully considered. It
appears in this regard that the government has not learnt from the costly
mistakes of the first arms deal, the burden of which we continue to labour
under today. Not only does ill-conceived defence expenditure continue to
prevent pressing social expenditure, the misplaced priorities of the
defence budget itself have left the Defence Force in a precarious position.

The operational capacity of the SANDF is fundamentally compromised as in
many instances it lacks the necessary infrastructure, personnel and
expertise to properly integrate and operate many of the weapons acquired.
In this context it seems extraordinary that the government has committed
itself to spending billions more on a second arms deal. The A400M Deal has
been concluded in virtual secrecy, has bypassed Parliament and has been
presented to the nation as a fait accompli without any debate.

This is indicative of a government which is failing in its constitutional
obligation to ensure that any procurement of this magnitude is conducted in
an open and transparent fashion. Until the many operational shortcomings
that currently beset the SANDF are properly dealt with, the DA cannot
support the defence budget. You gave us Armsgate, you gave us Travelgate,
you gave us Oilgate and you cannot be the keepers of Moralgate. [Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: With the larger involvement in Africa of the Defence Force,
clearly the budget currently presented is insufficient. Therefore, taking
into account the pressing needs, domestic needs in respect of social
services, clearly it is going to be controversial to increase the budget,
even though it is necessary to do so. I would want to call upon the
Minister of Defence and the Deputy Minister to increase the tempo of the
formation of the standby force in the continent so that the burden of
peacekeeping is shared by all countries involved.

One of the areas of concern is that the Northern African region has not
even began to discuss the formation of this standby force. We ask the
Ministry of Defence therefore to attend to this matter urgently. Thank you.
Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Geagte Voorsitter, op 14 Februarie 2003 kondig die agb
President aan dat die kommandostelsel in Suid-Afrika uitgefaseer gaan word.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Ja, u kan maar kla en te kere gaan, maar die feit van die
saak is dat dit ook baie duidelik is dat baie agb lede hier nie weet van
die goeie werk wat die kommando’s gedoen het nie, soos byvoorbeeld in 2002
toe hulle die agb ANC-lede opgepas het tydens hulle konferensie in
Stellenbosch. Dit was die kommandolede wat u beskerm het. Die belofte is
gemaak dat daar met die uitfasering van kommando’s nie ’n leemte sal
ontstaan in die veiligheidsituasie nie. Pas is daar ’n lys van 55 kommando-
eenhede bekend gemaak wat in hierdie finansiële jaar moet sluit.

As ons kyk na die Durban-Suid kommando, is hierdie kommando op die oomblik
verantwoordelik vir die beskerming van vyf nasionale sleutelpunte in
Durban. In Pretoria is die Broederstroomkommando verantwoordelik vir die
beskerming van die nasionale sleutelpunt naamlik Pelindaba. Agb Minister,
as hierdie kommando sluit, dan gaan daar beslis ’n leemte ontstaan in die
veiligheidsituasie. Twee maande gelede het die Klerksdorpkommando ’n
kardinale rol gespeel tydens die aardbewing in Stilfontein. Die polisie het
na vore getree en erken dat hulle nie die situasie kon hanteer het nie. Die
vraag is: Wie gaan rampsituasies hanteer in die toekoms?

Alle lande ter wêreld het ’n bepaalde reserwemag wat ook ’n tipe van
territoriale reserwemag insluit. Daarom wil ons ook van die VF Plus se kant
vir u sê: Die besluit om die kommando’s te sluit en die wyse waarop dit
gedoen word, is onverantwoordelik. Dit skep ’n leemte in die
veiligheidsituasie en daarom sal die VF Plus nie hierdie begrotingspos
ondersteun nie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, on 14 February 2003 the hon President
announced that the commando system in South Africa would be phased out.
[Interjections.] Yes, you may moan and carry on, but the fact of the matter
is that it is also evident that many hon members here are not aware of the
good work that was done by the commandos, for instance when they guarded
the hon ANC members during their conference in Stellenbosch in 2002. It was
members of the commando who protected you. The promise was made that with
the phasing out of the commandos there would not be a deficiency in the
safety situation. Recently a list was released of 55 commando units that
will have to close down in this financial year.

If we look at the Durban South Commando, this commando is currently
responsible for five national key areas in Durban. In Pretoria the
Broederstroom Commando is responsible for protecting the national key area
of Pelindaba. Hon Minister, if this commando closes down there will
definitely be a deficiency in the safety situation. Two months ago the
Klerksdorp Commando played a crucial role at the time of the earthquake in
Stilfontein. The police came forward and acknowledged that they were not
able to handle the situation. The question is: Who is going to handle
disaster situations in future?

All the countries in the world have specific reserve forces that include a
type of territorial reserve force. That is why the FF Plus for its part
wants to tell you that the decision to close down the commandos and the
manner in which it is being done is irresponsible. It creates a deficiency
in the safety situation and for this reason the FF Plus cannot support this
Budget Vote.]

Mr S B NTULI: Madam Chairperson, the ANC supports this Vote. There has been
progress in relation to the transformation of the SA National Defence
Force, especially since its inception in 1994. This budget will also then
enhance some of the work that is still outstanding especially at some
levels of some of the arms of the service.

On civil military relations, the Department of Defence has conducted itself
well in line with the requirements of the Constitution. The culture of
transparency started by former Minister Joe Modise in Defence is
continuing, characterised by the recent public hearings, with regard to the
Defence Review, the Defence White Paper and the White Paper on Defence
Update Process.

We have noted the integration process and its challenges. The role of
peacekeeping is continuing. Our defence force remains combat ready and we
are proud of the work that they have done so far. We also envisage that the
Budget Vote will enable the DOD to strengthen the SANDF by finding an
appropriate exit mechanism and the provision of the service core. All these
would be entrusted to the SANDF under the newly appointed Chief of Defence.
The ANC supports this Vote. [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES-237: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
    E; Balfour, B M N; Bapela, K O; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F;
    Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J; Bhengu, P; Biyela, B P ; Bloem, D
    V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M
    G; Cachalia, I M; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota,
    F I; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H;
    Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Direko, I W; Dodovu, T S; du Toit, D C ;
    Dudley, C; Erwin, A; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Fubbs , J L;
    Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N;
    Gillwald, C E ; Godi, N T; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Green, L M;
    Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hanekom, D A;
    Hendricks, L B; Herandien, C B; Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ;
    Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Joubert, L K;
    Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J; Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P;
    Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W;
    Kota, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E;
    Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D
    C; Mabudafhasi, T R; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madasa, Z L; Madlala-Routledge, N
    C; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E ;
    Magwanishe, G B; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi,
    X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M J; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manuel,
    T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J;
    Masutha, T M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
    Maunye, M M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V;
    Meshoe, K R J; Mfundisi, IS; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M;
    Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S;
    Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J;
    Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E;
    Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morutoa, M R; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss,
    M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mshudulu S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N;
    Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N
    M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T;
    Ngcobo, E N N; Ngema, M V; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya, M L; Nhleko, N P ;
    Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H;
    Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nzimande, L P M;
    Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, E G; Phadagi, M
    G; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E ; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A;
    Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M;
    Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Schneemann, G
    D; Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September ,
    C C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibuyana, M W; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu,
    L N; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Smith , V
    G; Solo, B M; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stofile, M A;
    Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L;
    Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z;
    Van der Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vezi, T E;
    Vos, S C; Vundisa, S S; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M ; Yengeni, L L;
    Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z ; Zulu, N E.


    NOES-49: Blanché, J P I; Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O;
    Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson,
    D H M; Gore, V C; Greyling, L W; Groenewald, P J; Haasbroek, S F;
    Henderson, R K; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard,
    D; Labuschagne, L B; Lowe, C M; Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J; Minnie, K
    J; Morgan, G R; Mpaka, H M; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Nkem-
    Abonta, E; Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R;
    Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Steyn, A C;
    Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D; Van
    Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille, H.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 22 - Independent Complaints Directorate – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Chairperson, misconduct and corruption in the SA Police
Services are increasing. It is a serious indictment on the ANC government
in that it is unwilling to tackle this issue effectively. The
anticorruption unit was replaced by the Independent Complaints Directorate.
Since then, however, the ICD have never been adequately resourced or
insulated from the SA Police Services to do an effective job.

In the last financial year, deaths in police custody, other offences and
misconduct, increased by an average of 33%. With only 70 cases investigated
it is clear that the ICD is unable to deal with all cases of police
misconduct and corruption. Where deaths in police custody occur, the ICD
have to rely on the forensic and other support of the SA Police Services,
the very people they are meant to investigate. Most rural areas have no
investigators. The Free State and Northern Cape only have three
investigators each.

This state of affairs is unacceptable and government has to indicate that
it is serious about dealing with police corruption and misconduct by
ensuring that the ICD is well resourced and independent from the SA Police
Services. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: A new proactive oversight unit has to be established in
order to carry out targeted research and operations and cases analyses. As
it has been done by the ICD, the monitoring of the implementation of the
Domestic Violence Act is being done in order to improve the public’s
confidence in the SAPS’ ability to deal with these cases. Is this
continuing or not? According to the International Human Rights Report,
South Africa is ranked very high on deaths in police cells. Has the ICD
found this to be the truth of the matter or not?

The management of the ICD is not doing the devolution of powers to the
provinces. But they fly all over the country especially from Pretoria to
Cape Town to investigate the cases. Why is this, because the ICD has
offices in all the provinces? The disciplinary measures are not implemented
properly because even the director of the ICD has not yet known how to be
disciplined. Thank you.

Ms M M SOTYU: Chairperson, the ANC supports Budget Vote No 22. We do
recognise certain challenges that face the ICD at both national and
provincial level. In his Budget Vote debate the Minister informed this
House and the portfolio committee that he will be restructuring the ICD so
as to ensure greater effectiveness and improve service delivery, especially
at provincial level.

I am not surprised that the DA is against this budget. Hon Jankielsohn
informed the portfolio committee that even if the ICD can do better they
have a standing position within the party that they must oppose the ICD.
[Interjections.] Today he stands here and says that the ICD is under-
resourced and only yesterday we were discussing challenges facing the ICD
together with a member of that party because hon Jankielsohn was not part
of that meeting. No decisions will be taken unless Jankielsohn is saying
that they must be taken. Thank you, Chairperson.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 23 – Justice and Constitutional Development – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, although some progress has been made to
achieve access to justice, particularly for women and children, to use the
words of the outgoing Director-General, Adv Vusi Pikoli, “not enough has
been done to reduce crime and invest confidence in the justice system”.

The main problem is substantial underresourcing with the unfunded
priorities this year totalling R2,6 billion. The unfunded amounts include
most items, which would contribute towards transformation of the department
and the judiciary – the Minister’s declared aim. For example, R70 million
for the restructuring of court management countrywide and R9 million for
the training of judges are aspects that are missing from this budget.

There is a R400 million shortage for court personnel. As a result, some 30%
of posts are vacant. Yet, justice’s share of national expenditure is
steadily decreasing. The NPA, which is the heart of the criminal justice
system, is again experiencing protests by prosecutors and has massive
vacancies. But more serious than the problems of the budget and the
department, is the fact that the Minister has produced six draft Bills
allegedly aimed at transforming the judiciary, which we believe, and which
the entire judiciary and most legal and academic commentators believe,
contain provisions which undermine judicial independence, striking at the
cornerstone of our constitutional democracy.

The Minister said she still has an open mind on the Bills. We are glad to
hear that. But, in the circumstances, we will take a rain check on support
for the Budget Vote this time around. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, we hesitantly support this Budget Vote
for at least three reasons. Firstly, in terms of the Constitution, more
than two years ago, we submitted applications for pardons on behalf of 384
prisoners, but they are being ignored by government and that constitutes a
violation of human rights. The Minister, last week, promised her immediate
attention to the matter, for which I thank her.

Secondly, we are extremely concerned about the general collapse of our
justice system. The main characteristics of this collapse are: the
inability of the police to effectively combat crime and finalise
investigations; the failure of our courts to hear cases; and the massive
inhuman overcrowding in our prisons.

On the very same day when our Budget Vote was debated here, Petrus
Liebenberg was released from prison, having won his appeal after spending
10 years in jail while he was innocent. How does one make good for 10
wasted years in prison?

The collapse of the justice system has become so threatening and dangerous
that it has actually become a national crisis. Therefore we call on all
political parties and civil society to put aside differences and stand
united to prevent a total breakdown of our justice system.

The IFP therefore offers the government our total support to save the
justice system and would specifically like to mention three areas where we
should all assist, namely: we have to assist the police to improve their
crime-fighting skills and speedy investigations of crime; we have to assist
the courts in eradicating the trials backlog; and we have to assist our
prisons department to eradicate the overcrowding of prisons. Society is
duty-bound to do this, otherwise there is no hope.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, a judicial system is only as good as those who
administer the law and we have very many dedicated prosecutors and
magistrates. The crime problem is aggravated by the criminal system that
has insufficient capacity to serve as a proper deterrent to crime. Courts
are understaffed as court rolls are clogged to such an extent that cases
are continuously postponed, and this has a knock-on effect on the number of
awaiting-trial prisoners kept in deplorable conditions of overcrowding.

The problems in the various links in the system, from the arresting and
investigating officers to the prosecutor, correctional services officer,
judicial officer and defence lawyer, remain a challenge. A delay in any of
these links severely affects the whole chain and adds to the backlog of
cases.

We need to ensure that the effective day to day functioning of the system
is achieved by enforcing an integrated approach whereby the four key
government departments, namely Safety and Security, Justice and
Constitutional Development, Correctional Services, and Social Development,
take responsibility for success by means of binding interdepartmental
protocols. Financial sanctions need to be applied, should a department
breach the protocols. Such protocols will serve to enhance and strengthen
the existing integrated justice system court centres.

The ACDP looks forward to the complete review of the criminal justice
system and trusts that these aspects will receive attention. We will
support the Budget Vote notwithstanding the reservations we have expressed.

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Chairperson, we from this side of the House have never
claimed that the justice department is perfect. Quite to the contrary, when
we celebrated our freedom in 1994, we realised that one of the biggest
challenges we were going to face was to integrate 11 departments of justice
that were essentially very, very badly run into one entity. This, I am
proud to say, we have managed to do. To come here and say things such as,
“justice is collapsing and so on”, is just the most dishonest thing and
just smacks of a lack of integrity.

I do think that we must give credit where credit is due. I am proud to say
that the department of justice, for the first time, recorded an unqualified
audit last year. This is due, in no small measure, to the efforts of
committed South Africans: the director-general and former director-general,
Adv Vusi Pikoli, Alan Mackenzie – the chief financial officer and their
team. These are committed, talented and dedicated South Africans doing what
they do best, that is working to build our country.
We, from our side, will never ever register a vote of no confidence in the
face of such dedication and commitment. [Interjections.] [Applause.] This
is the difference between us on this side of the House and people on that
side. We believe in this country. We believe in South Africans and we will
vote in support of this Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 24 - Safety and Security – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mnr R J KING: Agb Voorsitter, die DA glo dat as daar een aspek van die Suid-
Afrikaanse lewe is wat soos ‘n Berlynse muur skei tussen ware vryheid
enersyds, en die hel van sombere verknegting andersyds, dan is dit misdaad.

Terwyl ons kan spog met ‘n moderne eerstewêreldse grondwet, regeer die wet
van die oerwoud die lewe van té veel van ons mense, en is vryheid steeds ‘n
droom wat deur die werklikhede om ons negeer word.
Suid-Afrikaners wanhoop daagliks aan gruwelike hoë moordsyfers, geweldadige
roof, vroue- en kindermishandeling, korrupsie en onnatuurlike dood. Té veel
is die gebiede waar bendes en professionele rampokkers heerskappy voer. Té
veel is die buurtes waar dwelms en vernietiging die norm is. Té veel die
strate en wyke waar kinders en bejaardes se lewens waardeloos is.

Die DA glo dat ware vryheid slegs ‘n mite sal bly vir u en my totdat Suid-
Afrikaners sal uitbreek uit die spiraal van geweld en kan ontsnap aan die
verknegting van misdaad. Die persepsie bestaan dat die kans dat misdadigers
gevang, verhoor en gevonnis word baie min is, én die gebrek aan kapasiteit
in ons Polisiediens laat ernstige vrae ontstaan oor die politieke wil om
misdaad uit te roei.

Ons Polisiediens het net nie die kapasiteit of die vermoë om hierdie stryd
te wen nie. En reeds onder dié omstandighede kom die ANC-regering en neem
‘n besluit wat die kapasiteit en vermoë van ons veiligheidsmagte nog meer
drasties inkort: Kommando’s word afgeskaf.
‘n Gruwelike leemte word oornag uit die veiligheidsnet, in veral die
plattelandse gebiede, geruk. U kan niemand daar buite blameer nie,
Minister, as u ten volle verantwoording sal moet doen oor die gevolge van
hierdie dwase daad. Die DA kan nie onder dié omstandighede, Voorsitter,
hierdie begrotingspos ondersteun nie. Ek dank u. [Tyd verstreke.][Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr R J KING: Hon Chairperson, the DA believes that crime is one aspect of
life in South Africa that separates true freedom, on the one hand, from the
hell of dismal enslavement, on the other, like a Berlin wall.
Whereas we can boast of a modern first world constitution, the law of the
jungle governs the lives of too many of our people and freedom remains but
a dream which is negated by the realities around us. South Africans despair
daily because of the abominably high murder rates, violent robbery, abuse
of women and children, corruption and unnatural deaths. There are too many
areas where gangs and professional gangsters rule. There are too many
neighbourhoods where drugs and destruction are the norm. There are too many
streets and wards where the lives of children and elderly people are
worthless.

The DA believes that true freedom will remain a myth for you and me until
South Africans break free from the spiral of violence and escape from the
enslavement of crime. The perception exists that the chance is very small
for criminals to be caught, tried and sentenced, and the lack of capacity
in our Police Service leads to serious questions arising about the
political will to eradicate crime.

Our Police Service simply does not have the capacity or competence to win
this battle. And under these circumstances the ANC government comes along
and makes a decision that drastically diminishes the capacity and
competence of our security forces even more: Commandos are being abolished.
Overnight a terrible void is being left in the security net, especially in
the rural areas. You cannot blame anybody outside, Minister, when you must
fully account for the consequences of this foolish deed. Chairperson, the
DA cannot support this Vote under these circumstances. I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Chair, the incidence of the abuse of women and
children has increased and family killings have taken their toll. How can
we help the SAPS to stop these killings?

Strategies should be developed to stop these actions, because these
killings affect the members of the SAPS. What measures are in place to make
sure that the psychologists do assist the members who are affected by these
killings? A decision was taken by the portfolio committee that the increase
regarding the ordinary members of the SAPS must not be effected through
recommendations by the station commissioners. Has this decision been
ratified by management so that no station commissioner will recommend who
is supposed to get an increase or not.

The criteria of the VIP protection unit that are being used to select
people who will be protected need to be looked at by the Minister because
there are people who are not supposed to be protected. I am specifically
referring to Nkalankala Zungu and Sputla Mpungose. [Interjections.] These
are people who are not supposed to be protected, and there are people who
are supposed to be protected other than them. You can’t protect criminals
who are really criminals. Thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Chair, the Safety and Security budget has many
positive inclusions . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order please, members!

Rev K R J MESHOE: The Safety and Security Budget Vote has many positive
inclusions such as salary increases for the police, but the ACDP has some
serious concerns that are not addressed by this budget. Firstly, in the
light of the continuing unacceptable killings of the police, we in the ACDP
believe that every police officer must have a bulletproof vest. It is
unhygienic for police officers to be expected to share sweaty bulletproof
vests. This unhygienic sharing of vests may be one reason why some of the
police don’t wear them.

Secondly, there is still too much corruption in the police. While the ACDP
applauds the hard-working, honest and disciplined officers, we nevertheless
believe that much still needs to be done to enhance the overall image of
our police who are expected to provide efficient service to all our people.

Crime statistics released by government indicating that the war against
crime is being won are not supported by the daily experiences of ordinary
people on the ground. The ACDP will therefore not support this Budget Vote
as the crime level in this country is still unacceptably high. Thank you.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Madam Chair, during the reply of the hon Minister on the
Budget Vote, he threw his arms in the air and said, “I am not closing
commandos. It’s not I who closes the commandos”. [Interjections.] That’s
what you said, hon Minister.

Those are the most disturbing remarks I ever heard in the whole process of
closing down commandos. Why do I say that? [Interjections.] Hon Minister
that is what you said.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Don’t misrepresent me.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: No, I am not misquoting you, we can go to the Hansard
and look into that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order!

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Why I say those are the most disturbing remarks I ever
heard in the whole process of the closure of commandos is this: Before a
commando unit can close down, the Police Service have to clearly understand
that they are in a position to take over the role of the commandos.

Kom ons vat die voorbeeld van Potchefstroomkommando: Die polisie kom en die
polisie sê dat hulle gaan agt motors verloor omdat die getalsterkte van die
polisie bepaal dat hulle nie soveel motors kan hê nie. Nou wil ek vir die
agb Minister vra: Hoe is dit moontlik dat een sektorhoof van die polisie
die rol kan oorneem?

Ek wil vandag vir die agb Minister baie ernstig sê: Die polisielede op
grondvlak erken ruiterlik dat hulle nie die rol van die kommando’s kan
oorneem nie. Die polisielede – en die agb lid moet mooi luister – op
grondvlak erken dat daar ’n toename in misdaad gaan wees en hulle erken dat
daar ’n vakuum in die veiligheidsituasie gaan ontstaan, veral wat landelike
beveiliging betref.

As ons by die Parlement kom, dan kom die senior lede van die polisie en
hulle sê hulle kan die taak doen. Die polisie kan nie daardie rol oorneem
nie. Daar ontstaan ’n vakuum in die veiligheidsituasie, veral in die
landelike gebiede en daarom sal die VF Plus nie hierdie begrotingspos
ondersteun nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Let’s take the example of the Potchefstroom Commando. The police have
stated that they are to lose eight vehicles because their numbers at the
police station do not justify that number of vehicles. Now I want to ask
the hon Minister, how is it possible that one sector head of the police can
take over this role?
I would earnestly like to tell the hon Minister that the police on the
ground openly admit that they cannot take over the role of the commandos.
The police on the ground – and the hon member must listen carefully - admit
that there will be an increase in crime and that a vacuum will be created
in the security situation, especially with regard to rural security.

In Parliament, senior members of the police will come along and state that
they are capable of performing the task. The police cannot take over that
role. A vacuum is being created in the security system, especially in the
rural areas, and therefore we in the FF Plus will not support this Budget
Vote.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Chair, in support of this Vote, the MF appeals to the
Minister to seriously look into speedily increasing the number of police
officials and supplying sufficient vehicles at all police stations. This
will assist in taking care of crime in the community as there is always an
excuse of insufficient police officials and vehicles when cases are
reported. Thank you.

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, when you are policy-deprived, like the DA, you
turn your attention to being emotional. It’s a pity that they do so at the
expense of the suffering of very real persons. The truth of the matter is
that never in the history of our country has so much financial and human
resources been allocated and focus put on the real issue of fighting crime.
[Interjections.]
I fail to understand how the DA can stand here and make the kind of
statements that they do. When it was time to interact with the department
on the budget they were passive spectators in the whole process. In fact,
we said, in the study group, “Well, maybe we must organise our own
opposition in the committee because it’s getting very boring.”
[Interjections.]

Let it also be known that the report of the committee was adopted
unanimously by all parties in the committee, including the DA and the ACDP.
I can say with honesty that the FF Plus didn’t adopt it because they don’t
know when meetings take place. [Laughter.]

The budget of Safety and Security has increased dramatically over the past
six years. But, even more importantly, the distribution and focus is
achieving the desired effects. We have seen a decrease in serious and
violent crimes such as murder by 9,3% in the past financial year.

Die DA verstom my. Hulle sê dat mense nie vry is nie, maar hulle het die
vermoë om vandag hier te staan en die nonsense te praat wat hulle praat,
sonder dat hulle op enige manier bedreig word. Hoe kan u hier staan en die
Huis mislei? Moord is af met 9,9%; roof is af met 1,7% van die vorige jaar;
verkragting met 1,4%. Wanneer daar wel programme ingestel word wat daarop
gemik is om misdaad aan te spreek, dan is die DA die eerstes wat hulle op
perdjie klim en sê: Nee! Nee! Nee – soos byvoorbeeld met die wapenamnestie.
Verlede week is drie gesinne in hierdie provinsie vermoor deur mense na aan
hulle en dit is gedoen met wettige vuurwapens, maar steeds is julle teen
wapenamnestie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Aan die VF Plus wil ek sê, kommando’s is uit, dis uit! Die polisie moet
doen wat hulle moet doen. Die weermag is hier om die land te verdedig nie
om misdaad te bekamp nie. [Tyd verstreke.][Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The DA astounds me. They say that people are not free, but they are able
to stand here today and talk the nonsense that they do, without being
threatened in any way. How can you stand here and mislead the House? Murder
is down by 9,9%; theft is down by 1,7% on the previous year; rape by 1,4%.
When programmes are in fact introduced which are aimed at addressing crime,
then the DA are the first to get onto their high horse and say: No! No! No
– such as, for example, in the case of the firearms amnesty. Last week
three families were murdered in this province by people close to them and
it was done with legal firearms, but you are still opposed to the firearms
amnesty. [Interjections.]

To the FF Plus I want say, commandos are out; they are out! The police have
to do what they have to do. The Defence Force is here to defend the
country, not to fight crime. [Time expired.][Applause.]]

Division demanded.
The House divided:

    AYES-234: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
    E; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Bekker, H J; Beukman, F;
    Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J; Bhengu, P; Biyela, B P ; Bloem, D
    V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M
    G; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S;
    Chohan-Khota, F I; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H;
    De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Direko, I W; Dodovu, T S; du Toit, D C;
    Erwin, A; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S;
    Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gillwald, C E ;
    Godi, N T; Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C H F;
    Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hanekom, D A; Hendricks, L B;
    Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson, C
    B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J;
    Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P;
    Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K;
    Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I;
    Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Mabudafhasi, T R; Mabuyakhulu, D
    V; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R;
    Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S;
    Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M J;
    Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins,
    B A D; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M;
    Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M;
    Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C;
    Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P;
    Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M;
    Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T;
    Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi S D; Moonsamy, K;
    Morutoa, M R; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S
    D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mzondeki, M J
    G; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S;
    Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J;
    Ngema, M V; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya, M L; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R
    Z; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H; Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli,
    S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G;
    Padayachie, R L; Pahad, E G; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D;
    Pule, B E ; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M
    M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H;
    Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A;
    Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J
    B; Sibuyana, M W; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M
    B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Smith , V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G;
    Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stofile, M A; Thabethe, E; Thomson,
    B; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J;
    Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S
    C; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vezi, T E; Vundisa, S S; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M
    ; Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z ; Zulu, N E.


    NOES-51: Blanché, J P I; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Doman,
    W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M;
    Green, L M; Groenewald, P J; Haasbroek, S F; Henderson, R K;
    Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne,
    L B; Leon, A J; Lowe, C M; Madasa, Z L; Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J;
    Meshoe, K R J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A;
    Nel, A H; Nkem-Abonta, E; Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J;
    Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Steyn, A C;
    Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van der Walt,
    D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille, H.


Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 25 – Agriculture – put.

Declarations of vote:

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Geagte Voorsitter, die DA ondersteun in die breë
hierdie pos, vanweë die feit dat daar genoegsame geld vir die departement
beskikbaar gestel is, behalwe vir landbounavorsing.

In wese is die DA nie tevrede met die wyse waarop die geld bestuur word
nie. Die noodsaaklike onderbou in die vorm van navorsing om landbou
suksesvol te ondersteun, is besig om plat te val. Die aksies van die
Minister en die departement in hierdie verband toon geen positiewe
resultate nie en die posisie verswak dag na dag. Daar is wantroue tussen
die amptenare van Landbounavorsing en die raad wat dit moet bestuur. Die
verdere gevolge van hierdie gebeure is dat die voorligtingsdiens wat
noodsaaklik is om nuwe boere te vestig en te begelei, ook besig is om plat
te val – tot nadeel van grondhervorming.

Op ekonomiese gebied tree die departement nie op as kampvegter vir
kommersiële boere nie. Die nalaat om by te dra tot die instelling van
heffings op die invoer gesubsideerde landbouprodukte in Suid-Afrika het
graanboere in dilemmas geplaas wat hulle nie nodig het nie en wat hulle nie
kan oorleef as daar nie sinvol hierna gekyk word nie. Ook dit is
onverskoonbaar. Die optrede vorentoe in landbou gaan kritiek word as die
departement nie sy organisasie en beheer opknap nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Hon Chairperson, the DA supports this Vote in general,
owing to the fact that adequate funds are at the disposal of the
department, except for agricultural research.

In essence the DA is not happy with the manner in which the funds are being
managed. The essential infrastructure in the form of research to support
agriculture successfully is in the process of collapsing. The actions of
the Minister and the department in this regard show no positive results and
the position is deteriorating by the day. There is suspicion between
officials of Agricultural Research and the council that should be managing
it. The further consequence of these events is that the extension service
that is essential to establish and guide new farmers is also in the process
of collapsing – to the detriment of land reform.

In the economic sphere the department is not acting as a champion for
commercial farmers. The failure to contribute to the introduction of levies
on the import of subsidised agricultural products in South Africa faced
grain farmers with dilemmas that they do not need and cannot survive if
this is not looked at in a meaningful way. This is also inexcusable. The
future action taken with regard to agriculture is going to become critical
if the department does not brush up its organisation and management.]

Mnr S ABRAM: Agb Voorsitter, ek staan hier namens die ANC om hierdie
begrotingspos te ondersteun.

Die agb lid Van Niekerk het hier ’n paar dinge kwytgeraak. Onder andere sê
hy dat navorsing ten opsigte van die landbou besig is om plat te val. Die
agb lid loop dinge nou vooruit. Hy het vandag gehoor by die
portefeuljekomitee dat die agb Minister juis die komitee gaan kom inlig
binne ’n paar dae oor die situasie ten opsigte van navorsing en probleme
rondom navorsing.

Die agb lid Van Niekerk sê dat die regering nie die kampvegter is vir
kommersiële landbou nie. U weet, dit is ’n “understatement”. U weet,
hierdie regering het veel gedoen om markte vir landbouprodukte dwars oor
die wêreld oopgemaak te kry – iets wat ons nie in die verlede gehad het
nie.

Vandag is daar boere wat elke jaar nuwe Mercedes Benz’e en nuwe
dubbelkajuitvoertuie koop. Daar is boere wat grond bekom het vir R20 en R30
per morg in daardie dae, wat dit deesdae verkoop teen oor die R2 000 per
hektaar. [Tussenwerpsels.] As boerdery nie betalend is nie en as hulle nie
goed doen nie, sal hulle nie daardie pryse vir grond kan kry nie. Laat ons
die departement meet teen sy visie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr S ABRAM: Hon Chairperson, I rise on behalf of the ANC to support this
Budget Vote.

The hon member Van Nierkerk said a few things here, among others that
research relating to agriculture is collapsing. The hon member is jumping
the gun. He has heard today from the portfolio committee that the hon
Minister intends to inform the committee within a few days about the
situation regarding research and problems surrounding research.

The hon member Van Niekerk alleges that government is not the champion of
commercial agriculture. You know, that is an understatement. You know, this
government has done a lot to open up markets for agricultural products all
over the world – something we did not have in the past.

Today there are farmers who buy new Mercedes Benzes and new twin-cab
vehicles every year. There are farmers who obtained land at R20 and R30 per
morgen in those days, who are now selling it at more than R2 000 per
hectare. [Interjections.] If agriculture was not profitable and if they
were not doing well for themselves, they would not get this kind of price
for their land. Let us assess the department in terms of its vision.]

And the vision of the Department of Agriculture is that of a united and
prosperous agricultural sector.
Nou moet ons vra: Het hierdie departement hierdie visie uitgeleef of nie?
Die antwoord is: Natuurlik. [Tussenwerpsels.] Met die landbou gaan dit nie
so vrot soos wat mense beweer nie. Dit is jammer dat my tyd verstreke is.
[Tyd verstreke.][Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Now we must ask: Has this department lived up to this vision or not? The
answer is: Of course it has. [Interjections.] Agriculture is not in such
dire straits as people claim it is. It is a pity that my time has expired.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 26 – Communications – put and agreed to.

Vote No 27 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism – put and agreed to.

Vote No 28 – Housing- put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr A C STEYN: Thank you, Chairperson. The DA supports the principle of
subsidised state housing for the poor and the indigent of our communities.
However, it is of grave concern when increased budget allocations do not
result in increased housing delivery, as is evident over the last number of
years. Allegations are also on the increase regarding beneficiaries who do
not qualify for state subsidised housing but nevertheless become recipients
thereof, at the expense of those who are truly in need of housing.

The recent revelations from the department and other housing agencies that
there are numerous housing projects across the country that were started as
far back as 1996 that have still not been completed, also make a mockery of
the department’s statement that they have delivered in excess of 1,6
million homes. They may have paid out more than 1,6 million subsidies but
it is evident that the number of subsidies paid out does not equate to an
equal number of houses built. Why else would the Minister initiate yet
another audit into what she terms block projects?

The DA therefore calls on the department to get its house in order and to
translate the spending of the budget into delivery of quality houses for
the poorest of the poor in a fair and transparent manner. Until this is
done, we cannot support the continuous inefficient and wasteful expenditure
currently taking place. The DA therefore does not support the Budget Vote.
[Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF supports this Vote but is deeply
concerned about the inferior quality of houses being built by the
contractors. Whilst the government is making every effort in providing
homes to the homeless, more funds are used to redo and repair these homes.
An inspection in loco is urgently and kindly needed by the relevant
authorities.

Mrs Z A KOTA: The ANC is not surprised about the DA’s confusion but as the
ANC we are committed to fast-tracking housing delivery through the
implementation of comprehensive plans. The critical aspect of the plan is
the element of human settlement, in which the building of houses must be
the building of communities. It is clear that there is enthusiasm from many
corners of the country within the housing industry, that indicates that
this approach is realistic.

The R42 billion from the banks indicates clearly their commitment in coming
to the party. The emerging contractors stand to benefit from the national
pilot projects such as the N2 Gateway. As the ANC, we call on all public
representatives to dirty their hands and assist us with the building of
houses. We welcome the increase of subsidies from R28 000 to R31 000. This
is the reason why the ANC support this budget.

i-ANC izakuphatha de kubuye uYesu. Enkosi. [The ANC will govern until the
coming of Christ. Thank you.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES-233: Abram, S; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Balfour, B M
    N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J; Bhamjee, Y S;
    Bhengu, F; Bhengu, P; Biyela, B P ; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-
    Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chang, E
    S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J;
    Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H;
    Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Direko, I W; Dodovu, T S; du Toit, D C; Dudley,
    C; Erwin, A; Fihla, N B; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N E ;
    George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gillwald, C E ; Godi, N T;
    Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Green, L M; Greyling, C H F;
    Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hanekom, D A; Hendricks, L B;
    Hendrickse, P; Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson,
    C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J;
    Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P;
    Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K;
    Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I;
    Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madasa, Z L;
    Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magazi,
    M N; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maine, M
    S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M J; Maloyi, P D N;
    Maluleka, H P; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D;
    Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F;
    Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M; Mbombo, N D;
    Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M;
    Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S;
    Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J;
    Mokoena, A D; Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E;
    Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morutoa, M R; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss,
    M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B;
    Mthethwa, E N; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A;
    Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D;
    Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya,
    M L; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H;
    Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nzimande, L
    P M; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E G; Phadagi,
    M G; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E ; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S;
    Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M;
    Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Schneemann, G
    D; Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September ,
    C C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibuyana, M W; Sisulu, L N; Skhosana,
    W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Smith , V G; Solo, B M;
    Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stofile, M A; Swart, S
    N; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S
    L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der
    Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vezi, T E; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Woods,
    G G; Xingwana, L M ; Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z ;
    Zulu, N E.


    NOES-42: Blanché, J P I; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Doman,
    W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Groenewald, P J; Jankielsohn,
    R; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Leon, A
    J; Lowe, C M; Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R;
    Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Nkem-Abonta, E; Ntuli, R S;
    Opperman, S E; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Smuts, M; Spies, W
    D; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van der
    Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille, H.


Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 29 - Land Affairs – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mnr A H NEL: Voorsitter, ons steun die begroting vir grondsake omdat die
Minister van Finansies ’n ekstra R6 miljard beskikbaar gestel het vir die
afhandeling van die restitusie eise. Daar is egter nog ’n tekort, volgens
die Departement van Landbou en Grondsake, van R3 miljard. Solank as wat
amptenare mikpunte gestel word sonder die nodige finansiering sal hulle
sondebokke soek omdat hulle weet hul daardie mikpunte nie sal kan bereik
nie. Die gerieflikste sondebokke is natuurlik die huidige grondeienaars, en
daarom die beskuldigings dat hulle te veel vir grond vra.

Die feit is egter dat onafhanklike waardeerders, aangestel deur die
departement, die grond evalueer, en dit is dan die prys wat die staat
betaal. Verder spog die departement, in stukke wat voor die portefeulje
komitee gelê is, dat die prys wat hulle per hektaar betaal het, naamlik R2
922, onder die gemiddelde prys per hektaar is, soos bepaal deur syfers vir
markgerigte verkope van die hele land, naamlik R2 944.
Vier persent  van  die  grond  kom  elke  jaar  in  die  mark  teen  hierdie
gemiddelde pryse. Dit is dus nie die prys, of die beskikbaarheid van  grond,
wat die probleem is nie. Die probleem is eerder genoegsame  finansiering  en
die nodige administratiewe  kapasiteit  by  die  departement.  Baie  dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr A H NEL: Chairperson, we support the budget  for  land  affairs  because
the Minister of Finance has made an  extra  R6  billion  available  for  the
finalisation  of  the  restitution  claims.  There  is,  however,  still   a
shortfall of R3 billion, according to  the  Department  of  Agriculture  and
Land Affairs. As long as officials are set  targets  without  the  necessary
finances they will look for scapegoats because they know that they will  not
be able to reach those  targets.  The  most  convenient  scapegoats  are  of
course the current landowners, and  hence  the  accusations  that  they  are
asking too much for land.

The  fact  is,  however,  that  independent  assessors,  appointed  by   the
department, evaluate the land, and that is the price that  the  state  pays.
The department furthermore boasts in documents tabled before  the  portfolio
committee, that the price that they paid per  hectare,  namely  R2  922,  is
below the average price per  hectare,  as  determined  by  the  figures  for
market-related sales for the entire country, namely R2 944.

Four per cent of the land is put on the market at this average price every
year. It is therefore not the price, nor the availability of land, that is
the problem. The problem is rather one of adequate finance and the
necessary administrative capacity at the department. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]]

Mr M V NGEMA: Chairperson, the IFP will be supporting the Vote, but wishes
to warn that unless the government’s land reform programmes effectively
deliver a more equitable balance in land ownership, the country could face
enormous problems.

The allocation of the sum of R6 billion to conclude the land restitution
programme is an important development. However, the IFP wishes to point out
that this allocation is a drop in the ocean when considering the big
picture of imbalance in land ownership in the country. I thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Geagte Voorsitter, die VF Plus steun hierdie
Begrotingspos, maar ons is toenemend bekommerd dat veral amptenare deur
middel van die media uitsprake maak en die beskuldiging opper dat boere nie
hul grond beskikbaar wil stel nie. Dit veroorsaak spanning.

Ek wil graag ’n beroep op die agb Minister doen om haar amptenare aan te
spreek, want die werklike probleem met grondhervorming is, soos wat daar
gesê is, ’n finansiële probleem aan die een kant, maar aan die ander kant
is een van die grootste probleme die onbevoegdheid van amptenare wat sake
laat sloer. Die agb Minister weet dit.

Die Delmanuthu-saak is ’n spesifieke geval. Nadat die agb Minister ’n
onderneming gegee het dat daar spoedig opgetree sou word, het dit nog ’n
maand gevat voordat ’n amptenaar na die persone gegaan het om ’n waardasie
te doen om sodoende te bepaal wat die prys moes wees. Hierdie gesloer
veroorsaak dat boere in ’n onmoontlike situasie geplaas word. Hulle moet
van hulle los implemente ontslae raak; hulle moet van hulle vee ontslae
raak.

Hulle sluit ’n kontrak met die departement, maar op nommer 99 is daar
soveel vertragings dat hulle aan die een kant eenvoudig net nie kan
voortgaan om te boer nie, en aan die ander kant kan hulle ook nie ander
plase gaan aanskaf of ’n ander lewe begin nie. Dit is uiters onbillik
teenoor hierdie mense, en ek wil vir die agb Minister vra om haar amptenare
aan te spreek om nie hulle eie onbevoegdheid te probeer verbloem deur deur
middel van die media die skuld op die boere te plaas en te maak asof hulle
nie hul grond wil beskikbaar stel nie. Dit is nie aanvaarbaar nie. Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, the FF Plus supports this Budget Vote,
but we are increasingly concerned that officials in particular are making
statements, through the media, and levelling the accusation at farmers that
they do not want to make their land available. This is causing tension.

I would like to appeal to the hon Minister to address this matter with her
officials, because the actual problem with land reform, as has been
indicated, is a financial problem on the one hand, but on the other hand
one of the biggest problems is that matters are delayed because of the
incompetence of officials. The hon Minister is aware of this.

A case in point is the Delmanuthu matter. After the hon Minister gave an
undertaking that swift action would be taken, it took another month before
an official went to the individuals to do a valuation in order to determine
what the price should be. This tardiness is putting farmers in an
impossible position. They must get rid of their implements; they must get
rid of their livestock.

They enter into an agreement with the department, but there are so many
last minute delays that they simply cannot continue farming on the one
hand, and on the other hand they are also not in a position to purchase
other farms or start a new life. This is very unfair to these people, and I
want to ask the hon Minister to address the matter with her officials so
that they do not attempt to cover up their own incompetence by using the
media to put the blame on the farmers, alleging that they do not want to
make their land available. This is unacceptable. Thank you.]

Ms E NGALEKA: Chairperson, the ANC supports the Budget Vote. Since 1994 the
Departments of Agriculture and of Land Affairs have played a critical role
in addressing poverty through rural development, restoring dignity to those
who were dispossessed of their land in the past. The increase in the budget
for restitution is an indication of the government’s commitment to land
reform.

Our programmes of land reform are aimed at ensuring that the land is shared
by those who work it. This budget will ensure that the beneficiaries of
land reform and emerging farmers get the support that they need.

Grondpryse is ’n probleem en dit bly ’n probleem. Dit het ook vir ons
duidelik geword dat sodra van die boere uitvind dat daar ’n eis teen hulle
grond is, stoot hulle tog hul pryse op. Dit is al bewys in gevalle, so ons
moenie kom veralgemeen en maak asof alle boere engeltjies is nie. Hulle is
nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Land prices are a problem and remain a problem. It has also become clear
to us that the moment the farmers find out that a claim has been lodged
against their land, they push up their prices all the same. This has been
proved in some cases, so we should not generalise and make as if all
farmers are angels. They are not.]

Lastly, hon FF, could you please attend portfolio committee meetings,
because by attending portfolio committee meetings you will get free
education and stop abusing democracy. You are not attending meetings, but
you come here and want to call for a division. Don’t abuse the democracy.
Thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I will allow you in a moment.

Hon member Ngaleka, would you please just return to the podium until I have
taken the point of order. [Interjections.] Hon member, since the point of
order was raised while you were still at the podium, could you please just
return to the podium. [Interjections.]

Hon member, what is your point of order? Please take your seat, hon member
Ngaleka. Thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, my point of order is the following. We are
going through this process in terms of the Rules of this House. The Rules
of this House make provision, therefore, that parties may state their
positions. That is what all opposition parties are doing. The fact that the
Rules do not make provision that all members are not represented . .
.[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, order! [Interjections.]
Order! What is your point of order?

Dr C P MULDER: The same Rules make provision that all parties are not
represented in all committees. [Interjections.] So, to state that we are
undermining the Rules of the House, or are wasting the democracy’s time is
not true. Parties are entitled to put their positions in this House in
terms of the Rules, unless we are saying you are not democratic and that is
what she is saying. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Please don’t point. Thank you very
much.

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 30 – Minerals and Energy – put.

Declarations of vote:

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Chair, the DA will not condone the racially
motivated statements and policies of the ANC Ministry of Minerals and
Energy. The abusive attacks by the hon Deputy Minister, Lulu Xingwana, on
major mining houses Anglo American and De Beers for daring to appoint, and
I quote, “lily-white males” despite honest and clear progress in appointing
suitable black appointees to some of the most senior positions in these
companies are both alarming and frightening and, I might add, disgusting.

We can only assume that these attacks convey the thoughts and feeling of
the Ministry itself and not Cabinet, and in particular not the President.
The ANC should rather attempt to govern the erratic state departments
effectively and efficiently and not interfere in the private sector. Any
further pressure brought to bear upon the mining industry will lead,
inevitably, to disinvestment by international companies to the detriment of
the industry and your own BEE programme. [Interjections.]

The Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act is creating confusion
and uncertainty for major companies and small-scale miners, an issue which
needs to be addressed urgently.

The latest scandal to emerge, namely Oilgate, in terms of which Petro SA
allegedly paid R11 million to the ANC via a BEE company, indicates the
general state of affairs affecting this department. [Interjections.] The
ANC government, which professes to practise transparency and openness, is
clearly following the dubious example of its predecessor and current
partner the NNP, namely secrecy and inherent corruption.

We call upon the ANC to state its version of the facts in this matter. It
has a duty to do so. The DA opposes this Budget Vote. Thank you.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Chairperson, I think the ACDP is just going to object
to the Vote. We do not wish to make a speech.

Mnr W D SPIES: Agb Voorsitter, wanneer ons kyk na Minerale en Energie is
daar inderdaad vir ons rede om te juig, sowel as om te treur. Aan die een
kant wil ons juig saam met duisende toekomstige geslagte oor die energie
wat gespandeer is, die insette wat gelewer is en die beleggings wat gemaak
word om groter energiedoeltreffendheid te bewerkstellig. Ons is dankbaar
oor geld wat bestee word om hernubare energiebronne te ontgin, en ons
verwelkom dit en ons sê daarvoor dankie.

Aan die ander kant is daar ook vir ons genoeg rede om te treur. Een van die
belangrike punte wat ons wil uitlig is die gebrek aan doeltreffendheid met
die omskakeling van ou-generasie mynregte na nuwe-generasie mynregte. Dit
skep ’n ernstige probleem, nie net vir die boere op hulle plase wat sit met
delwers nie, maar ook vir die groot mynmaatskappye en vir internasionale
beleggers - waaraan ons moet aandag gee.

Volgens die Prokureursorde van Suid-Afrika is daar meer as 2 000
kennisgewings afgelewer van voorneme vir litigasie rakende onteieningseise
wat ingestel gaan word as gevolg van die inwerkingtreding van die nuwe
mineraalbedeling. Indien slegs 10% van hierdie kennisgewings ontaard in
litigasie sou dit beteken dat slegs regskostes, en dit is ongeag of dit
suksesvolle of onsuksesvolle litigasie is, meer as R100 miljoen beloop. Dit
is meer as 50% van die bedrag wat op die oomblik begroot word vir mineraal
ontwikkeling. Ons moet dit ernstig opneem, ons moet daarvoor begroot,
anders is ons roekeloos.

Ek wil ook aansluit by die vorige spreker rakende geld wat vanuit die
sentrale energiefonds oorbetaal is. Daardie fonds is bedoel vir strategiese
energiebeleggings. Ons kan dit nie vir enige ander doel aanwend nie, en
alvorens ons nie duidelikheid het dat die oorbetalings wat aan Petro SA
gemaak is wel vir daardie doel gebruik word nie, kan ons nie hierdie
begroting steun nie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chairperson, when we look at Minerals and Energy, we
indeed have reason to rejoice, as well as reason to mourn. On the one hand
we want to rejoice with thousands of future generations about the energy
expended, the inputs that have been made and the investments that are being
made to achieve greater energy efficiency. We are grateful for the money
that is being spent for the exploitation of renewable energy resources, and
we welcome it and we say thank you.

On the other hand we also have reason to mourn. One of the most important
issues we want to single out is the lack of efficiency with the change-over
from old-generation mining rights to new-generation mining rights. This
creates a serious problem, not only for the farmers who now sit with
diggers on their farms, but also for the big mining companies and for
international investors – whom we have to attend to.

According to the Law Society of South Africa more than 2000 notices have
been delivered of intentions to litigate regarding expropriation claims
that are going to be instituted because of the coming into force of the new
mineral dispensation. If only 10% of these notices lead to litigation, it
would mean that the legal costs alone, and this is irrespective of whether
the litigation is successful or not, will amount to more than R100 million.
This is more that 50% of the amount that is currently budgeted for mineral
development. We need to take this seriously; we need to budget for it,
otherwise we are being reckless.

I also want to link up with what the previous speaker said regarding money
that was paid over from the central energy fund. That fund is meant for
strategic energy investments. We cannot use it for any other purpose, and
before we have clarity that the payments made to Petro SA were indeed used
for that purpose, we cannot support this budget.]

Mr E N MTHETHWA: Sihlalo, nalokungenaludvonsi kuyantinyela. [Chairperson,
every Tom, Dick and Harry is saying something.] We support this Budget Vote
as the ANC. It’s the right thing to do.

The confusion about the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act is
the problem of the DA. They are confused. It has nothing to do with the Act
itself. The fact that they are raising the issue about companies like De
Beers says that indeed our programme is working. We just have to emphasise
it.

Regarding Petro SA – that they like so much because they have no programme
anyway – the issue about it is that we still emphasise that we have a
programme as the committee; no papers will dictate how we run our
programme. We are going to continue running our programme the way we do.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES-235: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
    E; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Bekker, H J; Beukman, F;
    Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J; Bhengu, P; Biyela, B P ; Bloem, D
    V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M
    G; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S;
    Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B
    N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Direko, I W;
    Dodovu, T S; du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fihla, N B; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L
    S; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gillwald, C
    E ; Godi, N T; Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C H F;
    Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hanekom, D A; Hendricks, L B;
    Hendrickse, P; Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H; Joemat,
    R R; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Joubert, L K; Kalako, M U;
    Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J; Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E;
    Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A;
    Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T;
    Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C;
    Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M;
    Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlawe, N M;
    Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela,
    M J; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N;
    Martins, B A D; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Masutha,
    T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
    Maunye, M M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V;
    Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N;
    Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng,
    T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R;
    Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D;
    Moonsamy, K; Morutoa, M R; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-
    Hounkpatin, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N;
    Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N
    M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T;
    Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya, M L; Njobe,
    M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H; Ntshulana-
    Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nzimande, L P M;
    Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E
    G; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S;
    Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M;
    Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E
    A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C C; Sibande, M P;
    Sibanyoni, J B; Sibuyana, M W; Sikakane, M R; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M
    B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Smith , V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G;
    Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stofile, M A; Thabethe, E; Thomson,
    B; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J;
    Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J
    H; Van der Merwe, S C; Vezi, T E; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Xingwana, L M ;
    Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z; Zulu, N E.


    NOES-47: Blanché, J P I; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Doman,
    W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M;
    Green, L M; Groenewald, P J; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; King, R J;
    Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Leon, A J; Lowe, C M; Madasa, Z L;
    Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P;
    Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Nkem-Abonta, E; Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E;
    Rabie, P J; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Smuts, M; Spies, W D;
    Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W;
    Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Zille, H.


Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 31 – Science and Technology – put and agreed to.

Vote No 32 - Trade and Industry - put.

Declarations of vote:

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA: Chairperson, as we are well aware, the mandates of the
Department of Trade and Industry are to raise investment, expand and
strengthen productive capacity, and create conditions for rapid and
sustainable growth and for high employment.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): Order, hon members! Awuyibambe nje
kancane mfowethu. [Wait a little bit, hon member.] [Interjections.] Order!
Hon members, please do give the hon member an opportunity to be heard.

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA: The question I ask in the House today is whether the
department has performed in these areas. At best, its performance in these
areas has been lacklustre, and neither the Minister nor the Deputy Minister
has even bothered to attend the portfolio committee meetings for 14 months.
None of them has attended any portfolio committee meeting.

But, more specifically, the department has failed in major areas. It has
failed in its BEE policy. It has failed in industrial policy and it has
also failed in small-business development. As we know, BEE policy has
succeeded in producing a tiny rich elite, and has not succeeded in bringing
the vast majority of black people into the economic mainstream.
[Interjections.]

Regarding industrial policy, we still remain very confused. We still look
for a coherent policy. And, of course, in small-business development all we
hear about is restructuring and restructuring and restructuring.
[Interjections.] But, very recently, we have also witnessed the inability
of the Minister to design a rescue package for a distressed industry. I
have in mind here the textile and clothing industry.

Also, what about Ceda and the Apex Fund? The department has rushed to
launch these programmes without submitting to the portfolio committee any
plan that ensures that there will be sustainability. And, of course, I come
to the arms offset deal. [Interjections.] The arms offset deal. What we
still notice is that the department has been very shoddy in reporting and
monitoring the targets imposed . .
The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): Order! Order, hon member.

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA: . . .in the deal, while all these things are symptoms of
the lack of a coherent, modern and transparent industrial policy.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr N P Nhleko): Order, hon member . . .

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA: As a consequence, the DA is unable to support the budget.
Thank you. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr B A D MARTINS: Chairperson, the ANC supports Vote 32 because, firstly,
the Department of Trade and Industry continues to facilitate access to
sustainable economic activity and employment for all South Africans; and,
secondly, the department provides an equitable and socially responsible
environment for investment, employment creation and economic growth. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 33 - Transport – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr S B FARROW: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, if there is one thing that
we have in common, it’s the need to get South Africa moving. Through the
portfolio committee, we have come up with a bold agenda for effective and
efficient delivery which we are in total harmony with. Where we differ is
the means of getting there and although these issues have been in the
budget debate for the past five years or so the progress has been slow and
lacking in intent.

The time has come to think both radically and laterally. The DA believes
the starting point needs to be the restructuring of the department to
embrace all transport entities to ensure full integration of freight
logistics systems.

Secondly, the need to put in place legislation to ensure funding of road
maintenance of national and provincial roads by way of a dedicated fund
through the fuel tax. If it can be done for the RAF, Mr Minister of
Finance, then surely it can be done for the Road Maintenance Fund.

Thirdly, to increase subsidies for public transport to include taxis, not
only busses and rail, through a multi-ticketing system levelled at the
commuter, and not the operator, and embracing in particular the elderly,
students and the disabled.

Fourthly, to form and introduce a national highway patrol, a dedicated
transport police force and additional accredited provincial traffic police
to effectively bring back a safe and disciplined motoring public devoid of
the ever-increasing road deaths which cost our economy over R38 billion a
year. Every reduction in accidents, serious injuries and death on our roads
will reduce the claims against the insolvent RAF and any money spent in
enforcement will be an investment in all of our futures.

A policy shift in these few directions would go a long way in contributing
to our country’s growth and development whilst at the same time creating
jobs and employment opportunities. The time for this shift is now and I
look forward to the role that the DA can play in this regard, and in
particular the input in the creation of a budget, which will have the
necessary resources to truly keep South Africa moving.

Finally, with so many public entities reporting to the Minister and more
oversight roles required, I would appeal to the Minister to ensure that the
Department of Transport is well represented on these Boards where money is
in many instances wasted and misappropriated – and here I single out the
ACSA CEO, which has recently been in the press.

Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the Road Accident Fund remains a thorn in the
flesh of the Department of Transport - the proverbial Achilles heel of an
otherwise well-functioning portfolio. The Auditor-General has warned that
the RAF is facing a serious financial crisis, with debts exceeding its
asset by R18 billion.

If the RAF were a registered company, such as any other short-term
insurance company, it would have been sequestrated long time ago. The fund
incurred an operating loss of R3,1 billion for the year ending 31 March
2004. Presently, its total liabilities exceed its total assets by more than
R18 billion.

The liquidity of the fund is of great concern to the ACDP because the fund
has net current liabilities of R4,2 billion at financial year end. What is
more disconcerting are the outstanding claims at the end of 2004 financial
year, which amounted to R18,5 billion.

The RAF has consistently been plagued by allegations of corruption, fraud
and maladministration. The bold action of the Minister of Transport is
commendable. This has led to the suspension of the CEO and the former
chairperson of the fund.

We do not wish to negate the hard work done by the Minister and his
department, but as a sign of our protest against the mismanagement of the
Road Accident Fund, the ACDP will unfortunately not support this Budget
Vote.

Thank you, Chairperson.
Mr J P CRONIN: Chairperson, some other speakers of the ANC before me have
expressed surprise at what has come from opposition benches, sometimes on
the grounds that some opposition members have never participated in
portfolio committee meetings. In my case, I am not going to go in that
direction at all.

Both Mr Farrow and Mr Green have been very active members in the portfolio
committee, which is why they were well informed when they made their
inputs. And which is why both of them have congratulated the department for
its performance in general.

I am a little surprised though. I mean Mr Green, as a participant would
know that the Road Accident Fund is not a private sector short-term
insurance company, it’s a public fund which has its own challenges, and
which we are addressing.

I think that both Mr Farrow and Mr Green would also know, as active members
of the portfolio committee, that in the last decade of the apartheid regime
absolutely no investment whatsoever went into transport except when it was
related to military transport. They would also know that in the first 10
years since 1994, there were other priorities, unfortunately but I think
understandably, in terms of our national budget by way of health care,
education and so on.

They would know that therefore this budget marks an important turn in
future transport. It is an expansionary budget. Over the medium-term
expenditure time frame we will see the transport budget rise by an average
of 11% - that is a very substantial rise. This expansionary budget is being
driven by two key areas: public transport subsidies and road infrastructure
and maintenance. As the ANC we certainly support those priorities.

If there is a division – I don’t think there will be any – we will
certainly be pressing the green button and those who might be inclined
otherwise are certainly free to press the self-destruct button provided, of
course, they are sitting in their allocated seats.

Thank you, Chairperson. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Christian Democratic Party
dissenting).

Vote No 34 – Water Affairs and Forestry - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, we will not be making a declaration in this
particular Vote. So that is that, as far as we are concerned.

An HON MEMBER: Chairperson, the ANC is happy that the DA is finally thirsty
and doesn’t want to make a declaration. Thanks. [Interjections.]

Vote agreed to.

Schedule, as amended, agreed to.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, I’ve been asked to speak for two minutes.

We’ve come a long way as a nation, from the day the people of this country
came together to declare that this country belongs to all who live in it,
black and white, and that no government can justly claim authority unless
it is based on the authority of all the people.

Who in his sober mind can call this historic document, upon which our
Constitution is based, a political party pamphlet? Who can call the will
and aspirations of the people of South Africa, black and white, together as
equals, countrymen and brothers who adopted the People’s Charter, a mere
slogan?

As we gather here today we represent those masses out there that expect us
as members of this House to champion the cause of total emancipation from
poverty and underdevelopment through the allocation of resources so that
the dreams of their forebears are realised.

The Appropriation Bill tabled by the hon Minister of Finance, Dr Trevor
Manuel, on 23 February 2005, is put before this House today for final
approval, after being subjected to a rigorous process in various committees
and to debates in Extended Public Committees.

A sound microeconomic framework, a reasonable budget deficit, a low
inflation rate that is well within target range and steady economic growth
have made it possible to have an expansionary Budget that is responsive to
the people’s needs.

Our government’s policy priorities are in keeping with the People’s Charter
and, subsequently, the Reconstruction and Development Programme, and,
therefore, this Budget gives expression to that policy.

Mhlazane abantu bakithi beshicilela uSomqulu weNkululeko babengenalo izwi
ekubusweni kwaleli lizwe, kepha babenombono wokuthi ngelinye ilanga
ziyobuya emasisweni. Abashongo ukuthi izwe kuyoba elethu sodwa kodwa bathi
liyoba ngelabo bonke abantu abamnyama nabamhlophe, ngaphandle
kokubandlulula.
Sezibuyile-ke emasisweni manje. Yingakho-ke kuthi uma kwabiwa imali udaba
ludingidwe esidlangalaleni wonke umuntu azi ukuthi idubukele.
Akusenjengakuqala lapho amantshontsho ayedlelwa khona emsamo kuthi uquqaba
lwabantu luphonselwe amathambo angenanyama. Lesi Sabiwomali esiphambi kwale
Ndlu namuhla siqonde ukuxosha ikati eziko, sidale amathuba emisebenzi.
Neminyango kahulumeni, ngokomthetho, ivele isiqalile ukwenza izinhlelo zalo
nyaka wezimali. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[When our people wrote the Freedom Charter they did not have a say
regarding the governing of this country, but they had an idea to say that
some day things would get better. They did not say that the country would
be only for us, but that it would be for all African and white people
without discriminating.

Now things are running smoothly. That is why when they allocate the Budget
the issue is discussed openly so that everyone knows that he can take part.
It is no longer like in the olden days where the best things were given to
the minority and the majority were given useless things. This Budget in
front of this House today determines to eradicate poverty and to create job
opportunities. Even the government departments have officially started
making arrangements for this financial year.]

What we have seen here today is the DA and other reactionary forces voting
against all attempts to bring about a better life for all. They voted
against the opening of the doors of learning; they objected to the clause
that says: “The people shall govern” at provincial and local government
levels; they voted against the provision of houses and security for all;
they voted against the idea of land that belongs to all who work it; they
voted against health for all; and they voted against equal rights.

They voted against most of these Votes for narrow, political, selfish
interests. We will not be deterred by these reactionary forces, and we
appeal to our people not to allow these forces to play with their feelings
and exploit their impatience.

The ANC has pledged its unwavering commitment to working with the people on
the ground to resolve the problems of delivery in some of our areas. Whilst
we acknowledge that there might be legitimate concerns in some of these
areas, third-force elements will also have to be exposed in order to deal
with the matter.

The Joint Budget Committee is in the process of finalising its
recommendations, which would see Parliament being an active participant in
the Budget process, with a particular focus on oversight.

The review of monthly and quarterly expenditure reports should be used
effectively by committees when tabled in this House, in order to improve
spending effectiveness and efficiency. Parliament should also engage the
executive effectively in a dialogue on spending effectiveness.

We will also be recommending an institutionalised mechanism of engaging
meaningfully with the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, which would be
overseen by this Parliament.

We’d like to commend National Treasury for the guidelines for legislative
oversight, through the annual reports that they have prepared for
Parliament, and we’d like to urge committees to utilise this valuable tool.

Let me also thank Parliament for taking oversight seriously, by
establishing the task team on oversight and accountability under the
leadership of Comrade Nkosinathi Phiwayinkosi Nhleko. It’s an encouraging
step in the right direction indeed.

Allow me, Speaker, to thank members of the committee for their dedication
and contribution in the evolution of the committee as we advance towards
effective oversight.

I-ANC iyaweseka lo mgomo wezimali. Ngiyabonga. [The ANC supports this
Budget. Thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Mr Chairman, South Africa has one of the highest rates of
unemployment, stagnant at over 35% for the past 7 years. Today we have to
remind ourselves that over 8 million South Africans are looking for work
or, having failed to find work, they have given up trying. It’s in the
context of this national crisis that the DA indicated our support for the
Appropriation Bill, because we saw it as both redistributive and, more
particularly, expansionary.

It was expansionary in that it included personal and corporate tax cuts,
and strong infrastructural spending of R60 billion at national, provincial
and municipal levels, all without deviating from the accepted deficit of 3%
of GDP. Now, reflecting on the Budget, I am not sure that it was
expansionary at all. The esteemed Commissioner Gordhan produced a further
R10 billion revenue windfall two weeks after the Budget, having produced a
further R11 billion just prior to the Budget. The effect of this was to
reduce the real deficit to a mere 1,6% of GDP.

This left the Minister with an embarrassment of riches in his hands. It
would have led to added pressure for either further tax cuts and
incentives, or greater infrastructural spending. The first he didn’t have
the stomach for, and on the latter he didn’t have the capacity. Instead,
debt was retired and an opportunity, we believe, missed.

Therefore, we renew the call we made in our alternative budget for a policy
on tax reform, particularly in respect of the effective tax rate on
companies. Instead of ad hoc adjustments to the corporate tax rate,
government should set a target corporate tax rate of about 25% and a time
period over which it will be implemented. This will have a powerful and
immediate effect on investment and therefore the creation of jobs.

In addition, we renew our call – despite the Minister’s specious remarks –
for further incentives and large-scale job creation at the lower end of the
skills chain. If we can have tax allowances for capital investments, why
not for businesses and households that employ labour-intensive methods?

In respect of infrastructure, we note that provinces and municipalities
spent only 46% of their capital budgets last year. Therefore we urge the
state to increase the capacity for infrastructural expenditure. In this
regard, we believe that private sector capital should be mobilised to help
the market and prove that the state is serious about harnessing the
efficiency and service delivery credentials of private enterprise. After
all, this is compatible with a new paradigm presented by the ANC’s
discussion document called: “Development and Underdevelopment”.

This document places the DA’s economic policies at the heart of South
Africa’s political economic discourse and proposes the interventions which
will, according to its own words, set the preconditions for market-led
growth. The implementation of the policies in the document will help to
fire up economic growth and tackle our unemployment crisis. Incidentally,
without a shadow of doubt, it will also prove that a stronger opposition
with coherent pragmatic policies is very valuable in a thriving democracy.
We support the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T E VEZI: Chairperson, the IFP supports the Appropriation Bill against
the background of the startling Auditor-General’s report which appeared in
yesterday’s Business Day. While we applaud the good work done by the
Minister and his department, we are concerned about reports like this one.

As I have often stated, we all share the same constituency. Irregular,
fruitless and wasteful expenditure must and will result in lack of
delivery. We must now ask ourselves what else needs to be done. Is it lack
of capacity? Is it blatant unwillingness to work?

Unauthorised, irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure was reported in
all nine provinces. In 89 of the 115 departments, our people have been
short-changed for too long. Fruitless and wasteful expenditure means
expenditure which was made in vain and would have been avoided, had
reasonable care been exercised.

We live in the market place were all the agitation is taking place. We
cannot adopt an armchair-critic attitude. Indeed, it is an attitude we can
ill-afford. It is our people who suffer when there is no delivery.

The IFP supports the Bill and requests the Minister to note the concerns
raised by our members during the various debates. I thank you.

Mr Y WANG: Chairperson, Ministers and members, I will be pretty short, as
usual. The ID welcomes the special expansion, in connection with our
transport, and all these initiatives. Therefore we support the Bill. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, over the past weeks we have engaged in debates
over the budget allocation for various departments for this financial year,
2005-06. From the allocation, we have been able to see the priorities of
the government and how, through the allocations, various departments set
out to deliver within their faculties and ultimately deliver to the people
of South Africa.

Primarily, the Appropriation Bill clearly advocates addressing the needs of
the most impoverished of our land, but in no way tends to neglect the rest.
The MF hopes that the larger allocations shall bring us even closer to the
quality of life, livelihood and democracy that we hope to achieve.

All allocations and priorities of the departments will make service
delivery a reality. The MF hopes that the funds shall be utilised
effectively and efficiently to bring us to the South Africa we should be.
The MF supports the Appropriation Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Chairperson, hon members, the Freedom Charter did not end
with its adoption in 1955. In fact, it is a beacon for further struggles,
in a sense a standard by which to judge.

While the Freedom Charter is explicit that there shall be work and
security, that there shall be peace and friendship, that the doors of
learning and culture shall be opened, and that there shall be houses,
security and comfort, the 2005 national Budget gives legitimacy to the
claims of the charter.

The Freedom Charter is as relevant today as it was 50 years ago. The new
democratic government has taken active steps to implement the central
thrust of the Freedom Charter. It remains a living document and therefore
informs the policy direction of our new democratic dispensation.

The ANC is not desperate to defend the Freedom Charter, but simply argues
that our tried and tested history and participation in the struggle began
not yesterday but a long time ago, and we’ll continue to do so.

The 2005 Budget is noted for its equitable redistributive character. It
channels more resources towards job creation, human-resource development
and poverty alleviation. The contract our government has with the people of
South Africa to create work and fight poverty is clearly taken care of in
this Budget. In fact, it acts in terms of and speaks to the challenges we
face as a country within this context.

Government has to ensure that there is enough capacity to spend the Budget.
Parliament has to play a vigorous oversight role so that this Budget is
properly and qualitatively spent. The necessary tools for Parliament to
enable it to play a continuous and effective oversight role in respect of
the Budget include monthly and quarterly reports by different departments,
which portfolio committees have to ensure that they receive.

Elements that stand in the way of implementing our programmes have to be
uprooted and dealt with accordingly, as some Ministers, such as Comrade
Minister Skweyiya to quote one Minister, are already doing.

While we conclude that our government is consistent with the Reconstruction
and Development Programme and our Constitution, it plays a critical role in
advancing social development. Those opposed to our struggle for a better
life for all will always be antagonistic in their approach. We’ll therefore
be confronted with new dilemmas and contradictions, as President Mbeki
warned. New solutions are inevitably required to build our society. Time
and the continual application of our wisdom will produce the outcome we
desire.

Under these circumstances, I must share with you the recent remarks by
Frederick van Zyl Slabbert. He said:

   Today South Africans are planning, doing and experiencing everyday events
   that nobody in their wildest dreams would have thought possible 15 years
   ago. I recall, then, the pervasive sense of a stalemated, resource-
   destroying, deadlocked situation where one side was presenting the only
   solution at the total destruction of the other. We talked ourselves out
   of and away from a catastrophe.


   Today, given the scope and depth of our transformation, we battle with
   problems that test our resolve and commitment. But these problems are
   about building democracy not destroying it, about creating an open
   society, in which poverty and deprivation can be overcome, not pursuing
   policies that entrench them. After 10 years, we are thriving and punching
   well above our weight amongst emerging democracies.

Historically, the ANC is the sole architect of establishing the framework
for social change. The proper allocation of financial resources through
budgetary intervention is our starting point. The ANC, in this regard, has
displayed sheer wisdom and political acumen.
Responding to issues raised by the opposition, particularly the DA, is a
waste of time and energy. We have a very tight programme of national
importance, which we have to implement, that they do not have.

We will therefore spare our energy and wisdom for such a task. Let the DA
continue to make noise. We will continue to serve our people. Seventy per
cent of them elected us, by the way. The ANC endorses the 2005
Appropriation Bill. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson and hon members.
It is late in the day; so let me use my full time. [Interjections.]

Chairperson, I would actually ask the indulgence of the House to give
consideration to this process. The Budget was tabled on 23 February. We
have been through quite an intensive process in Parliament. I don’t believe
that the ritualistic way in which we address matters in the Second Reading
debates does justice either to our positions or to democracy. [Applause.] I
would ask that this House, in all its glory, through the Joint Rules
Committee, give consideration to this matter. Clearly, I think we must
respect democracy. We must respect the right of parties to be heard.

However, for the past 11 years I have observed this with a degree of pain,
because I don’t believe that it does justice to what we represent to the
joint objectives we have to serve our people. So, I conclude by asking that
that matter be considered and that, perhaps, next year we can look at the
Budget quite differently and celebrate it’s passing. And, more importantly,
consider also how Parliament will use the available information through
monthly releases in terms of the PFMA and a variety of other sources to
ensure that we can improve on the oversight of Parliament over the spending
by government. Thank you very much, Chairperson.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 18:48.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS





                             FRIDAY, 27 MAY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Withdrawal of Bills

      The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism withdrew the
    following Bill on 26 May 2005:
      (i)   Marine Living Resources Amendment Bill [B 16 – 2005] (National
         Assembly – sec 75)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Finance

      Government Notice No 365 published in Government Gazette No 27487
    dated 14 April 2005: Framework for Conditional Grants to Provinces in
    terms of Division of Revenue Act, 2005 (Act No 1 of 2005).

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Government Notice No R.1342 published in Government Gazette No
         26994 dated 12 November 2004: National Gambling Regulations in
         terms of section 87 read with Item 8 of the Schedule to the
         National Gambling Act, 2004 (Act No 7 of 2004).

      (b)   Government Notice No R.1311 published in Government Gazette No
         26962 dated 12 November 2004: Standards Matters in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      (c)   Government Notice No R.1315 published in Government Gazette No
         26962 dated 12 November 2004: Standards Matters in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      (d)   Government Notice No R.1397 published in Government Gazette No
         27038 dated 3 December 2004: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP):
         Notice in terms of section 12G(16) d of the Income Tax Act, 1962
         (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (e)   Government Notice No R.1398 published in Government Gazette No
         27038 dated 3 December 2004: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP):
         Notice in terms of section 12G(16) d of the Income Tax Act, 1962
         (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (f)   Government Notice No R.1399 published in Government Gazette No
         27038 dated 3 December 2004: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP):
         Notice in terms of section 12G(16) d of the Income Tax Act, 1962
         (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (g)   Government Notice No R.1441 published in Government Gazette No
         27097 dated 17 December 2004: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP):
         Notice in terms of section 12G(16) d of the Income Tax Act, 1962
         (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (h)   Government Notice No R.1442 published in Government Gazette No
         27097 dated 17 December 2004: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP):
         Notice in terms of section 12G(16) d of the Income Tax Act, 1962
         (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (i)   Proclamation No R.2 published in Government Gazette No 27157
         dated 14 January 2005: Transfer of the administration of the Co-
         operatives Act, 1981 (Act No 91 of 1981), from the Minister of
         Agriculture to the Minister of Trade and Industry in terms of the
         Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of
         1996).

      (j)   Government Notice No R.133 published in Government Gazette No
         27269 dated 18 February 2005: National Measuring Standards in terms
         of the Measuring Units and National Measuring Standards Act, 1973
         (Act No 76 of 1973).
      (k)   Government Notice No R.134 published in Government Gazette No
         27269 dated 18 February 2005: Regulations relating to the payment
         of levy and the issues of sales permits with regard to compulsory
         specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act
         No 29 of 1993).

      (l)   Government Notice No R.140 published in Government Gazette No
         27269 dated 18 February 2005: Regulations relating to the payment
         of levy and the issues of sales permits with regard to compulsory
         specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act
         No 29 of 1993).

      (m)   Government Notice No R.168 published in Government Gazette No
         27269 dated 4 March 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
     Administration on the Commonwealth Association of Public Administration
     and Management 10th Anniversary Biennial Conference, dated 10 March
     2005:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration was
     invited to participate in the 10th Anniversary Biennial Conference of
     the Commonwealth Association of Public Administration and Management
     (CAPAM), held in Singapore from 23 to 27 October 2004.

      The Committee accepted the invitation, and sent a delegation
     comprising of Messrs M R Baloyi (leading the delegation), N E Gcwabaza
     and R S Ntuli, accompanied by Ms N Gwaza, Committee Secretary.

      The Conference took place under the theme; “Networked Government”,
     and focused on three sub-themes, namely:

    • Many agencies, one Government, which concentrated on Public Service as
      a learning organization, un-bureaucratic bureaucracy and citizen-
      centric service delivery;
    • Engaging Citizens, which concentrated on building capacity for
      enhanced engagement, building partnerships with stakeholders and
      engagement through e-Government; and
    • Networking beyond borders, which concentrated on partnering with
      international organizations, equipping officers for the international
      dimension and serving a globalised citizenry.

   2. THE CONFERENCE IN PERSPECTIVE

      The Conference was preceded by a workshop organized for the purpose
     of allowing participants to share their views on the results of a
     survey that CAPAM conducted with a view to determine as to why
     Governments embark on new organisational and service delivery
     arrangements, and to use such an engagement in shaping the discussions
     in the Conference itself.

      The Workshop considered the survey results conducted through engaging
     experts from Australia, Canada, Ghana, India, Jamaica, Malaysia, Malta,
     New Zealand, Samoa, Singapore, South Africa and Uganda.

      The results indicated that public servants are the key change drivers
     in dealing with organizational change and service delivery
     arrangements, followed by politicians and then international
     development agencies. Noting the engagement in this survey report, the
     Workshop concluded that whereas there is diversity as to which agent
     directly dictates the course and speed of events in organizational
     change and the introduction of new service delivery mechanisms, country
     specifics point to the reality that those changes are the common
     features of governance. It also emerged in the survey report that all
     countries that are undergoing changes are faced with unique challenges,
     they have to increase capacity to deal with such challenges and, in
     order to do so, it is imperative that they get the best and relevant
     mix of tools, research and activities to get the best products out of
     the change processes, and it is in this regard that networking becomes
     critically important for all the Governments of the World, first at
     home and in the international community.

      Noting the CAPAM survey results that international and country
     experts agree that factors leading to organisational change depend on
     individual country circumstances, and applying that observation to our
     situation in South Africa, it comes to light that we need to pay
     attention to the following challenges:
     • Building on the political will that has been demonstrated through
       policy formulation in the Public Service arena;
     • Accelerating the strategic deployment of public servants;
     • Isolate and deal with cases of resistance to change;
     • Accelerate engagement with the academic community;
     • Dealing with consultancy domination;
     • Building change management capacity;
     • Improving horizontal communication among state organs;
     • Accelerating vertical communication between the Government and the
       people;
     • Intensify the fight against corruption;
     • Managing resource constraints.

      In exploring the conference theme, answers to the following questions
     were sought:

    • How can Government be organized with different agencies and yet remain
      as a connected network as delivering integrated, customer-centric
      services?
    • What values, structures, systems, processes and tools are required to
      encourage networking, collaboration and sharing knowledge across
      agencies?
    • What are the competencies and values Public offices should have, and
      should these be honoured to build a shared understanding and purpose?

      In an attempt to get to the bottom of providing answers to the
     questions that the theme of the Conference introduced, the conference
     engaged in a mode of experience sharing guided by the sub-themes of the
     Conference, in which case they show-cased their respective experience,
     practices, policies and challenges that each country is confronted
     with. During this interaction, organs of civil society from various
     Governments were also sharing their experience. What spiced the whole
     interaction was the fact that Conference got divided into small groups
     and toured Singapore with a view of exposing delegates on the practical
     side of the information-exchange.

      To acknowledge that the Public Service is, of necessity, a learning
     organization results from, among other things the following:
    • The Public Service’s ability to actively participate in a globalised
      environment,
    • The state of the Public Service’s advancement  in ICT developments as
      a key communication mechanism,
    • Visionary change,
    • The need for the Public Service to be responsive to the needs/demands
      of the civil society,
    • The development and deployment of managers who are visionaries.

      The observations that we make in this regard of our Public Service as
     a learning organization is that we need to examine the role that
     institutions such as SAMDI are playing in making training and
     development interventions for the learning advancement of our Public
     Service.

      Through debates on the engagement of civil society on matters of
     governance, policy formulation and service delivery, a number of things
     are emerging, namely:
    • Not only are Governments taking the initiative to engage citizens and
      various stakeholders, but citizens themselves are increasingly
      demanding participation,
    • Various forms of engaging the citizens are being utilised to promote
      and ensure effective engagement with civil society,
    • Democracy is not just about the citizens exercising their rights to
      vote a Government into power, but it is also about involving them  in
      decision-making, in generating new ideas in matters of governance,
      policy development, service delivery and in budgetary processes. It is
      about empowering the citizens to tell public servants where they are
      succeeding and where they are failing to deliver.

      Our country’s participation in features of engaging citizens such as
     the “izimbizo’s”, the citizens forums, the use of Public Information
     Terminals, the Multi-Purpose Community Centres, door-to-door visits and
     community mass meetings serve to give meaning to the people governance
     concept, and practically position us in such a manner as to proclaim
     our compliance with the requirement of citizen engagement.

      Given the reality of globalization, it is possible for governments to
     form partnerships with organizations beyond their borders for purposes
     of sharing knowledge, networking and providing peer remedial solutions
     to problems and challenges.

   3. CONCLUSION

      Whereas it often emerged that Governments engaged in self-praise and
     competitive attitudes rather than experience-sharing, perhaps natural
     in intergovernmental relations, a lot could be learnt from the
     interaction.

      It is a strong recommendation that we, as Parliament or as a
     Portfolio Committee or both, should constantly participate in the
     activities of CAPAM and in fact register as members. Individual MP’s
     may also register for membership.

Report to be considered.

2.    Annual Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation -
     MAY – DECEMBER 2004

   1. COMMITTEE:  PC ON SPORT AND RECREATION

      CHAIRPERSON:     Mr. B M Komphela

      MANDATE OF THE COMMITTEE:

      VISION:    To oversee the realization of an active and winning nation
     as well as to ensure that sport, as a whole, is accessible to all in
     particular the disadvantaged masses in the townships and rural areas.

      MISSION:   To oversee that sport and recreation is being placed at
     the forefront to address issues of national importance, such as
     unemployment, under development, poverty, economic development, as well
     as individual and community health.  Above all, it contributes to
     nation building.

        1. List of Entities reporting to the Committee

           1. Boxing South Africa (BSA) established in terms of the Boxing
              and Wrestling Control Act, 1954 (Act No 39 of 1954 as
              amended) is responsible for controlling and regulating boxing
              in the Republic of South Africa.
           2. The South African Sport Commission (SASC) established in
              terms of the South African Sports Commission Act, 1998 (Act
              No 109 of 1998 as amended) to administer sport and recreation
              under the guidance of the Minister and to promote and develop
              sport and recreation.
           3. The South African Institute for Drug Free Sport established
              in terms of the South African Institute for Drug Free Sport
              Act, 1997 (Act No 14 of 1997) to promote the participation in
              sport free from prohibited substances and to counteract
              doping in sport.


   2. Chairperson’s overview (summary for the year)

      Key activities: The Committee worked well together as a team despite
     political differences. There were challenges relating to understanding
     the aim, objective and a need of transforming the sport fraternity in
     the country amongst the political parties. The committee has a big
     challenge of visiting provinces to determine understanding of their
     IDPs in relation to MIG for development of basic sport facilities. Also
     to determine their preparedness and mass participation development
     programme to feed for 2010 development.  The provinces that have been
     visited are KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Gauteng, Northern Cape,
     Free State and North West. During the visit the Committee experienced a
     huge backlog of access to facilities.

      The Committee has dealt with all the activities planned for in the
     programme for the year. The Chairperson wishes to extend a word of
     appreciation to members of the Committee who participated in the all
     the committee activities despite many other commitments. A word of
     appreciation also goes to the staff members supporting the Committee.

   3. Core objectives (responsibilities)


      As part of the oversight role the committee has to increase the
     levels of participation of South Africans in sport and recreation
     activities, to raise the profile of sport and recreation amongst
     decision makers; to increase the probability of success of South
     Africa’s sportspersons and teams in major international competitions
     and to place sport and recreation at the forefront of efforts to
     address issues of national importance, such as unemployment, poverty,
     economic development, and individual and community health.

      Composition of sub-committees:


   1. Legislation  (briefings and hearings)
      None

        1. Matters other than mandated legislation
      None

        2. International agreements
      None

        3. Papers referred to the Committee
     1. Paper referred to the Committee on (ATC Wed 20 October 2004 page
        915) The report of the Auditor-General for consideration.
     2. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Department of
                 Sport and Recreation for 2003-2004, including the Report of
                 the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 20
                 for 2003-2004.


         (b)     Report on Financial Statements of the South African Sports
                 Commission for 2003 – 2004, including the Report of the
                 Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003 –
                 2004. (ATC Thursday, 4 November 2004, page 1108)

        4. Hearings on of national interest, if any…


The Committee conducted Budget Hearings with SRSA; Heads of Provincial
Departments and provincial Chairpersons of Standing Committees; SAIDS;
USSASA; SASC; DISSA and Gymnastic SA. [Report published on ATC dated 14
June 2004]

Recommendations:

            • To interrogate study tour reports since most of the issues
              highlighted by the provinces also appear in the reports
            • To look at bilateral agreement such as the Cuban Model of mass
              participation and what assistance can be requested from Cuba.
            • The President offered to accompany the former Minister of
              Sport to the Minister of Finance to acquire more funds and the
              Committee will follow that offer up. To reactivate that offer
              since we have become aware of the fact that our budget is
              equal to 40c per child per year.
            • To hold a workshop instead of study tours to provinces to
              decide on inputs that would be used to influence change in the
              budget and to make an input to the MTEF that will be finalized
              in August by Sport and Recreation South Africa.

   2. Oversight
    1. Visit to KwaZulu – Natal from 9 to 12 August 2004
    2. Objectives or focus areas:
   1. To promote participation of South Africans in local and international
      sport and recreation programmes through own programmes and funding of
      associated organizations and to monitor the impact on communities.
   2. Mass participation is directly driven at national level as a major
      policy initiative. Meetings and in loco visits will take place at
      points of implementation of the Siyadlala programme
   3. Visits to key nodal areas where community mass participation
      programmes have been launched by SRSA and development plans for the
      Indigenous Games and mass participation programmes for the disabled
      and women
   4. Meetings with local USSASA structures to discuss challenges facing
      them in the implementation of the national programme and funding,
      USSASA plans to implement the school sport programme and the desired
      funding model and mechanism
   5. Meetings with the key federations (soccer, cricket, rugby) that are
      funded by SRSA and evaluation of their development programmes in
      relation to performance target commitments given to SRSA
   6. Meeting the local sport councils and management committees of the
      provincial academy at the universities in the provinces on their
      admission/selection criteria and programmes, linkages to the national
      academy and sources of funding in terms of corporate entities
Meeting with sport councils to establish their involvement in national
events such as the 2010 World Cup; to learn of the challenges they
experience in relation to national lottery disbursement agency pertaining
to sport and recreation; also their plans they have for rural areas because
sport councils are a direct responsibility of the national department and
to find out how they are resourced by the department and sport councils
were established in terms of the Sport Commission
   7. Meeting with an expert on recreational issues on a researched study
      into recreation in South Africa.
   8. Visiting areas where Building for Sport and Recreation programme is
      implemented, evaluation on the efficacy of the programme with regards
      to mass community participation and determining the state of readiness
      of local structures to become implementing agents for the programme.

      3. Findings:

      ❖ Workshop should be conducted to clarify issues on sport structures
        in the province. The readiness of the province for 2010 Soccer
        World Cup. Monitoring of municipalities on concentrating to all
        sport codes not soccer only.
      ❖ Clarity on the placement of USSASA. Fees paid by school affiliated
        to USSASA and the role of USSASA in relation to former Model C
        schools that are not participating in competitions or not
        affiliated to USSASA.
      ❖ Accessibility of Lottery Fund and the issues of a three-year
        audited statement to be looked at seriously.
      ❖ Re-introduction or activation of sport councils in the province.
      ❖ Maintenance, monitoring and accountability on built facilities.
      ❖ Inclusion of sport as part of education curriculum.
      ❖ Lack of affordable transporting for players to attend games or
        matches within the province.
      ❖ Developed players disappear without being monitored or placed in a
        right team. No accountability or follow-up of players after being
        developed.
      ❖ Less involvement of teachers to identify talents at schools during
        physical education due to abolition of physical education and
        Wednesday matches.
      ❖ Lack of transformation programmes, development programmes and
        succession plans for building young teams visible but only debated
        and end in the boardrooms.
      ❖ Not enough programmes on mass participation and school sport.
      ❖ All municipalities want to have stadium built or renovated in
        their areas.
      ❖ Not enough training for coaches and referees.
      ❖ Federations are not applying to Lottery Distribution Fund Agency.
      ❖ Lack of information sharing amongst federations, stakeholders and
        NGOs.
      ❖ Women sport not active in the province.
      ❖ Still racial tensions exist in different sport codes.


RECOMMENDATIONS: The Committee decided to make recommendations after
visited other provinces to prepare for a debate in the House including all
provinces visited.

2. Oversight visit to Limpopo. Mpumalanga and Gauteng from 3 to 14 October
2004

Same objectives as KwaZulu-Natal

FINDINGS

The Committee identified the following issues:
    ❑ Lack of national policy on school sport.
    ❑ Patriotism vs sterling pound - The clubs that have more crowds than
      the national team. What can be done to address this issue?
    ❑ High expectation and demand on sport facilities for the rural areas
      even if its open grounds.
    ❑ Glenmore in Mpumalanga don’t have water or sanitation and not
      possible to have toilets in the facilities.
    ❑  The communities argue that BSRP created jobs and what is MIG going
      to provide?
    ❑ Workshop should be conducted to clarify issues on sport structures in
      the province. The readiness of the province for 2010 Soccer World Cup.
      Monitoring and addressing municipalities that are not concentrating to
      all sport codes but soccer only.
    ❑ Clarity on the placement of USSASA. Final negotiations should be
      discussed with the stakeholders. Fees paid by school affiliated to
      USSASA and the role of USSASA in relation to former Model C schools
      that are not participating in competitions or not affiliated to
      USSASA.
    ❑ Accessibility of Lottery Fund and the issues of the two-year audited
      statement to be looked at seriously.
    ❑ Re-introduction or activation of sport councils in some provinces and
      information on why they were established and what their
      responsibilities are.
    ❑ Inclusion of sport as part of education curriculum.
    ❑ Lack of affordable transport for players to attend games or matches
      within the provinces.
    ❑ Mechanism should be devised to track down developed players and be
      monitored. A database should be available.
    ❑  Less involvement of teachers to identify talents at schools during
      physical education due to abolition of physical education and
      Wednesday matches.
    ❑ Lack of transformation programmes, development programmes and
      succession plans for building young teams visible should not be
      debated in the boardrooms and not implemented.
    ❑ Not enough developed programmes on mass participation and school
      sport.
    ❑ All municipalities want to have stadium built or renovated in their
      areas.
    ❑ Not enough training for coaches and referees.
    ❑ Lack of information sharing amongst federations, stakeholders and
      NGOs.
    ❑ Women sport not active in the provinces.
    ❑ Racial tensions between different sport codes.
    ❑ Cross border issue
    ❑ Challenges with karate, cricket and rugby.
    ❑ The existence of racial tension in certain sporting codes and the
      continuing reluctance of certain former ‘Model C’ schools to become
      affiliated to USSASA.

17. RECOMMENDATIONS

• Finalisation of the Transformation Charter on Sport by Sport and
  Recreation South Africa (SRSA) in order to provide a blueprint for South
  African sport at national, provincial and local levels.
• The Standing Committee on Sport in the provinces are encouraged to embark
  on oversight visits in their respective provinces and to build strong
  relationships with local municipalities.
• Activating and instituting local sport councils in municipalities to
  serve as integral consultative forums of the community in order to inform
  municipal priorities and create a sense of local ownership.
• The Lottery Distribution Agency for sport must embark on a public
  education campaign to familiarise communities on the guidelines and
  requirements for accessing the fund. The stringent requirements of the
  distribution agency must be reviewed in order to allow for greater access
  and to prevent unallocated funds to be returned to the National Treasury.
  The 10% allocation to sport by National Lottery must be reviewed; an
  increase in allocation to 20% is proposed in order to meet the huge
  developmental challenges in sport.
• The 2010 Soccer World Cup governance structure must be finalised as a
  matter of urgency. Currently, local authorities and provinces have high
  expectations to host World Cup matches and embarked on various
  organisational and logistical initiatives which are uncoordinated and
  confusing.
• SRSA must enter into negotiations with the Department of Mineral and
  Energy Affairs and reach agreement on the possible utilisation of sport
  facilities and properties owned by mining companies, by local
  communities.
• The exorbitant fees charged by local municipalities for utilisation of
  facilities, even those built by SRSA, is a major source of concern.
  Municipalities must review their hiring fees structure in order to
  improve accessibility and usage.
• Municipalities are also called upon to review long-term leases (i.e. 99-
  year, 50-year, etc) granted to private clubs before the 1997 Constitution
  of the Republic of South Africa was adopted.
• SRSA must provide clarity on the future model for school sport in South
  Africa and the role of school sport organisations (e.g. USSASA) in sport.
• There is uncertainty on the possible effect the Municipal Infrastructure
  Grant (MIG) will have on the provision of sport facilities. According to
  stakeholders, The Building for Sport and Recreation Programme (BSRP) of
  SRSA created jobs in local communities while at the same time providing
  much needed facilities. In order to continue the aims and objectives of
  the BSRP it is recommended that funds earmarked for sport facility
  development in MIG be ring fenced for that specific purpose.
• Federations must be urged to demarcate their boundaries according to the
  political boundaries of the country and align their structures and
  operations accordingly.

     1. Annual Reports
     2. Boxing South Africa presented its Annual Report 2002/03 on 2
        November 2004 to the Committee
     3. Implementation of legislation
     4. Institutional Oversight


    ❖ Briefing by SRSA on Strategic Plans on 01.06.2004 and Budget Vote 20
      on 04.06.2004
    ❖ Briefing by SASC and SAIDS on Budget 0n 04.06.2004
    ❖ Briefing by BSA on Annual Report 0n 02.11.2004
    ❖ Briefing by SRSA on Annual Report on 09.11.2004
    ❖ Briefing by federations on their development programmes and
      transformation progress.

        3. Internationals
      None
   4. Committee activities

   1. Invitations for Chairperson
|CHAIRPERSON              |DATE                  |VENUE                   |
|1. Mr. Komphela [MINMEC] |13 June 2004          |Sports Commission,      |
|                         |                      |Pretoria                |
|2. Mr. Komphela          |21 – 29 September 2004|Athens (Paralympics)    |

   2. Conferences
      None
   3. Any other


|Date               |Subject                                          |
|11.05.2004         |Election of Chairperson of Ad Hoc Committee on   |
|                   |Sport and Recreation Committee Programme         |
|01.06.2004         |Briefing by SRSA on Strategic Plans              |
|                   |Adoption of minutes                              |
|04.06.2004         |Budget Hearing with SRSA; SASC; DISSA; USSASA;   |
|                   |Gymnastic SA and SAIDS.                          |
|08.06.2004         |Budget hearing with provincial heads of          |
|                   |departments and chairpersons of standing         |
|                   |committees                                       |
|14.06.2004         |Adoption of minutes                              |
|                   |Review of Committee Programme                    |
|                   |Adoption of Budget Report                        |
|                   |Discussion on workshop instead of study tour     |
|                   |visits                                           |
|22.06.2004         |Adoption of minutes                              |
|                   |Presentation on sports development programmes    |
|                   |by:-                                             |
|                   |SCORE                                            |
|                   |Playing for Peace                                |
|                   |Sport for All                                    |
|25.06.2004         |Election of Chairperson for the Portfolio        |
|                   |Committee on Sport and Recreation                |
|02.08.2004         |Adoption of minutes                              |
|                   |Consideration of the revised programme           |
|                   |Deliberation on the provincial visit to          |
|                   |KwaZulu-Natal                                    |
|09 – 12.08.2004    |Oversight visit to KZN                           |
|17.08.2004         |Briefing by National Lottery Distribution Agency |
|                   |on distribution of funds                         |
|                   |Briefing by USSASA on their development          |
|                   |programmes                                       |
|24.08.2004         |Debriefing on National Lottery briefing          |
|                   |Consideration of Business Plan and study to KZN  |
|                   |report                                           |
|07.09.2004         |Joint meeting with PC on Provincial and Local    |
|                   |Government to discuss issues on 2010 World Cup   |
|                   |preparations                                     |
|                   |Adoption of minutes                              |
|14.09.2004         |Briefing by SAFA and Netball SA on their         |
|                   |development programmes                           |
|                   |Adoption of Committee’s Business Plan            |
|                   |Adoption of KZN oversight report                 |
|03 – 14.10.2004    |Oversight visit to Limpopo, Mpumalanga and       |
|                   |Gauteng                                          |
|19.10.2004         |Briefing by SRSA on transformation charter and   |
|                   |presentation by Ministerial Task Team on         |
|                   |implementation of their recommendations          |
|22.10.2004         |Briefing by UCB and ASA on their development     |
|                   |plans and transformation progress                |
|                   |Adoption of minutes                              |
|26.10.2004         |Consideration of International Agreements        |
|                   |Adoption of minutes                              |
|                   |Election of sub-committees                       |
|02.11.2004         |Consideration of study reports to Limpopo,       |
|                   |Mpumalanga and Gauteng                           |
|03.11.2004         |Presentation by Boxing South Africa on 2202/003  |
|                   |Annual Report                                    |
|05.11.2004         |Presentation by Swimming South Africa on         |
|                   |development programmes and transformation        |
|                   |progress                                         |
|09.11.2001         |Presentation by SRSA on Annual Report 2003/04;   |
|                   |school sport programme and mass participation    |
|                   |programme.                                       |
|10.11.2004         |Briefing by NOCSA and SACGA                      |
|16.11.2004         |Presentation by SASC on Annual Report and        |
|                   |Consideration of Committee’s Annual Report and   |
|                   |Draft Programme for 2005                         |

Outstanding matters:
         • Briefing by Premier Soccer League on mechanisms in place for
           safety at stadiums
         • Golf federation to brief the Committee on matters affecting golf
           in the country and reasons for lack of development.
         • Joint meeting with PC on Education to discuss issues of school
           sport.
         • Briefing by Sport Science Institute on development programmes
         • Presentation by SCIR on research done in relation to sport issues
           and the benefit of federations for the research.
         • Study tour to Australia and France to learn and interact on
           challenges experience during hosting of World Cup and spin offs
           after the hosting. Korea-Japan to determine the reasons that led
           them to demolish stadiums built during the Soccer World Cup in
           preparation for 2010 Soccer World Cup in South Africa.

6.    Financial statements

           a. Provincial visits
|Period     |Purpose of visit     |Names of Members |Number  |Date Report  |Costs        |
|           |                     |                 |of Staff|Tabled       |             |
|9-12 August|The visit was to     |Mr. B M Komphela |1       |Published in |R59 818.00   |
|2004       |measure their        |(ANC)            |        |the ATC on 27|             |
|           |readiness for 2010   |Mr. M M Dikgacwi |        |September    |             |
|           |and whether the      |(ANC)            |        |2004         |             |
|           |monies paid by Sport |Mr C T Frolick   |        |             |             |
|           |and Recreation South |(ANC)            |        |             |             |
|           |Africa (SRSA) to     |Mr T J Louw (ANC)|        |             |             |
|           |federations reach the|Mr. E Mtshali    |        |             |             |
|           |clubs in the         |(ANC)            |        |             |             |
|           |provinces as it is   |Gen B H Holomisa |        |             |             |
|           |suppose to be and    |(UDM)            |        |             |             |
|           |challenges           |Mr. C B Herandien|        |             |             |
|           |experienced. The     |(NNP)            |        |             |             |
|           |Committee was also   |Mr R Bhoola (MF) |        |             |             |
|           |checking at the      |                 |        |             |             |
|           |conditions of        |                 |        |             |             |
|           |facilities built by  |                 |        |             |             |
|           |SRSA and the         |                 |        |             |             |
|           |accessibility of     |                 |        |             |             |
|           |those facilities and |                 |        |             |             |
|           |also to measure the  |                 |        |             |             |
|           |reality against      |                 |        |             |             |
|           |SRSA’s programmes.   |                 |        |             |             |
|           |                     |                 |        |             |             |
|3–14       |Same as the above    |Mr B M Komphela  |1       |Not yet      |R178 616.00  |
|October    |                     |(NC)             |        |tabled.      |             |
|2004       |                     |Mr C T Frolick   |        |             |             |
|           |                     |(ANC)            |        |             |             |
|           |                     |Mr M M Dikgacwi  |        |             |             |
|           |                     |(ANC)            |        |             |             |
|           |                     |Mr T J Louw (ANC)|        |             |             |
|           |                     |Ms D M Morobi    |        |             |             |
|           |                     |(ANC)            |        |             |             |
|           |                     |Ms M M           |        |             |             |
|           |                     |Ramakaba-Lesia   |        |             |             |
|           |                     |(ANC)            |        |             |             |
|           |                     |Mr E Mtshali     |        |             |             |
|           |                     |(ANC)            |        |             |             |
|           |                     |Mr S J Masango   |        |             |             |
|           |                     |(DA)             |        |             |             |
|           |                     |Rev SMS          |        |             |             |
|           |                     |Khumalo(ACDP)    |        |             |             |

      1. Catering = R19 017.60
      2. Oversight – R230 117.00

   5. Appendices

|Membership               |Appointment Date      |Discharge                  |
|African National Congress|                      |                           |
|Bogopane-Zulu, Mrs H I   |23 June 2004          |                           |
|Carrim, Mr. Y I          | 23 June 2004         |                           |
|Dikgacwi, Mr. M M        | 23 June 2004         |                           |
|Frolick, Mr. C T         |23 June 2004          |                           |
|Komphela, Mr. B M        |25 June 2004          |                           |
|Louw, Mr. T J            |23 June 2004          |                           |
|Louw, Mr. S K*           |23 June 2004          |                           |
|Mlangeni, Mr. A          |23 June 2004          |                           |
|Mngomezulu, Mr G P*      |23 June 2004          |                           |
|Morobi, Mrs D M          |23 June 2004          |                           |
|Mtshali, Mr. E           |23 June 2004          |                           |
|Ramakaba-Lesiea, Ms M M  |23 June 2004          |                           |
|Reid, Mr. L R R          |23 June 2004          |                           |
|Schoeman, Dr E A*        |23 June 2004          |                           |
|Zulu, Prince B Z*        |23 June 2004          |                           |

Democratic Alliance
|Lee, Mr. T D           |23 June 2004            |                           |
|Masango, Mr. S J       |23 June 2004            |                           |

Inkatha Freedom Party
|Zikalala, Ms C N Z     |23 June 2004            |                           |
|Mr. B W Dlamini        |                        |                           |

United Democratic Movement
|Holomisa, Mr. B H      |23 June 2004            |                          |
|                       |                        |                          |

Independent Democrats
|Gore, Mr. V C         |23 June 2004            |                           |
|                      |                        |                           |

New National Party
|Herandien, Mr. C B     |23 June 2004            |                          |
|                       |                        |                          |

African Christian Democratic Party
|Khumalo, Rev M S       |23 June 2004            |                           |
|                       |                        |                           |

Minority Front
|Bhoola, Mr. R B*       |23 June 2004            |                           |
|                       |                        |                           |


   1. SUPPORT STAFF:

      2.1   CONTROL COMMITTEE SECRETARY: TENDA MADIMA
                       [September 2000 to date]
      2.2   COMMITTEE SECRETARY: NTOMBEKHAYA MBUQE
                       [June 2002 to date]
      2.3   COMMITTEE ASSISTANT:  NTHABISENG BOROTHO
                       [May 2001 to date ]
      2.4   TRANSCRIPTION TYPIST: CHARLENE SHELDON
                       [2003 to date]
      2.5   SECRETARY TO CHAIRPERSON: BETSIE VENTER
                       [June 2004 to date]
      2.6   RESEARCHER (RESEARCH UNIT): FARIEDA KHAN
                       [2002 to date]

Adopted by the Committee on 25 February 2005.


Signed                                  25/02/2005
………………………………….               ………….
COMMITTEE SECRETARY                     DATE
Ntombekhaya Mbuqe


Signed                                  25/02/2005
……………………………………………..          …………..
CONTROL COMMITTEE SECRETARY       DATE
Tenda Madima


Signed                                  25/02/2005
……………………………………               ……………..
COMMITTEE   CHAIRPERSON                 DATE
B M Komphela


                             MONDAY, 30 MAY 2005




ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 30 May 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


            (i)   Prevention of Illegal Eviction from and Unlawful
              Occupation of Land Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)


            (ii)  Re-determination of the Boundaries of Cross-Boundary
              Municipalities Bill [B 12 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
              75)


            (iii) South African Sports Commission Act Repeal Bill [B 13 –
              2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)

2.    Translations of Bills submitted

     (1)    The Minister of Finance


            i) uMthetho woKwabiwa kweziMali zoMbuso [UM 8 – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 76)


         This is the official translation into isiZulu of the Division of
         Revenue Bill [B 8 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76).

National Assembly

1.    Designation of Acting Speaker and Acting Deputy Speaker


      The Speaker announced that, as both the Deputy Speaker and herself
     would be absent from Parliament from 31 May to 5 June 2005, she has
     designated House Chairperson N P Nhleko as Acting Speaker and House
     Chairperson G Q M Doidge as Acting Deputy Speaker for the period 31 May
     to 5 June 2005, in accordance with the resolution adopted by the House
     on 24 June 2004.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

      Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Restitution of
     Land Rights for 2004-2005 [RP 49-2005].


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
     on the Re-determination of the Boundaries of Cross-Boundary
     Municipalities Bill [B 12 - 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated
     24 May 2005:

            The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government,
         having considered the subject of the Re-determination of the
         Boundaries of Cross-Boundary Municipalities Bill [B 12 - 2005]
         (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
         without amendment.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on the
     South African Sports Commission Act Repeal Bill [B 13 - 2005] (National
     Assembly - sec 75), dated 25 May 2005:

            The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, having
         considered the subject of the South African Sports Commission Act
         Repeal Bill [B 13 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to
         it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75
         Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 13A - 2005]


                            TUESDAY, 31 MAY 2005

ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly


1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled


      The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
    relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts and the Ad Hoc Committee on the Auditor-General
         for consideration:


       Report on the Budget and Strategic Plan of the Auditor-General for
         2005/06 [RP 38 of 2005].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report:


            (a)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Turkey regarding
              Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


            (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Turkey regarding Mutual Assistance between
              their Customs Administrations.


            (c)   Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the
              Republic of Turkey for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and
              the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
              Income, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


            (d)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
              Republic of South Africa and the Republic of Turkey for the
              Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
              Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.


            (e)   Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Gabon for the
              Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
              Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms of
              section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


            (f)   Explanatory Memorandum on the Convention between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Gabon for the Avoidance of Double Taxation
              and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
              Income.


            (g)   Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Ghana for the
              Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
              Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital Gains,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


            (h)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Ghana for the Avoidance of Double Taxation
              and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
              Income and on Capital Gains.


            (i)   Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo
              for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
              Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in
              terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108
              of 1996).


            (j)   Explanatory Memorandum on the Double Taxation Convention
              between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
              the Democratic Republic of the Congo.


            (k)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Norway regarding
              Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996
              (Act No 108 of 1996).


            (l)   Explanatory Memorandum on the Customs Agreement between
              the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of Norway.


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education for consideration:


       Strategic Plan of the Department of Education for 2005 to 2010.


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture for consideration:


       Strategic Plan of the Department of Arts and Culture for 2005 to
         2010.


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Correctional Services:


       White Paper on Corrections in South Africa – February 2005.


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration.


       Report on the State of Performance Management Systems in the South
         African Public Service – July 2004 [RP 199-2004].


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs:


       A list of approved early naturalisation applications in terms of
         section 5(9) of the South African Citizenship Act, 1995 (Act No 88
         of 1995).


     (8)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development:


            (a)   Proclamation No R.13 published in Government Gazette No
              27406 dated 22 March 2005: Commencement of the Judicial
              Matters Second Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 55 of 2003).


            (b)   Government Notice No R.250 published in Government gazette
              No 27406 dated 22 March 2005: Amendment of Regulation in
              terms of the Judges Remuneration and Conditions of Employment
              Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of 2001).


            (c)   Government Notice No R.251 published in Government Gazette
              No 27406 dated 22 March 2005: Amendment of Mediation in
              Divorce Matters Regulation in terms of the Mediation in
              Certain Divorce Matters Act, 1987 (Act No 24 of 1987).


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government and the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


       General Report of the Auditor-General on Provincial Audit Outcomes
         for 2003-2004 [RP 42-2005].


     (10)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport for consideration:


            (a)   Accession to the Convention for the Suppression of
              Unlawful Acts against the Safety Maritime Navigation and to
              the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the
              Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996
              (Act No 108 of 1996).


            (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Accession to the Convention
              for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
              Maritime Navigation and to the Protocol for the Safety of
              Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located
              on the Continental Shelf.


     (11)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport:


       Bilateral Air Service Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Great Socialist People’s Libyan
         Arab Jamahiriya for Scheduled Air Services Between their
         Territories and Beyond, Government, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (12)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report:


            (a)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of senior
              magistrate Mr M J S Nhleko.


            (b)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              magistrate Mr R Ameer.


            (c)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              magistrate Mr M K Chauke.


            (d)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              magistrate Mr M S Makamu.


            (e)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              magistrate Mr L D Monageng.


              f) Report on the provisional suspension from office of
                 magistrate Mr S E Tebe.



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      Government Notice No 868 published in Government Gazette No 27636
     dated 30 May 2005: Municipal Supply Chain Management Regulations in
     terms of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003
     (Act No 56 of 2003).

2.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

      Strategic Plan of the Department of Provincial and Local Government
         for 2005 to 2010.


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
     the Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 10 - 2005] (National Assembly -
     sec 75), dated 31 May 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
        considered the subject of the Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 10
        - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified
        by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
        Bill with an amendment [B10A - 2005].


