---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 February 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-02-16
---

WEDNESDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 2005
____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:06.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.


                     STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF LABOUR


                             (Draft Resolution)


Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I hereby move:


  That the House –


  (1) debate the untrue statement by the honourable Minister of Labour
        during the state of the nation debate to the effect that the
        Democratic Alliance and its leader, the hon Tony Leon, had supported
        the labour legislation when it was debated in the House some years
        ago;


  (2) further consider whether the honourable Minister deliberately misled
        the House in view of the fact that Hansard clearly indicates that
        the Democratic Party, the forerunner of the Democratic Alliance,
        voted against the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, as did the
        NNP, the ACDP and the FF, and that the Labour Relations Act was
        opposed by the Democratic Party, the IFP and the FF; and


  (4) finally consider whether the attitude of the Minister of Labour
        contradicts the undertaking given by the President in introducing
        the state of the nation debate – the Minister’s speech hints at
        permit exemptions to applicants, rather than a new deal for small
        business and its deregulation and empowerment.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, there is a convention
which hon Comrade Douglas knows very well.[Interjections.] That colleague .
. .

The SPEAKER: … who I see has graduated to a comrade of yours. [Laughter.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Yes, I want to appeal to him because
I want to be nice today. We had a meeting of the Chief Whips’ Forum and all
of us had agreed that there would be no motions without notice. Please let
the House not consider that motion, Madam.

Mr D H M GIBSON: May I address you on the hon Chief Whip’s …

The SPEAKER: May I address the Chief Whips?

Mr D H M GIBSON: Yes.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, this particular debate is really not the occasion
for the Chief Whips of the two largest parties to be coming here in the
House … [Interjections.] May I appeal that we get on with the debate?
Please, hon Gibson, may I request that we respect the President’s debate.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam, I have the greatest respect for the President and
for his speech. It is just that the hon Minister should not break the other
convention of this House, and that is telling fibs. [Interjections.] When
he does that, he has to be pulled up short. I asked for an opportunity for
a personal explanation and that was denied. This is the only means open to
me.


RESUMPTION OF DEBATE ON PRESIDENT’S STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I ask for an
opportunity to address you on a ruling that was made yesterday, which has a
bearing on the debate before we start. Yesterday the Minister of Labour
used an expression in Xhosa, which we then went into pains of explaining.
It is an idiom, an expression. The presiding officer, Madam Botha, ruled
that it should not be heard in the House again. The implication of that
militates against the language policy that we are promoting. Of course I do
understand the limitation of the presiding officer in terms of
understanding the language, as well as the quality of the interpretation
services. We want to place it on record that that ruling please be reviewed
at an appropriate time. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon Chief Whip, may I request that when there is any issue
relating to a ruling by any presiding officer, we deal with it outside the
House itself. I would rather that we do not actually entertain that issue.
We can discuss it outside the sitting.

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, may I address you on a point of order?

The SPEAKER: Hon Mulder?

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, my apologies to the President that I have to
do this. We have a problem with regard to Rule 59 for today’s debate. Rule
59 deals with the list of speakers that we are going to follow today. The
problem is that in terms of that list, times are allocated to parties to
participate in today’s debate. By agreement by the parties, and from the
ANC’s side, a certain period of time was allocated to opposition parties.
In terms of that agreement, parties prepared for today’s debate. Some of
the parties already yesterday participated in terms of that time
allocation. Exactly the same happened for today. It affects the opposition
parties. We were allocated 12 minutes per opposition party.

Today, after one o’clock, we were informed unilaterally that a third of our
time was being taken away. We did not give our permission for this, for
whatever reasons there may be, and we cannot accept this. Even if you look
at today’s programme, Madam Speaker, you will see that the times have been
reduced from 12 to eight minutes, but if you look at the schedule on the
second page, it still indicates that these opposition parties each has 12
minutes.

I have consulted with the other opposition parties. None of them agrees or
is happy that their time is suddenly reduced. I really want to ask about
this. I know that this is something that the Whips should sort out, but I
have to do it in this way, because we are starting now in terms of that
list. What I am asking is that you please allow those parties to use the
time that they have been allocated. Other parties have already had the
benefit of their 12 minutes yesterday, and I cannot accept that we now lose
a third of the time allocated. We have prepared our speeches in terms of
that, and I ask the Chair to make that ruling to accommodate that.

The SPEAKER: I hope the Whips can deal with this. It seems to me it is very
clear. Twelve minutes were allocated for each of the parties, and we have
said in the past that, at least for the President’s debate, we have to make
sure that every single party has adequate time to make whatever points they
would like to make. So I would like the Whips to deal with this as a simple
matter so that the parties will be able to exercise that.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We will do that.

Prof B TUROK: Madam Speaker, I should say that I have also lost two minutes
of my speech. [Interjections.] [Applause.] I think it is a loss for the
House. [Laughter.]

Mr President, Mr Deputy President, Madam Speaker, it is an honour to stand
before this Parliament of the people in my capacity as a veteran of our
movement.

It is not the first time that I address a parliament of the people,
although the circumstances at that time were very different. I was a very
young man and, of course, I refer to the Congress of the People.

If I close my eyes now I see before me an amphitheatre with planks of wood
placed on bricks in an open field in Kliptown. On the planks of wood there
are 3 000 delegates, of whom over 2 000 are African, 320 are Indians, 230
are coloureds and 112 are whites. It was the largest nonracial gathering in
South Africa at that time. [Applause.] Furthermore, in addition to the 3
000 delegates, there is a wire enclosure and outside the enclosure there
are 10 000 observers, and among the observers there are clusters of police
vehicles, there are police patrols on horseback and there are armed police
everywhere.

It is obviously a show of force for us and for the country but,
nevertheless, inside the enclosure among the delegates there is an
atmosphere of a carnival, of a festival, because we are there for a special
occasion. Most of the people are working folk, they have come from all the
corners of South Africa, they have paid their own fare, they raised that
money in their communities in order to be present at the outstanding
Congress of the People.

In the middle of the amphitheatre there is a rough wooden platform, quite
high, and on the platform there are speakers from the multinational
Congress Alliance, the ANC, the Indian Congress, the Coloured Congress, the
Congress of Democrats and the Congress of Trade Unions.

Before this congress there was a massive campaign in which some of us,
myself included as a volunteer, went to the most remote corners of the
country, places where the small groups of communities or villages would
have meetings which had never been held before. We asked the people for
their demands to incorporate these in the Freedom Charter.

Thousands of little scraps of paper were presented to us across the whole
country and these were collected and collated, and that was the basis of
the Freedom Charter. [Applause.] That is why it is such a concrete demand
with lists of issues that some people now find out of date, because the new
South Africa has managed to meet some of those demands.

I should also say that at that time, Nelson Mandela, Chief Luthuli and all
the other leaders of the movement were banned. They could not attend the
meeting and so I, as a very young cadre and very nervous in my twenties,
was asked to introduce the economic clause and I did so at that gathering.
[Applause.]

At the end of each session the meeting broke into songs such as “Mayibuy’ i-
Afrika”, which we should not forget, and the other songs of the ANC.

In my mind’s eye I see before me a congress of the people having peaceful
discussions on the second day of the meeting, the Sunday, when suddenly, at
about 3 o’çlock, a posse of armed police entered the enclosure, marched
into the arena, climbed onto the platform and told the chair to close the
meeting. The chair got up and said, “I have been instructed to close the
meeting. Do you approve the Freedom Charter?” Everybody got up and said
“yes” and that is why South Africa has a Freedom Charter. [Applause.]

The police then had closed off the whole enclosure, took everybody’s names
and addresses, and many of the delegates lost their jobs the next day, and
the rest of us were charged with treason some time later.

What is the essence of the Freedom Charter? I believe one word summarises
the whole Charter. We want to share South Africa with all its racial
groups, we want to share its natural beauty, we want to share the cultural
heritage and we also want to share the economic resources of this country,
which we have not done yet. [Applause.]

By giving emphasis on sharing we will build the social cohesion that our
President talked about in his speech the other day. The Freedom Charter is
about creating economic opportunities, social opportunities, cultural
opportunities and the rest.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: And nationalisation.

Prof B TUROK: Of course, it is true. He is shouting nationalisation. I will
deal with you. [Interjections.]

You know, Madam Speaker, the problem with this gentleman is that he says he
belongs to the largest opposition party in this country. That is true, but
he also belongs to the smallest opposition in the world. [Laughter.]
[Applause.] And the problem with the leader of the DA is that when he gets
up here he is introduced as Tony Leon, but after a minute or two he thinks
he is Tony Blair, and one is tempted to call him Prime Minister Tony.
[Laughter.]

Madam Speaker, ours is a market economy. We understand that and there is a
national consensus about the market economy. However, what there is no
consensus about, is the question of sharing, and that is why the opposition
cannot accept the Freedom Charter, because although they emphasise the
market, they do not emphasise sharing. Let us be very clear on this: we
accept the market economy, but we also know from basic economics that the
market favours the strong. The market favours the strong and the
advantaged, and that is why in South Africa we have a developmental
strategy which is going to make up for the disadvantages of the weak.

You believe in the free market, the market of the strong, and we believe in
the market for the disadvantaged. That is the difference. [Interjections.]
That is why we have broadbased black economic empowerment, labour-intensive
legislation, micro credit and co-operatives. All these are mechanisms to
ensure that the market is not only for the strong. [Interjections.]

I have two minutes left and the left is making noise. I get very confused
because the left is on the right. [Laughter.] Madam Speaker, they are
drowning me out.

The Freedom Charter, I should say, was quite a radical departure for the
fifties. Let us say that it was a radical departure, and some of us were
very excited to be part of a new vision for the world. Why was it a radical
departure? It was radical because after the Second World War the whole of
the Third World began nationalisation. They nationalised foreign
enterprises in the interests of national control of their economies. Even
in Britain the Labour Party started the welfare state, and even in the
socialist countries, despite distortions, there was an enormous emphasis on
sharing and equality. In Africa the leaders of independence movements were
beginning to talk about sharing their societies, based on traditional
African values. There were also rising labour struggles, which were calling
for greater equity and sharing. And so the ANC, in the context of the
fifties, in the context of this upsurge of Third World militancy, and in
the context of a belief in sharing and equality, adopted the clause that
you find so unacceptable, but which we see as the future of South Africa.

I believe that South Africa can be not only a political miracle but  also a
social miracle. If we follow the Freedom Charter and if we follow the
principles of sharing and equity, the world will look upon us as an example
of what a country should be. My time is up. [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Agb Speaker, die agting waarmee die vorige spreker in sy
eie geledere behandel word, en sy sienings oor nasionalisering, spreek uit
die feit dat hy nog nooit bevordering in die ANC kon kry nie. Transformasie
is nie ’n geykte term nie. Dit is nie ’n konstitusionele term nie. Dit is
ook nie ’n regsterm nie. Dis ’n politieke beleidsterm.

Ek wil oor transformasie praat en veral die vraag stel: wat word bedoel met
transformasie van die regsbank? Transformasie is ’n gegewe. Ek self het so
lank terug as 1990 gesê dat daar radikale transformasie vir Suid-Afrika
voor die deur staan, maar watter soort transformasie? Die Freedom Charter
praat van, “all our people live in brotherhood, enjoying equal rights and
opportunities”. In 1994 sê die witskrif oor die HOP transformasie is,
“securing for each citizen liberty, prosperity and happiness”. Hiermee kan
ons ons vereenselwig. Ook met spesiale stappe om die regsbank meer
weerspieëlend van die diversiteit in ons land te maak.

Dit op sigself sal ’n bate wees, maar die inhoud wat die ANC aan
transformasie gee, het in 1997 dramaties geskuif. Op die 50ste nasionale
konferensie word transformasie beskryf as ’n “continuing battle to assert
African hegemony in the context of a multiracial society”, en Joel
Netshitenze sê die volgende jaar transformasie is die proses …


  extending the power of the national liberation movement over all levels
  of power; the army, the police, the bureaucracy, intelligence structures,
  the judiciary, parastatals and agencies such as regulatory bodies, the
  public broadcaster and so on.

[Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.]

Dit gaan dus om beheer. Dit is transformasie, soos ’n mens uit die applous
kon aflei wat ek nou gekry het, en dit sluit die regsbank in. Beheer oor
die regsbank is deel van die program. Ons het die vordering van die program
reeds beleef, van die kies van ’n Springbokspan tot by waar medici mag
praktiseer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr J T DELPORT: Hon Speaker, the esteem with which the previous speaker is
regarded in his own ranks and his views on nationalisation point out why he
could never attain promotion in the ANC. Transformation is not a
stereotyped term. It is not a constitutional term. It is also not a legal
term. It is a political term.

I want to speak about transformation and particularly ask the question:
what is meant by transformation of the judiciary? Transformation is a
given. I myself have said as far back as 1990 that radical transformation
is imminent in South Africa, but what kind of transformation are we talking
about? The Freedom Charter speaks of “all our people live in brotherhood,
enjoying equal rights and opportunities”. In 1994 the White Paper on the
RDP said that transformation is, “securing for each citizen liberty,
prosperity and happiness”. We can identify with this; as well as with the
special steps to make the judiciary more representative of the diversity in
our country.

This in itself will be an asset, but the meaning that the ANC subscribes to
transformation shifted dramatically in 1997. At the 50th national
conference transformation was described as a “continuing battle to assert
African hegemony in the context of a multiracial society”, and Joel
Netshitenze said the following year that transformation was the process of
. . .

  extending the power of the national liberation movement over all levels
  of power; the army, the police, the bureaucracy, intelligence structures,
  the judiciary, parastatals and agencies such as regulatory bodies, the
  public broadcaster and so on.

[Interjections.][Applause.]

This is therefore about control. This is transformation, as one can deduce
from the applause that I have just received, and that includes the
judiciary. Control over the judiciary is part of the programme. We have
already experienced the progress of the programme; from choosing a
Springbok team to where medical practitioners may practice.]

The programme progresses – what about the judiciary? The independence of
the judiciary is a fundamental principle on which our Constitution is
built. It is the key to upholding the rule of law and to curtailing the old
notion that the king can do no wrong. It’s the key to a truly
constitutional state. Destroy it à la Mugabe, and your Constitution and
your country will be destroyed à la Zimbabwe.

Recently, the ruling party called for the collective mindset of the
judiciary to be transformed and for judges to be made accountable to the
electoral masses. What is meant is that judges should start to become more
executive-minded and that they should prosecute the Government’s policy
agenda. No, it is not the role of the courts to represent the will of the
majority, nor to implement government policy. It is the role and function
of the judiciary to uphold the law and the Constitution as the highest law
of the land, even despite and in the face of Government policy, if
necessary. Let me sound a clear warning: Transformation of the judiciary
according to the Joel Netshitenze programme may well be the beginning of
the end of the soul and spirit of the South African Constitution.

Ek wil afsluit. Die President is die hoofbeskermheer van die Grondwet. Die
Grondwet – die gees van die Grondwet - kan nie bly staan sonder ’n
onafhanklike regsbank nie. Selfs om slegs te praat van beheer en gesag oor
die regsbank is aggressie teen ons Grondwet. Mnr die President, beskerm die
onafhanklikheid van die regsbank en herken die blinde magsug in u geledere,
anders versaak u u verantwoordelikheid teenoor u land en my land, Suid-
Afrika. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

I would like to conclude. The President is the principal patron of the
Constitution. The Constitution – the spirit of the Constitution – cannot be
upheld without an independent judiciary. Even just talking about control
and power over the judiciary is aggression against our Constitution. Mr
President, protect the independence of the judiciary and recognise the
blind craving for power in your ranks, otherwise you forsake your
responsibility towards your country and my country, South
Africa.][Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mr
President, colleagues, members of Parliament, a country that is not
prepared to learn from the experiences of the past will be doomed to make
the same mistakes in the future. [Interjections.] So, sir, it is important
that you understand that - that we have to learn from the mistakes of the
past. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Had the government in 1955 listened to what our people said in the Freedom
Charter and had it responded to the needs of our people, then our country
and economy would not have wasted inherent potential and we would today be
a highly developed and more equitable economy and society.

History has shown that the socioeconomic choices made by the government in
1955 were incorrect and left a burdensome legacy that will take many years
to rectify. In overcoming these economic challenges, we have implemented a
number of economic and social development policies which are broadly
consistent with and draw inspiration from the Freedom Charter.

The challenges that our people faced in 1955 brought them together to
create a historic document that 50 years later would be relevant to a
democratic government. In 2005 the political, social and economic
structures of the country are substantively different from 1955, yet when
we look at the articulation of the economic needs expressed in the Freedom
Charter, we can see their relevance even today.

It is important that we reflect on the economic conditions at the time when
the Freedom Charter was born so as to better understand the approach to our
current economic development and the interventions that are now required.

The fifties was a successful period in our country’s economic history. We
had been going through a strong post-World War II economic boom of
sustained manufacturing growth. The gold reefs in the Free State had been
discovered a few years previously and the mining operations in this region
started to take effect by the mid-fifties, which resulted in an expansion
of our gold output and in concomitant manufacturing and services-sector
growth as suppliers to the mining industry.

The oppressive laws of apartheid notwithstanding, there was substantial
growth in the number of people that were employed in the manufacturing
sector, which had increased by 81% when compared to a decade earlier. This
expansion laid the foundations for the 1960s boom in which our growth rate
was over 7% per annum and our manufacturing output grew by 120%.

In order to protect these nascent manufacturing industries, a number of
import-substitution measures were implemented by the then department of
trade and industry. As the domestic market in the fifties was small by
world terms, the approach of the government was to protect domestic
industry so that it was able to meet domestic needs and it did not develop
manufacturing capacity for the export market. As the world increasingly
isolated the apartheid state, the government in response pursued an import
substitution industrialisation approach.

When one compares South Africa in 1955 with other developing countries
which were in a similar economic position, we can see how our progress was
further stifled by poor economic choices and the apartheid policies that
tried to capture the benefits of the country’s wealth for one grouping
only.

The drafters of the Freedom Charter were able to see this potential and
wanted to be equal participants in its development, but because of the
choices that were made as a country and as an economy, we did not live up
to our potential.

These incorrect choices contributed significantly towards the slower growth
that we had in the seventies and the negative growth that our economy
experienced in the eighties. These policies resulted in years of
technological advancement being lost as a result of international
isolation, and they also led to slower growth of manufacturing output and
lower rates of manufactured exports. Compounding this situation were the
policies of systematic disempowerment and poor education and training for
black workers, which led to low skill and productivity levels. Industry
became uncompetitive and was forced to hide behind protective barriers,
focusing on the domestic economy.

Our policy response in 1994 was to bring down those protections, improve
the competitiveness of industry, become more export orientated as an
economy, and create the conditions for sustained economic growth, while at
the same time becoming more inclusive by facilitating and supporting the
entry of black people, women and the youth into the economic mainstream.

Our approach, on the one hand, has been to ensure that there are greater
levels of economic growth and, on the other, to create the framework so
that our people indeed share in the country’s wealth and that there is work
and security for all. Ensuring that these issues are addressed
simultaneously is a critical part of our approach to providing leadership
to the economy.

While the first decade of democracy has delivered success - such as
macroeconomic stability, the opening up of our economy, the restructuring
of the economy and the achievement of a more export-orientated industry -
and given the major challenge that still faces us of higher and broadly
shared growth, in terms of where we are today we have to embark on a new
and deeper way of economic reform in order to overcome that challenge.

Of course we have to address the challenge of competitiveness, and there
are a lot of things that are being done in order to address
competitiveness, as articulated in the microeconomic reform strategy.
However, perhaps a more important and critical success factor that we need
in our country at the moment is to improve our industrial capabilities.
International experience has shown that successful developing countries are
those which invest heavily in their human resource capabilities and in
attracting and developing technologies.

Given our legacy of inadequate education and training for the majority of
our population, the low levels of investment in technology and insufficient
research and development spending by both the public and private sector, we
found ourselves lagging behind in terms of our industrial capabilities.

We have recognised that to improve our capabilities, there are a number of
interventions that need to be made, such as having higher levels of
education, particularly in maths and science; increasing the number of
tertiary and postgraduate students in engineering and science disciplines;
increasing our research and development spending in both the public and
private sector; improving the cross-pollination of ideas between tertiary
education institutions, government research facilities and the private
sector; promoting greater levels of further education and training amongst
employees; supporting the growth of our manufacturing sector through sector-
development programmes; and, finally, mobilising and intensifying domestic
investment, as well as attracting inward investment.

Inasmuch as we are pursuing higher growth, we are also pursuing the goal of
broadening participation, as this will also contribute to higher levels of
sustained growth. In this regard our broad-based black economic empowerment
programme; our small, medium and microenterprise support programmes and
focused interventions in the second economy will help achieve the goal of
inclusivity. So, hon Delport, for as long as we cannot achieve that
inclusivity, the peace that you enjoy today in a stable and democratic
South Africa will not be sustained.

To conclude, the development path pursued in the fifties could not meet the
objectives of the Freedom Charter. One can trace our current
competitiveness problems to the economic policy choices that were taken in
the fifties. As we celebrate the 50-year anniversary of the Freedom
Charter, we can see how correct and far-sighted the drafters were, and we
salute them. We owe it to them, to the present and future generations to
declare with confidence that indeed our people will share in the country’s
wealth and there will be work and security for all. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I have to admit today that I am
disappointed in the state of the nation address by the hon President.
[Interjections.] I am disappointed, because I had expected that the head of
state would address us on critical national issues, but he merely skirted
them. He hardly spent two minutes on the critical issue of HIV/Aids.
[Interjections.]

I wondered why the President had only skirted those national issues,
because he had all the time in the world. The reason, of course, lies in
the admission by the hon President that the ANC is not coping with
executing its own programme of action. Therefore, the point is that the ANC
government is failing. That is the point. [Interjections.]

Take the criminal justice system, for instance. It is in a state of
collapse. [Interjections.] It is not only the IFP that says so. Seven years
ago already the then Director-General of Justice warned that the justice
system was collapsing, and today, after seven more years, the answer is
very simple: Failure!

In fact, our criminal justice system is now under critical threat, and be
reminded, hon members, that when the justice system collapses, society
collapses, and South Africa will become nothing less than a failed state.
[Interjections.]

Last week 60 prominent jurists attended a workshop on the future of our
justice system; among them were numerous judges of our High Courts. What
they had to say about our justice system is almost too ghastly to mention.
Allegations made by these top jurists almost caused panic. They made
allegations such as that during the past 10 years a quarter of a million
people have been murdered in South Africa. This is the peace that the
previous speaker referred to.

In the year 2000, only 16 persons were convicted for every hundred murders.
After 1994 crime increased. [Interjections.] Damning references were made
by these top jurists to what they called “unspeakable violent crimes” and
“barbarism instead of nation-building”. [Interjections.]

Heyi wena, thola wena! Ke nna ya buang mona. Dula fatshe o kwale molomo.
[Laughter.] [Hey you! Keep quiet! I am the one speaking here. Sit down and
shut up![Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: They referred to overcrowded court rolls. They
referred … [Interjections.]

Wena ha o tsebe le ho buwa Sesotho hle, kwala molomo o dule fatshe! [You
don’t even know how to speak Sesotho, shut up and sit down!]

They referred to an unacceptably high family violence rate. They referred
to an inaccessible judiciary for ordinary people. They said that one third
of all crimes in South Africa were violent crimes.

In some areas, people are organising their own judicial systems, and
communities are increasingly developing more trust in these systems.

In some prisons up to 60 prisoners are locked up in cells intended for 18
people. Prison wardens are starting to admit that gangs run certain
prisons. Then, Judge Fagan, the Inspector-General of Prisons, said - not
the IFP, the Inspector-General – and I quote:

  Our prisons have become breeding areas for crime instead of a place of
  rehabilitation.


Judge Fagan also said:

  The conditions under which our prisoners have to live are totally
  inhuman.


You must listen, Minister of Correctional Services, but it is not your
problem, as I will indicate later.

An HON MEMBER: It’s your problem!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: It’s not my problem. It’s our problem.
[Interjections.] Judge Fagan continues, and I quote:

  In the youth section of a prison in Johannesburg, 101 youngsters have to
  use one toilet. When I was there …


The judge said -

  … that one toilet could not flush, because the water tank was empty.


He says:

  Skin disease and rape are rife.


Other judges were also extremely concerned. Judge Eberhardt Bertelsman
said:

  Our prisons were built to accommodate 113 000 inmates, but last September
  there were 187 000.


Overcrowding of 74 000 prisoners! The judge said, and I quote:

  As matters stand at the moment, rehabilitation in our jails is virtually
  impossible.

The Minister of Correctional Services is smiling. I think you should cry,
Minister. You shouldn’t smile! [Interjections.] [Applause.] Judge Mohammed
Navsa, a judge of our Supreme Court of Appeal, said, and I quote:

  I do not know what our people are to think of our judicial system.

The worst is still to come. Judge Dennis Davis said … [Interjections.] Why
don’t you shut up or ask for an opportunity to speak? They never trust you
to speak, because you always speak nonsense. [Laughter.] Judge Dennis Davis
said, and I quote:

  During a survey done under ANC elite …

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Please listen to the hon Van der Merwe.
[Interjections.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I can excuse them for not listening,
because the next sentence that I am going to read will be a real
revelation. Now listen to this … [Laughter.] Ja, you can laugh! Judge
Dennis Davis said:

  During a survey done under elite ANC officials, it was found that 66% of
  them do not have any trust in the criminal justice system.

[Interjections.] Sixty-six percent of you with your big mouths, you do not
have trust in the system! [Interjections.] [Applause.] What a disastrous
admission! What an admission, Mr President! [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The core reason for the crisis is that our prisons are in a horrible and
inhuman state because of the massive failure of government over 10 long
years to improve our crime rate. [Interjections.] I will come to that.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order!

Hanyane, hanyane! Wena dula fatshe, kwala molomo. Ha se wena ya buang, ke
nna. [Slowly, slowly! You sit down, shut up. It is not you who are
speaking, it’s me.]

The solution to overcrowded prisons is not larger prisons, but less crime.
[Interjections.] The worst forms of human rights violations are committed
in our overcrowded prisons, such as rape, murder, assault, corruption and
human beings being subjected to horrible and inhuman conditions. Why is
that so? Why are we saddled with a gross violation of human rights in our
prisons? Why are our prisons overcrowded? Why are prisons the breeding
ground for crime? Why the paralysing accusation … [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, can we have some order?

Mr D V BLOEM: [Inaudible.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Bloem, is that a point of order, or do you want to ask a
question?

Mr D V BLOEM: Madam Speaker, it’s a point of question.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: No, no questions. You cannot put an intelligent
question, so sit down. [Laughter.] [Applause.] Why do we have ...

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it
parliamentary for the biggest-mouthed member of Parliament to talk about
other people’s big mouths? [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: It’s fine for Koos. [Laughter.] Hon member, please proceed.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I think the hon Minister tried to make
a joke. Maybe we should laugh. [Laughter.] Why do we have this situation? I
will tell you why. Because over a long period of 10 years the ANC has been
underestimating the crime crisis. That is the problem. The problem does not
lie with the prison departments. They are the victims of the system.
[Interjections.] That is where the problems end. This is why I have a
little sympathy for the Minister with the big mouth here. [Laughter.]

The IFP proposes an urgent change of mindset by the ANC, in fact, a
paradigm shift.

Mnr D V BLOEM: Mev die Speaker, wie het die departement vir 10 jaar
bestuur? Was dit nie ’n IVP-lid nie? Dit was die IVP. Dit was nie die ANC
nie. [Gelag.] [Applous.] [Mr D V BLOEM: Madam Speaker, who managed the
department for ten years? Was it not an IFP member? It was the IFP. It was
not the ANC. [Laughter.][Applause.]]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member! Take your seat, hon Bloem. Hon Van der
Merwe, please finish your speech.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, if that hon member will just open his
ears, he will hear what I am saying. The problem is not caused by the
prison department, but by the whole system, because the courts and the
police are not in a position to finalise criminal investigations and
trials, and then the victim at the end is the prison system. This is why I
have sympathy for the loud-mouthed Minister over here. [Laughter.]

We propose an urgent change of mindset by the ANC, in fact a paradigm
shift, namely that a total onslaught on crime be urgently launched, a total
onslaught in which all state departments and civil society are involved.

I wish to refer to the word “transformation” that has in some instances
been transformed into nothing less than racism, especially in appointing
judges to the High Court. [Interjections.] Just listen to me.

When an excellent lawyer and loyal ANC struggle fundamentalist such as Adv
Jeff Budlender is not made a judge because he is white, then the time has
come for the President to intervene, because if Budlender cannot be
appointed because he is white, which white man will ever be appointed as a
judge? [Interjections.] And if white lawyers are not to be appointed
judges, let us at least be honest and tell them: Because you are white, you
will not be appointed as judges. [Interjections.]

The current attack on white judges is also based, to a degree, on racism.
There is no need for any judge who was appointed before 1994 to line up at
the doors of the Judicial Services Commission. They have all sworn
allegiance to the Constitution. [Interjections.] Problems on the Bench
should be dealt with much more sensitively, rather than to have dog fights
between a Judge President and prominent advocates in the media. The victim
then is the judiciary, which of course we cannot afford. [Interjections.]

In conclusion, Mr President, it is my right as an opposition speaker to
voice my concerns and criticism. The IFP, however, does not only criticise,
we also propose solutions. [Interjections.] Despite our well-intended
criticism, we in the IFP honour and respect President Thabo Mbeki as the
President of our country, and we wish him well.

Mooi loop, mnr die President. [Go well, Mr President.] Hamba kahle, Mzizi.
[Ihlombe.][Go well, Mzizi. [Applause.]]

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Speaker, will the hon member take a question?

The SPEAKER: No, he is gone, hon member. [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, no, I am not gone. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Van der Merwe, leave the podium.

Dr J T DELPORT: His time has not expired.

The SPEAKER: His time has totally expired.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, President,
Deputy President, hon members, indeed it seems we don’t live in the same
country. When hon Van Der Merwe said that nothing had been said in the
state of the nation address, I wondered what he meant. He cited the issue
of HIV and Aids that the President, indeed, articulated in his speech. I am
not sure how much more we needed to have said.

Clearly, we cannot say that nothing has been said just because there are
certain things that we ourselves wish could be said. Our participation in
this debate allows us an opportunity to do exactly that. I am sure some
members who will come after me, rather than saying that things have not
been said, will articulate exactly what they want.

As we begin the second decade of freedom, we are conscious of the
foundations we have laid in transforming our society. We are also proud, as
a people and as a country, that we have been able to realise meaningful
changes in our first decade of freedom. This would not have happened had it
not been for the policies, legislation and programmatic intervention that
our government has put in place. It is also true that such visible changes
would not have occurred without your leadership, Mr President, and that of
former President Mandela, supported by the collective leadership of the
people’s movement, the ANC. [Applause.]

Mr President, during the opening of the third democratic Parliament in May
2004, you emphasised the important responsibility we all carry as the
public representatives and government in ensuring that, through our
actions, we push back the frontiers of poverty. Through the programme of
action you outlined then, it became clear that the policy objectives we had
set for ourselves as a country remained valid and that our most critical
challenges lay in the implementation of such policies.

You also emphasised the strengthening of our system of governance as a
critical element to support delivery. Most importantly, you also
appreciated that the role of the state in economic growth cannot be distant
or be that of only facilitating. Rather, as a developmental state, we would
have to play an active role in growing our economy. Indeed, one cannot but
agree with that analysis.

As a state, there are leverages that we have at our disposal to intervene
in the stimulation of the economy. Some of these are in the areas of
energy, infrastructure, water, telecommunication and transport. Regarding
the area of infrastructure, we have already announced key projects that are
going to be undertaken by our public entities. First of these investments
will be in the region of R165 billion over a period of five years, and they
are: the expansion of the Durban Port, the expansion of the Cape Town
Container Terminal, and the improvement in the container facility to
increase fruit export and the multiproduct pipeline between Durban and
Johannesburg.

Mr President, you have announced that the key infrastructure providers will
remain in the state’s hands in order to lead the investment programme. You
have also indicated that this does not mean that there is no role for
private sector investment. When we talk about sharing wealth, as our
Freedom Charter states, we should also look at how we as a state can, in a
meaningful way, redirect the economic activities to those depressed areas
in order to spread the benefits to the majority of our people.

We have put in place the rural and urban renewal strategy so as to focus on
those areas that are underdeveloped. The spatial development zone, which is
an integral part of this strategy, has started to show some success. Those
of us who may know or come from KwaZulu-Natal will know of the Lubombo
Spatial Development Initiative which falls under the Umkhanyakude district
- one of our rural nodes. This initiative has opened opportunities for
tourism, which are enhanced by the St Lucia Heritage Site. The Mbazwana
market is now working and has created opportunities for local farmers and
other traders to market their goods. The cotton ginnery in Makhathini has
also expanded the agricultural opportunities for small-scale farmers in the
area.

If one looks at some of the initiatives regarding urban renewal, I would
like to cite the investment by the Public Investment Corporation in
constructing the Mabopane shopping mall. This mall has rejuvenated the
economic activity in that area. Through this project, we have created a
link between the established retail sector and the informal or
microbusiness enterprises. The support by other state entities, such as the
Industrial Development Corporation, has also made an impact through
bringing into light some new entrepreneurs in the economic mainstream.

Mangisho futhi ukuthi ukulungisa imithetho yokuxhasa labo abasafufusayo
kwezamabhizinisi sekusenze sabona ukuthi mkhulu umsebenzi esiwenzile,
njengohulumeni. Ngikhuluma nje, kuyo le Ndlu yesishayamthetho, kungekudala
sizobe sikhuluma ngomthetho wamaco-operatives neco-operatives banking Bill.
Lezo ngezinye zezinto ezizoxhasa osomabhizinisi abasafufusayo. Lokhu
kuzoxhasa umsebenzi obusuvele wenziwa yimiphakathi engingabala kuyo
izitokfela, omasingcwabisane kanye nama-village banks. Ngezinye zezinto
lezo abantu abazama ngazo ukuthi babambe iqhaza kwezomnotho. (Translation
of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[I want to mention that the amendments to legislation regarding black
economic empowerment have made us realise that we as the Government have
done a lot of service delivery. As I speak, this Parliament will be
debating the Bill on co-operatives and co-operatives banking. Those are
some of the projects that will finance emerging businesses. This project is
intended to finance projects that already exist, such as stokvels, burial
clubs and village banks, to mention a few. Those are some of the projects
through which the community can participate in the economy.]

Mr President, hon members, we must indeed be proud of the interventions
that we have made. We are already seeing some positive impact of the
implementation of the broad-based economic empowerment policy and
legislation. The most recent of these is the birth of the uMzansi account –
one of the deliverables of the Financial Sector Charter. Already, as we
speak, about 570 000 accounts have been opened in almost all the major
financial institutions. Through this facility, many of our people who not
so long ago were considered unbankable and risky can now have access to our
financial system. Again, this shows that, through the leadership of
government in policy development and management, we can make even greater
progress than what we have done today. [Applause.]

During the state of the nation address last Friday, in this very Assembly,
the President gave an account of what our government has done in
implementing the programme of action as announced in May 2004. At the
centre of your input, Mr President, you reminded all of us that what we
have done in the past years was to actually give meaning to what the people
of South Africa envisaged in 1955 when they drafted the Freedom Charter in
Kliptown. In doing so, you have raised our collective conscience that what
the people of South Africa said then remains their wish even today,
regardless of the many years that have passed since the drafting of this
document. What it therefore means is that the Freedom Charter is a living
document that must continue to find expression in our policies, legislation
and programmes - even of this very House.

Mr President, when the people of South Africa said that South Africa
belongs to all who live in it, black and white, they made a very profound
declaration of our nationhood. Any people in the world would define who
they are in relation to the territorial boundaries that belong to them. The
patriotism that arises out of our affinity to the land is in itself the
product of the relationship that we have to the land as an economic asset.
It’s very interesting that even the former apartheid government’s national
anthem - when one listens to the phrases - says, “Ons sal lewe; Ons sal
sterwe; Ons vir jou, Suid Afrika”. It was indeed an indication of an
affinity that they had with South Africa as a land. I think it is true
today that when we remember Kliptown, we can say we are all South African.

However, our people in Kliptown did not end with that declaration. They
further articulated interventions that would have to be undertaken to
realise this vision. One of those was that the land must be shared among
those who work it. What this clause in the Freedom Charter means is that we
cannot talk of a South Africa that belongs to all who live in it if we do
not, in a measurable way, deal with the equitable ownership and use of land
by all South Africans. [Applause.] It was therefore correct that we
included land reform in our Constitution as a fundamental principle for
redressing inequality in the ownership and use of such land.

Ngingasho ngithi kule minyaka eyi-10 eyedlule kuningi esesikwenzile
ukubuyisela imihlaba ebantwini. Sibonile-ke ukuthi yize imihlaba ibuyele
ebantwini, okunye okubalulekile okufanele sikwenze ukuthi sibaxhase
ngezinto zokulima ukuze bakwazi ukuwusebenzisa umhlaba, ukwazi ukubanikeza
nomnotho njengesizwe. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[I can safely say that a decade ago we did a lot to give land back to the
beneficiaries. We have realised that, although the land has been given back
to beneficiaries, we still need to help them with equipment so that they
are able to use the land, and can generate economic growth on their own as
a nation.]

While we have moved on policy and legislation on these areas, it is sad to
note that there are still those among us who feel that access to and use of
land by the majority should and must not happen because it will
disadvantage the privileges of some who have had access to and use of the
land as a result of the dispossession. The Sunday Independent, in this
Sunday’s edition, relates a very sad story of how tension is looming in
Limpopo between the restitution claimants and the current landowners, where
some of the landowners are questioning the validity of the claims.

The Freedom Charter, in its subclause about land, also deals with the
support that is required to actually assist those who would have received
the land. I think it is important for us to note one of our programmes here
in Cape Town. Through the share equity scheme, the initiative of Paul
Cluver has resulted in new black farmers who have actually entered the wine
export market. The success story of Thandi wines, which now has become a
well-known label in the export market, has come out of that share equity
scheme where, indeed, we can say the land has been shared among those who
work it.

Fifty years later, the voices of our people in Kliptown fill our lives as
their vision of a South Africa finds meaning and reality in policies,
legislation and programmes we implement here today. When we celebrate 50
years of the Freedom Charter, we must do so with complete awareness that
the government of the people, led by the ANC, remains true to the wishes of
our people carved over 50 years of painful struggle. [Applause.]

Mr M DIKO: Madam Speaker, hon President, Deputy President, hon Cabinet
Ministers and hon members, our Constitution is renowned throughout the
world for the comprehensive expression that it gives to the freedom and
equality of all South Africans. Central to the Constitution is the specific
and implicit tone on social justice that it seeks to establish.

We are building a democratic state on the understanding that, irrespective
of a person’s social standing, he or she is entitled to a certain basic
quality of life. Yet in our country, millions of people live below the
breadline. This grinding poverty, Mr President, mocks the tone of social
justice that is so fundamental in our Constitution. For these millions of
disadvantaged people their daily suffering is immediate, while the
Constitution’s guarantees seem distant and ideal.

In this context, the provision of a safety net for these desperately poor
millions is one of the foremost responsibilities of our government that
would like to call itself democratic in the true sense of the word, in
other words, a government that calls itself democratic not merely because
it received the majority of votes, but a government that promotes and
defends the rights of all its citizens.

The UDM therefore welcomes the hon President’s assurance, and I quote:

  ... that government has continued to allocate more resources and put in
  more effort to provide services to society at large and a safety net for
  the indigent.

However, the UDM, in its interaction with the public, has discovered
disturbing reports of people who were registered for grants just prior to
the previous elections, but who have now been cut off. Quite
understandably, these people now feel that they were duped into being mere
voting cattle. Whether this is true or not, the fact remains that they
qualified for grants because they had real needs, and ... “... basalamba
Mongameli.” [… they are still starving, President.]

Similarly, there are widespread complaints and frustrations regarding
housing, electricity, water, clinics, schools and community development. To
the best of my knowledge, Mr President …

The SPEAKER: Order, hon member! Hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it
proper to say something as outrageous as the speaker has said, and then to
qualify it by saying “whether it is true or not”? If it is not true, why is
he saying it? [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, we will have to look at the Hansard to see what
you actually said and how you put it. Then we will be able to determine ...
[Interjections.] Proceed, hon member. [Interjections.]

Mr M DIKO: These people are merely asking to receive that which has been
promised to them and to have the correct and self-serving officials who
neglect them removed. If the government fails to demonstrate more
effectively that democracy can deliver social justice, then democracy
itself comes under threat.

Declaring protests illegal will not remove threats. To the best of my
knowledge, Mr President, these people are not rioting because they need
luxury cars or designer clothes. What they need is basic services. I thank
you.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Speaker, His Excellency, the
President of the Republic of South Africa, hon Deputy President and hon
members, the editorial of Die Burger today warns the sporting fraternity of
this country that it has already received a yellow card, and if it
continues to tarry on transformation, it will soon be receiving a red card.
[Interjections.]

Prof Gangat, writing to the Sunday Argus, warns that South Africa’s
deprived majority is getting fed up with transformation which is beginning
to engage the reverse gear. This immediately raises the question of why
those who benefited from the apartheid legislation of the past, and indeed
those who continue to lick their boots, want to make such a noise about
transformation, when in fact they should be putting more energy into making
it happen.

Mr Lee should begin to attend these meetings in the Eastern Cape when these
serious matters are being discussed, instead of going to play golf at
Walmer. [Laughter.] This is where he should be. Then he would begin to
understand even the definition of the concepts.

He has the audacity to stand in front of this august House and distort the
presentation by Abdul Minty to the United Nations on our desire to get to
the merit selecting situation in this country. [Interjections.] What did he
say? He said what we asked him to say. And this is what we said, when he
was lolling in his erstwhile privileges, bestowed upon him by Hertzog in
1935. This is what we asked Minty to say to the United Nations. There is no
country in the world which, only on the basis of people’s skin colour,
would deny them access to the facilities and amenities of their country.
What are we doing today? What we are doing today is to get South Africa
where we always wanted it to be - a South Africa where all its people
belong to it, not only in terms of the Constitution, Mr Delport, but in
real terms of access, better facilities and participatory democracy.

In respect of sport, the facilities are certainly not in Kwazakhele,
Esikhawini and Manenberg; the facilities are elsewhere. It is our
responsibility to make sure that our children and our communities also have
access to equal or even better facilities. How do we do it? The way to do
it is to dip our burners for those who went to Kliptown in 1955 and salute
them for providing us with the lodestone that must continue to pull us
towards that objective.

Nonracialism is not an event. The fact that we are sitting here now,
enjoying the benefits of our miseries and our woes, our broken sorrows and
our broken and sorrowful hearts, is because you yourselves were
beneficiaries of that blood and those wheels that continue to bleed on our
bodies. [Applause.]

Nonracialism, on the contrary, is going to come, Mr President, as you
correctly said, when we transform every nook and crevice of our society.
And there are no sacred cows in this respect. Not even our political
parties, sport facilities or schools are sacred cows.

We cannot do what the DA is asking us to do – to just fold our arms and
watch transformation taking its course spontaneously. There is nothing like
that. Our government must and will intervene, and prod society along
towards our ultimate goal.

South Africa cannot loll in the comfort of knowing that in 80 minutes they
may win a soccer game, in 90 minutes they may win a rugby game, but in the
long term they lose the cohesion and dignity of the rest of society. South
Africa must get off the horse of individualistic ambitions and get onto the
horse of wanting to build a nation. Whilst Mr Lee was lolling there in Port
Elizabeth, nation-building was a product of our sweat. We ran up and down
the length and breadth of this country, and indeed the world, to canvass
support for the nation of South Africa to be born. Sport was able to
deliver a seat for Mr Lee to sit in this Parliament today. [Applause.]

Mr President, we are not prepared to watch our children sit on the benches
and sing in the choirs at the stadium. We want to move the situation
forward. We want to assist them to catch up with those who were already put
there for no reason other than being beneficiaries of apartheid and
colonialism. Merit will come when that catching-up has happened.

You cannot expect the boys of Kearsney College to go and play a match
against the boys of Esikhawini and call that an equitable situation based
on merit. There is nothing like that. You can’t take the boys from
Manenberg and let them play against the boys of Bishops College and call
that … [Interjections.] I am pleased that they can now beat Bishops. That
is transformation. [Laughter.] When Bishops is beaten by Manenberg, that is
when we are able to say, this is transformation in the Western Cape.
However, it cannot be the case elsewhere, because other places are still
lolling in those benefits of yesterday.

For this reason, we have called upon the sports administrators to sacrifice
a little in terms of wanting to win, because even when we use all these
semi-lilywhite teams, we lose. [Interjections.] We therefore believe we
must begin to look at the broader virtue, the value of a broader South
African nation that is proud to be participating in the international
fraternity. This will be what transformation is. [Applause.]

Today sport has a lot of economic perks. A lot of money goes into the
pockets of those that play sport. [Interjections.] Whilst Mr Leon was
patrolling the borders with the ships, I was playing sport in this country
– on the veld. [Applause.] Whilst he enjoyed the greens of Kearsney
College, I played among the bottles of Cradock and Alice in Port Elizabeth.
That is where we come from, sir. It was not only discovered yesterday. It
has been there a long time, whilst you were enjoying your benefits.

Whilst Mr Lee did not know even know how to spell the term nonracialism, we
were espousing and propagating it. [Applause.] This is why he cannot
differentiate, for instance, between Basil D’Oliveira and this young boy
who was playing last week, Peterson. How can you compare these
incomparables? It is precisely because you do not know where they come
from, what the difference is and where you come from, as a matter of fact.
[Applause.]

Our economic programmes, in our view, must also use sport to impact on the
second economy. The 2010 World Cup must not only benefit the first economy.
It must also begin to benefit the owners of bed-and-breakfast
establishments, the taxi owners and the caterers of the hinterlands. That
is what we want to do in accepting your challenge to move our community
forward. We agree with you, Mr President. We have come a long way. The
changes at school level and at the junior levels must be assisted to impact
at the national level.

The Freedom Charter continues to be the lodestone that guides us in these
things. Mr President, your leadership inspires us, irrespective of the
gaunt skeletons that continue to rattle in the apartheid cupboard with
years of injustice and greed. We will march on towards the vision of our
forefathers and foremothers. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon President, Deputy President, hon Ministers
and members, in his state of the nation address, the President has sketched
for us, broadly, the progress our country has made over the past 10 years,
with a frank assessment of what the critical outstanding issues are that
must be addressed by this government in the coming year.

With reference to the economy, the President said, and I quote:


  … in May last year, in the aftermath of our third democratic elections,
  we set out the programme of action of government to achieve higher rates
  of economic growth and development, improve the quality of life of all
  our people, and consolidate our social cohesion.

In this regard, the President quoted Rudolf Gouws of the Rand Merchant
Bank. I concur with Mr Gouws’ assessment that government has a good track
record in implementing prudent fiscal policies. However, the slow economic
growth and the persistent high unemployment figures in our country continue
to concern us.

Government has chosen the path of trade liberalisation and we might argue
that this is unavoidable in today’s fast-globalising world economy.
Government must look at ways of limiting the negative effects of trade
liberalisation, such as unemployment, especially on women. If we examine
the effects of trade liberalisation on the clothing and textile industry in
the Western Cape, we must admit that small and medium-sized enterprises
have been most affected because they could not invest in the new technology
needed to be competitive. More than 42 000 clothing and textile industry
workers have been retrenched between 1997 and 2000, most of whom have not
been able to find other jobs and this, of course, adds to the social burden
on government.

With reference to the liberalisation of the telecommunications industry, I
concur with the President that it is unacceptable that our fixed-line rates
should be ten times those of developed countries, and I urge government to
do everything in its power to remove the impediments that stand in the way
of a second national fixed-line operator.

The President also mentioned in his speech the intended deployment of
community development workers at local government level. My question, Mr
President, is: What exactly will be the role of these workers? Will they be
appointed by the municipalities, by the province or by national government?
Will this deployment be done by way of a pilot project first to evaluate
any teething problems? What will be the cost and extent of this programme,
and what are the desired or intended outcomes?

Regarding safety and security, it is commendable that government has
deployed the police on trains to secure the safety of passengers. There is,
however, a great need for improved safety at our public hospitals and our
schools. It is not enough for government to say these public places are no-
go areas for criminals. Security personnel are needed to improve security.

I also believe that the hon Minister of Labour responded to the ACDP’s
input on how to fight the HIV/Aids scourge that is facing our nation. The
hon Rev Meshoe implored government to emphasise abstinence before marriage
and staying faithful to one’s spouse during marriage. The Minister of
Labour yesterday blamed the church and church leaders for failing to spread
the message of abstinence.

Let me remind the hon Minister that the church has not failed. The Bible,
which we believe is the Word of God, cannot lie. Abstinence is the answer.
The church has preached this for centuries. The success of Uganda’s victory
is that both church leaders and leaders of government, including the
president and his wife, have promoted the message of abstinence. The day
our government, including our President, follow their example, and we as a
nation submit ourselves to God’s Word, is the day we will see the beginning
of the end to the HIV/Aids scourge. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Madam speaker, the President, Deputy
President, Ministers, comrades and hon members:


  There shall be peace and friendship;
  South Africa shall be a fully independent state which respects the rights
  and sovereignty of all nations;
  South Africa shall strive to maintain world peace and the settlement of
  all international disputes by negotiations – not war;


  Peace and friendship amongst all our people shall be secured by upholding
  the equal rights opportunities and status of all;
  The right of all peoples of Africa to independence and self-governing
  shall be recognised, and shall be the basis of close co-operation …

This is what the people of this country declared 50 years ago, led by the
ANC which has always been the driving force for progressive change.

Mr President, in outlining the key elements of our international agenda and
programme, you said:


  We shall do all this, Madam Speaker, conscious of the responsibility that
  we have not only to our own citizens, but also to the rest of humanity in
  pursuing the goal of a better world.


  In the first instance, our greatest challenge in this regard is to
  consolidate the African agenda, and we can draw inspiration from the many
  positive developments on the continent since we addressed the Joint
  Sitting of Parliament last May.

This illustrates that the ANC-led government has been true to the
international vision and tradition of our people and the founding leaders
of our movement.

We continue to give concrete expression to one of the fundamental aims and
objectives of the ANC, which is the cause of the national liberation and
the right to independence of nations in Africa and the rest of the world.

In our work on the continent, we continue to be guided by a basic
understanding so simply put by our first Nobel Laureate, Chief Albert
Luthuli, when he delivered his lecture at the University of Oslo on 11
December 1961. He said, and I quote:


  All Africa has this single aim: our goal is a united Africa in which the
  standards of life and liberty are constantly expanding … This goal,
  pursued by millions of our people with revolutionary zeal … carries the
  only real promise of peace in Africa.

It is also in this same context that Africa’s liberation was expressed by
President Mandela in his address to the OAU Summit in Tunis in 1994, when
he said, and I quote:


  If freedom was the crown which the fighters of liberation sought to place
  on the head of Mother Africa, let the upliftment, the happiness,
  prosperity and comfort of her children be the jewel of that crown.

This means that our engagement with the world is guided by the same goals
that we pursue every day of our lives here at home, that is, pushing back
the frontiers of poverty and underdevelopment, and the constant expansion
of the vistas for human advancement and freedom.

Thus, Madam Speaker, the founding President of our democratic state
redefined our relations with the continent, away from being a source of
suffering and pain, towards being a potent force for good and the all-round
regeneration and advancement of our continent.

It is this perspective that continues to inspire and guide us even today as
we find our bearings through a maze of complexities in the execution of our
tasks.

We remain consistent because our approach is rooted in a rich legacy of
practical experience, intellectual interrogation and moral judgment.

It is in this context, Mr President, that we salute you for your leadership
in ensuring that, no matter what the difficulties, we stay on course, that
we do not betray our people simply because the alternative may bring short-
term comfort and popularity. Aluta Continua! [Applause.]

It is also against this background that we wish to make it clear that, in
whatever form it arises, any fundamental challenge to our expression of
support to the advancement of our continent, such as the now fashionable
questioning in some quarters of the time devoted by the President and the
Deputy President to the affairs of the continent, we shall treat with the
contempt it deserves. We do so fully confident of the support of our people
and the verdict of history. We shall do so in the knowledge that the
security of our own future objectively depends on an Africa that is free,
peaceful, democratic and prosperous.

Thus we shall continue to strengthen the AU and its organs; we shall
continue to support and advance the consolidation of democracy in the DRC
and Burundi; we shall contribute what we can to the post-conflict
reconstruction in Angola and the Comoros. We are consequently proud that
our country is currently playing host to the prime minister of Angola, who
is here as a guest of the Deputy President, and we will continue to support
the legitimate struggle of the people of Western Sahara based on their
right to self-determination.

South Africa and SADC shall continue to work with and support Zimbabwe.
[Interjections.] As of now, we are looking forward to the coming elections
in March. The registration of candidates of contending parties is going to
be completed at the end of this week, which will then mark the formal
beginning of the election campaign, and thereafter the invitations to the
observers from the SADC and others will be issued. And, of course, SADC
will then go to Zimbabwe, Tony.

As you indicated, Mr President, we are inspired by the comprehensive
agreement between the government of Sudan and the SPLM, ending the decades-
long conflict on our continent. On 18 February 2005, we shall be chairing
the post-conflict reconstruction meeting here in the Mother City. Delegates
at this meeting will discuss the agreement itself and map out the action
plan for the committee in the coming years. The challenge is how to make
sure that in the next six years the lives of the people in Sudan,
especially southern Sudan, change for the better to an extent that they
vote to stay in a united Sudan. The alternative will have wide-ranging
negative implications.

Our government, together with Unisa, is participating in an important
exchange of ideas with the senior leadership of the SPLM, and we have
started a long process of human resource development and capacity-building
in a trilateral agreement with Unisa, the SPLM and the South African
government.

Mr President, we support you in your task in Côte d’Ivoire that you were
asked to carry out by the AU.

The formation of the transitional Federal Government of Somalia heralds new
hope. The re-establishment of the state of Somalia is not going to be easy,
but we as part of the AU, have no choice but to participate in that
herculean task.

Of course, we also support your position, Mr President, on Togo and the
holding of democratic elections in line with that country’s constitution.

However, the attainment of sustainable peace and enduring stability on the
African continent can only become a reality if there is also sustainable
socio-economic development. Therefore we must focus on the implementation
of Nepad programmes. The only concern is the much-needed resources to carry
out this work. We must also strive to make resources available from our own
continent for these processes.

We are indeed encouraged that the world’s decision-makers who gathered at
Davos sought to address the global and African challenges of poverty,
further paving the way for us, together with our international partners, to
be able to realise our development objectives.

We are concerned by the report on the millennium development goals by Mr
Jeffrey Sachs that Sub-Saharan Africa demonstrates a widespread shortfall
for most of the MDGs and is at the epicentre of crisis, and as a
consequence requires specific poverty scale-up interventions by all.
Fortunately, the same report makes the bold statement that the MDGs can
still be achieved by 2015 if there is renewed and intensive effort by all
parties.

Mr President, Africa will only be able to boast about being free when its
women are free. We ought to acknowledge your efforts, both in South Africa,
and on the continent and globally. Of course, at the end of this month and
the beginning of March, there will be a strong delegation to New York to
participate in Beijing Plus Ten.

As part of our contribution in mobilising for the African Renaissance, we
will be participating in a conference with members of the Caribbean
diaspora in March.

We are in full agreement with what the President said about the Middle
East. The resolution of that conflict will contribute tremendously to world
peace.

In yesterday’s debate, the DA heckled hon A H Gaum. The heckling was rather
unfortunate. They said, derogatively, that he should be an ambassador for
South Africa, only because he was talking positively about his country.
[Interjections.] I would have thought that all members of this House see
themselves as ambassadors of South Africa. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

I also found it rather contradictory that the hon Sheila Camerer claimed
that she supports the Homecoming Revolution, but then she went on,
indirectly, to give a litany of reasons why South Africans abroad should
not come home. In essence, she was saying she doesn’t support them coming
home. [Interjections.]

However, Mr President, in support of what you have said, we are instructing
our missions to work closely with Angel Jones and Marina Smithers of the
Homecoming Revolution and hope that this project will be a great success.
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, South Africa belongs to all who live in it.
The question is: Is that true for black and for white? Economically this
government did well – and I have said that more than once. However, I want
to focus today on black-white relations. For ten years, sir, I have
listened to speeches in this Assembly in which whites are accused of
racism, while blacks can do no wrong. I am tired of double standards of
political correctness that force us to silently bear these attacks. We must
look each other squarely in the eye today and honestly talk about this. We
must calculate what the effect of this is on all South Africans out there.

The ANC Youth League sees it very simply. Mr Ntshangase says the following,
and I quote:

  When a black person says he does not like white people that is not
  racism. It is prejudice. Blacks have no capacity to be racist. They can
  only respond to it.

Dr Rufus Nortjé, a young Afrikaner doctor, works in the Mmamethlake
Hospital in Mpumalanga. Last week three young black men came into the
hospital, placed a gun against his head and threatened to kill him after
they asked him whether he was Afrikaans. What does being Afrikaans have to
with something like this? According to the nurses, they warned him that
they wanted to kill him because he was white. And it happened. The question
is: What does the ANC Youth League say about this? Prejudice or blatant
racism?

Yesterday the Indian shops in Mpumalanga were destroyed while the black
shops were not touched. Prejudice or racism? I know these are dangerous
things that we are talking about.

Mr Jack de Gouveia was a 70-year-old farmer in the Heidelberg area. He died
in December last year. He was beaten on his head after which a rope was
tied around his neck. He was fastened to a vehicle and dragged behind the
vehicle. He died of strangulation as a result of being dragged behind the
vehicle. Four young black men were arrested. Some of them are 15 years old.
What does the ANC Youth League say: Is it prejudice or racism?

Where do these young people come from, sir? They were not in the struggle.
They do not know teargas and police action. They were born in 1990 when Mr
Mandela was set free. What motivates them to act like this? They were
raised on political speeches by all of us and the ANC and one-sided
television propaganda programmes. This has created a climate within which
young people act in this racist way and believe that it carries the
necessary approval of somebody somewhere. According to these speeches and
television programmes, whites have done only bad things for 350 years and
blacks have done only good. This is the distortion of our history. Our
history is not that simple.

In our history there were bad white people and good white people, but also
good black people and bad black people – and there are many examples. Let
me give you one. In 1830 Mzilikazi, the leader of the Matebele, attacked
the Barolong in what is today the Free State, killed many men, enslaved the
children and took some of their women. The Matebele stole the Barolong’s
land. Chief Moroka of the Barolong then signed a treaty with the Afrikaner
Boers. In October 1836 Mzilikazi tried to kill the Afrikaners at Vegkop. He
did not succeed, but he stole all the cattle. They had no food, no oxen and
no means of moving their wagons. Chief Moroka of the Barolong then sent
oxen to pull the wagons. The Afrikaners were moved to his place at Thaba
Nchu. There they stayed for a month while he helped them to recover. Why
don’t we also hear this part of history?

Go and read about the relationships between the Afrikaner and the Zulu
people in Natal and how, after the Battle of Blood River in 1840, they
handed rocks of peace to each other, and in 1866 came together at Blood
River and stacked rocks as a symbol of their peace, how Cetswayo gave land
to the Boers after they helped and protected him. The Republic of Vryheid
dates from that period. Interestingly, eventually the Zulu King Dinizulu
and the Boers ended up on St Helena, both banned to the island by the
British.

Sir, you can interpret this history as you please. The point I would like
to make is: Our history is not a simple black-white confrontation where the
one side is always bad and the other always good, as it is sometimes
portrayed around here.

The Ivory Coast was seen as one of the model states of Africa. The
democracy and stability of the Ivory Coast was suddenly destroyed after 40
years by a military coup in 1999. What went wrong in the Ivory Coast? The
question is: What will South Africa look like in 2034? It will then be
precisely 40 years after the transfer of power to the ANC. Will there be
harmony between the different groups? Let’s hope. Or will our children then
fight each other, as in the Ivory Coast? The decisions taken in this
Assembly and the speeches we make will largely determine this in the end,
in 40 years’ time.

The ANC Youth League says that one can have 40 years of antiwhite speeches,
because it won’t have any effect on black people because blacks have no
capacity to be racist. What nonsense, sir!

The big hero of the ANC Youth League is Mr Mugabe. This weekend Mr Mugabe
launched an attack on the American secretary of state, Ms Condoleezza Rice.
According to Mr Mugabe Ms Rice should know, because she comes from a
history of slavery, that the white man is not a friend. Sir, that is crude
racism and a generalisation. All whites are enemies, according to Mr
Mugabe. Why is this not condemned? If that is the type of politics we are
going to practise, we will end up like the Ivory Coast.

I prefer the old Mugabe. During the independence celebrations of Zimbabwe
in April 1980, Mr Mugabe said the following, and I quote:


      Oppression and racism are inequalities that must never find scope in
      our political and social system. An evil remains an evil, whether by
      white against black or black against white.

Sir, the ANC is as guilty in creating this climate. Read the documents on
the ANC website. If you do not join the ANC, you are the enemy, according
to those documents. Attack the enemy on all fronts, say the documents. We
on this side of the Assembly are described as, “broadly speaking,
counterrevolutionaries”. [Interjections.]

Sir, during the past ten years we in the FF+ have spoken in this Assembly
about co-operation and reconciliation. Read my speeches. They are all
available in Hansard, and you will remember what I said. What does the ANC
write in its strategy documents on reconciliation? On page 9 they write:

  The deliberate policy of reconciliation adopted by the liberation
  movement is to narrow the space for those forces which might have had
  plans to subvert this process.

Does the ANC’s reconciliation come from the heart? Or is it a deliberate
strategy to outmanoeuvre the enemy? I need to know that. We cannot blame
the ANC Youth League if this is correct. The young lion cubs act as they
were trained. South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white,
says the President, and I agree and support it.

I received a letter from a young South African last week. He had just been
affected by affirmative action. He is a qualified clinical psychologist who
completed his community year at the Defence Force. He did such excellent
work that the directorate of psychology asked him to stay with the Defence
Force. He had an attractive offer to go and work overseas for much more
money. After consideration he decided to stay with the Defence Force -
coincidentally the Minister last week asked that more whites should join
the Defence Force. Last week he received a phone call and he was told that
his application had been turned down and that he had to leave his post
within the next month. The directorate of psychology did not turn him down,
but human resources did. Why? They said because the quota of black
psychologists had to be filled and he unfortunately was white. All
indications are that his position will not be filled because black
psychologists did not apply for the position. What do I write to him? I
must respond. Do I quote Minister Lekota who says that whites should join
the army? Do I quote the President that says South Africa belongs to all
who live in it, both black and white?

Recently a study was completed that showed that affirmative action was the
single biggest factor that leads to alienation amongst young whites and we
must take cognisance of that. The FF+ has suggested solutions. We tried to
solve these problems and not make it worse. We have suggested a cut-off
date, as well as that young people of a certain age be exempted. The ANC
says it is important and that we will talk about it, but that is where it
stays.

As the leader of a political party, what do I say to my supporters? Must I
copy the ANC Youth League and say that whites have no capacity to be
racist, but can only respond to it? That would also be nonsense. Then I
would be justifying throwing a person into a lion’s enclosure or dragging
him behind a vehicle because he is of a different race. We condemned those
incidents, but the ANC did not condemn the black racist incidents I
referred to. The easy way is to reward racism with racism, but that will
bring us nowhere. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, and then we end
with the whole world being blind.

Meneer, ek noem nog enkele voorbeelde wat hierdie polarisasie versterk. As
jy mense wil kwaad maak, moet jy hulle geskiedenis, hulle helde en hul
voorvaders beledig. Dit is wat die ANC tans met die Afrikaner doen, omdat
hulle geen beleid het oor die verandering van plekname nie. Ek het met
verskeie Ministers gepraat en probeer om die beleid te bepaal. Vanaf 1850
tot op hede het die Britte nog net een oorlog verloor. Dit was teen die
Afrikaners in 1881. Die Boereheld van daardie oorlog was Piet Joubert, en
Pietersburg is na hom vernoem. Dit is nou Polokwane.

Kom ek gee vir u ’n persoonlike voorbeeld uit my hart uit. My oupa Mulder
was met ’n Potgieter getroud. Muldersdrif naby Krugersdorp is na hierdie
voorvader vernoem en Potchefstroom na Hendrik Potgieter, my ouma se
voorvader. Die ANC wil altwee hierdie name verander. Ek sê: U beledig my en
my voorvaders, en u verwag van my om vriendelik hier te sit en dit net te
aanvaar. Natuurlik is hierdie ’n aanslag op die Afrikaner. Britse koloniale
name soos King William’s Town, Queenstown, Durban en Victoria-Wes is nie
onder druk nie, net Afrikaanse name.

Daar is egter oplossings. Soos die 1913-afsnypunt vir grondaansprake, kan
ons soortgelyke riglyne ontwikkel vir plekname, want ek weet u wil name
verander. Kom ons praat daaroor. Hoekom sê ons nie byvoorbeeld alle name na
’n spesifieke datum mag nie verander word nie en ontwikkel riglyne? Die
President het verlede jaar in hierdie debat gesê dat hy graag hierdie sake
met ons wil bespreek. Intussen gaan die ANC sonder beleid en met
verskillende standpunte voort.

In sy nuusbrief van 7 Januarie 2005 verwys President Mbeki na die NP-
regering wat altyd geweet het “what is best for the Bantu” – en ek verstaan
dit - maar binne tien jaar is die ANC presies soos die vorige regering. Die
ANC glo hulle het al die antwoorde; hulle weet “what is best for the
Afrikaner and the minorities”. In die DRC onderhandel President Mbeki oor
magsdeling en sê dat almal in die saak geken moet word. In die Ivoorkus
word voorgestel die opposisie moet om ’n tafel gaan sit en praat, maar in
Suid-Afrika weet die ANC egter wat is die beste vir die Afrikaners en die
ander minderheidsgroepe.

Ons betaal almal belasting, maar ons kan nie bepaal waarheen ’n enkele sent
daarvan gaan nie. Dit is nêrens so duidelik as in die huidige geveg om
skole nie. Net 3% van alle skole in Suid-Afrika is eentalig Afrikaans.
Hierdie skole is nie meer wit nie. Tog is die ANC deurlopend met hierdie
skole besig. Moenie Afrikanervriendelikheid met swakheid verwar nie. Gaan
kyk in ons geskiedenis wat gebeur het toe die Britte alle skole probeer
verengels het.

Ek droom van ’n model Suid-Afrika oor 40 jaar - gaan lees my vorige
toesprake - ’n Suid-Afrika waar ek en my kinders nog steeds sal wees. U sal
nie van my ontslae raak nie. Ek droom van ’n land wat werklik aan almal
behoort, waar daar vir elkeen ’n plek in die son gegun word, maar nie op
hierdie manier nie. Lees saam met my die internasionale dokumente oor
minderheidsregte en selfbeskikking, oor hoe ons die regte resep kan kry om
almal te akkommodeer. Moenie dat ons die lang pad van konflik loop nie.
Moenie dat ons uit die Ivoorkus en ander lande leer, terwyl ’n kortpad
beskikbaar is om by hierdie droom uit te kom nie. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Sir, I want to mention a few more examples which strengthen this
polarisation. To make people angry, one has to insult their history, their
heroes and their ancestors. This is what the ANC is doing to the Afrikaner
at present, because they have no policy with regard to the changing of
place names. I have spoken to various Ministers to try to ascertain what
the policy is. Until today the British have lost only one war since 1850.
It was against the Afrikaners, in 1881. The Boer hero of that war was Piet
Joubert, and Pietersburg was named after him. It is now Polokwane.

Let me give you a personal example straight from my heart. My grandfather
Mulder was married to a Potgieter. Muldersdrif near Krugersdorp was named
after this ancestor, and Potchefstroom after Hendrik Potgieter, my
grandmother’s ancestor. The ANC wants to change both these names. I say:
You insult me and my ancestors, and you expect me to sit here and be
friendly and simply accept that. Of course, this is an onslaught on the
Afrikaner. British colonial names such as King William’s Town, Queenstown,
Durban and Victoria West are not under pressure, only the Afrikaans names.

However, there are solutions. We can develop guidelines for place names
similar to the 1913 cut-off point for land claims, because I know you want
to change names. Let us talk about that. Why don’t we say, for example,
that all names may not be changed after a specific date, and develop
guidelines? The President said in this debate last year that he would like
to discuss matters with us. In the meantime the ANC continues without
policy and with differing points of view.

In his newsletter of 7 January 2005 President Mbeki referred to the NP
government who always knew “what is best for the Bantu” - and I understand
that - but ten years later the ANC is exactly the same as the previous
government. The ANC believes they know all the answers; they know “what is
best for the Afrikaner and the minorities”. In the DRC President Mbeki
negotiates about power sharing and says that everybody is to be considered
in this matter. In the Ivory Coast it is proposed that the opposition sit
at a table and talk, but in South Africa the ANC knows what is best for the
Afrikaners and the other minority groups

All of us pay tax, but we cannot stipulate where a single cent is going.
Nowhere is this as clearer than in the current fight about schools. Only 3%
of all schools in South Africa are single-medium Afrikaans.  These schools
are no longer white, and yet the ANC is continually busy with them. Do not
mistake Afrikaner friendliness for weakness.  Have a look at our history
and see what happened when the British tried to anglicise all schools.

I dream about a model South Africa in 40 years’ time – go and read my
previous speeches – a South Africa where my children and I will still be.
You will not get rid of me. I dream of a country that really belongs to
everybody, where everyone is granted a place in the sun, but not in this
manner. Read the international documents about minority rights and self-
determination with me, about how we can arrive at the right recipe to
accommodate everybody. Let us not walk the long road of conflict. Let us
not learn from the Ivory Coast and other countries when there is a short
cut to realise this dream. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, hon President, hon members,
first of all I want to say, without being accused of not acknowledging
other faiths and beliefs, I want to greet you in the name of the Lord.

Mr President, in response to your speech, I really want to address some of
the issues that we are left with, that are challenges and that will bring
the public works programme forward, but the teacher in me wants to do
something before I do that.

When you spoke in this House in May 1996, and said “I am an African”,
amongst other things, you said:

  I have seen what happens when one person has superiority of force over
  another, when the stronger appropriate to themselves the prerogative even
  to annul the injunction that God created all men and women in his image.

You also said:

  Among us prowl the products of our immoral and amoral past – killers who
  have no sense of the worth of human life, rapists who have absolute
  disdain for the women of our country, animals who seek to benefit from
  the vulnerability of the children, the disabled and the old, the
  rapacious who brook no obstacle in their quest for self-enrichment.

And you said “you know all this because you are African”.

Around this House on that memorable day responses came from all the benches
that people were Africans, and what I want to say today is that if you are
such Africans, what are you doing about it? In my little illustration –
former teacher Stella Nomzamo of Ohlange – I will use my little toys. As a
teacher, I don’t even know how to string my own bow and arrow …
[Interjections.] It doesn’t matter, you can see that it is a bow and then
somewhere there is an arrow.

There are those people who will shoot at anything, no matter how good, just
for the sake of saying “we are shooting”. However, amongst us there are
those who will say “this is South Africa, and we are proud to be South
Africans”, who will find solutions easily by just using a nut and a bolt …
[Applause.] … and I want to believe it is those nuts and bolts that are
going to build our future.

I deal with a department entrusted with dealing with the issue of poverty,
and everywhere we go, as all these political parties, we always fight on
that weekend. Are we all sincere? And if we are all sincere, we shall, as
of today, say that we are Africans who fight together, because the issue of
poverty, Mr President, should straddle political lines; it should be a
common agenda. If we say we are truly African, this is the agenda for all
of us.

When you spoke in your address, you spoke to people whose formations
actually come out of Nedlac – labour is there, civil society is there, as
well as government and business - where they came up with an agreement that
there should be movement on the fight against poverty. Some of the
formations here are made up of the same composition as Nedlac. So, what I
want to say, Mr President, is that we all have to work together on this
issue, and we all have to be sincere about it.

As you said in your speech, we spent the first six months of the programme,
up to September 2004, ensuring that the EPWP meets its targets in terms of
the number of work opportunities created, and you also illustrated that in
the first six months we created 75 of those opportunities. However, what
are we doing, and where are we now, sir? The programme, I want to assure
you, is on track, because we believe at the end of the day we shall have
created 13 000 work opportunities.

We have put in place training programmes and implementation guidelines to
make sure that … [Interjections.] There is Mr Bow-and-Arrow yapping away.
The training programmes we have put in place will create 300 work
opportunities per annum until we reach the third year, and our government
is in the process of rolling out a sustained and substantial investment in
economic and social infrastructure. We are putting in place a number of
capacity-building measures, including a learnership programme that has been
put in place by the construction sector for emerging constructors and their
supervisory staff to develop capacity to use labour-intensive methods.

Before I lose what I wanted to give to you, we received the most
encouraging letter from a true South African, who wrote as follows, Mr
President:

  While we are aware of the challenges that remain in improving the lives
  of our people, we can boldly say that South Africa is a better place to
  live in as a result of the government’s efforts in eradicating poverty
  and reducing unemployment.


  The First Rand Group has always acknowledged the importance of partnering
  with government in ensuring that its programmes are executed. Thus, the
  First Rand Group would like to invite you to a luncheon with all our
  executives to share with us the following: Challenges faced by your
  department, and how we can assist in ensuring that the key departmental
  areas of focus, the expanded public works, are carried out effectively.


  We would also like to share with you our initiatives regarding SME
  support and development, and I would appreciate that we discuss this at
  the earliest convenience.

Sir, this comes from a nongovernmental body and they are saying, “we want
to help government to succeed in its programmes”. What better accolade
could our government receive! [Applause.]

I further want to say, sir, in our learnership programme we are actually
going to be using labour-intensive programmes that will involve up to 950
learners, for which we have signed certain things with the various
departments of public works around the country. Twenty-six sectors within
the provinces and municipalities around the country have taken up these 950
learnerships, and these learners are currently undergoing classroom
training and undertaking practical training projects.

Each of the learner contractors typically employs a hundred workers in
their practical training projects. By the end of 2005 there will be 1 500
learners under this particular learnership. We are moving, and I want to
assure you, sir, that as we gather strength, as we understand the
programme, as we understand the challenges, we will make sure that we meet
those challenges. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Order! Hon members, we will now take a
comfort break for ten minutes.

BUSINESS SUSPENDED AT 16:01 AND RESUMED AT 16:19.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Deputy Speaker, hon President, Deputy President and
hon Ministers, we have noted with great appreciation the President’s
frankness about our government’s delivery record and programme of action to
address prevailing challenges. This time around the President has managed
to spell out unambiguously how he intends to achieve his stated delivery
goals, as expressed in his speech last Friday. It is on the basis of these
pronouncements he made, that he will be judged in terms of to what extent
he delivered the promised land to the people of South Africa.

It is a fact that the poor of the country, who gave him an overwhelming
mandate to govern, expressed themselves on the need to deliver, not because
they don’t trust him, but simply because they expect him to do so on the
basis of their confidence in him.

It is heartwarming to know that the President has acknowledged the
realities which our government is faced with. He spoke of nondelivery, and
said that the democratic state would not walk away from the obligation to
come to the aid of the poor, bearing in mind available resources. This is a
sensible and considerate statement from the President. It is on the basis
of this realisation and commitment that the opposition party supports him
in his endeavours to bring about a better and just society for all. We
expect him to lead the country as a president of a united South Africa. We
are beginning to see signs that the President appreciates the difference
between a party and a government leader, and if he continues on this path,
we see no reason why he cannot achieve his stated objectives, though
perceptions do exist that the government tends to deliver along party
lines, a classic example being black economic empowerment beneficiaries.

We as opposition have to emphasise and acknowledge that South Africa today
is a better country under this democratic government. We have an
opportunity to accelerate this change to benefit all South Africans,
irrespective of race or political affiliation. We might be on the high path
to prosperity, but more still needs to be done through hard work and
dedication to serve our people. If we don’t, there is a real possibility
that development will slow down and we will reverse what we have achieved
thus far.

It must be said that the President is very aware that nonperformance on the
part of government will fail South Africans. Surely this is an undesirable
possibility, especially when not enough is done fundamentally and
materially to change the lives of ordinary people. His dream of a better
life and the African Renaissance will simply remain a dream which will be
quickly forgotten when he exits politics. However, given the rate at which
he works, he believes that he is within reach of achieving this dream.

Then what is the challenge for our President? The challenge for him is to
address unidentified failures on the part of our government and to take
another look at the priorities of our government to find what went wrong.
On his scorecard of delivery, those challenges come out clearly in the
following areas: the economy, job creation, water, sanitation and poverty
alleviation.

We are witnessing an economy that is doing well, but much still needs to be
done to achieve incentives for business and attract investment. As an
intervention to the identified challenge, the government is set to increase
investment and lower the cost of doing business, improve economic inclusion
and provide the skills required by the economy. This is a welcome move.
However, we still have an unacceptable level of unemployment, at 35% plus.
Our economy is not creating enough employment opportunities to meet the
growing rate of unemployment.

We have also noted efforts by the government to fight poverty through the
public works programme. As things stand, the President said that to date
over R1,5 billion has been spent on the programme, and as a result 75 000
jobs have been created. The question is: Are these jobs sustainable? Is
there any skills transfer taking place during the implementation of these
projects? We are, however, pleased to know that the government has achieved
the 10 million mark in terms of South Africans who have gained access to a
basic service such as water.

In health, the government is still faced with a major challenge to improve
the working conditions of health workers. We know for a fact that we are
losing our good and well-trained nurses to other countries because of
attractive benefits offered to them. On the question of HIV/Aids, we have
seen positive efforts on the part of the government to educate the public
about the disease, but still feel that more can be done to investigate ways
to improve the delivery of much-needed medication to the sufferers.

Regarding education, much has been said about not meeting educational
targets in terms of classrooms, as the President acknowledged on our
government’s shortcomings in this regard. However, we are pleased to learn
that the government has prioritised that. Our major concern is the
declining standards of education in our country, especially at secondary
level. The fact that some universities are exploring new ways of admitting
matriculants to their institutions bears testimony to the fact that matric
results are no longer reliable criteria to determine the readiness of
learners to cope with the academic demands of higher learning.

The other important issue is the high cost of education for our learners at
tertiary institutions. We know that the majority of the learners come from
impoverished backgrounds.

In foreign policy we have noted the shift in term of how our government is
involved in international matters. Sometimes you find alliance partners
fighting about how to handle countries considered to be undemocratic. We
welcome the President’s stand on Zimbabwe, where he has called for a free
and fair election so that the people of Zimbabwe can have an opportunity to
exercise their democratic right to vote for the party of their choice, and
his stand on Swaziland, for Swazi nationals to map out their destiny in a
changing world order.

We hope that the President will work hard and with vigour to meet these
challenges and targets for the coming year, as expressed. These  include
introducing community courts, expanding the number of police areas from 69
t0 169, further improving law enforcement and security at ports of entry,
and readily reducing the number of children in police and prison custody.

Mr President, we believe that a collective approach in this regard will
help the government to deliver on its promises. We have to advise you that,
as you may know, if we don’t capacitate our delivery engines, the local
governments, we shall remain where we are. We are pleased to know that you
have identified the shortcomings of the councillors in effecting change or
imparting your vision. Let us all work together for a better South Africa.

Mr President, we in the UCDP can’t agree more with the President when he
says there has to be law and order in the country. If people have
grievances, they should present them to their authorities properly. We
strongly condemn the unbecoming conduct of the prison warders who
desecrated our national symbols by tossing their insignia around and
trampling on them. In our view, this unbecoming behaviour, which has led
people to think through their blood, borders on treason, if it is not
treason. National symbols are there to be protected, respected and defended
by citizens, regardless of their state of agitation. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President,
Deputy President, Cabinet colleagues, members of the House, I just want to
start off by saying to the hon Mulder …

… dat ek kennis geneem het van daardie spesifieke saak wat hy genoem het,
en ek sal dit opvolg. Ons sal sien wat ons later aan die saak kan doen. […
that I have taken note of that specific matter that he mentioned, and that
I will follow it up. We shall see what we can do about the matter later.]

The clarion call that went out to the people of South Africa, in
preparation for the Congress of the People, said in part, “Let us speak
together, Africans and Europeans, Indian and coloured, voters and voteless,
privileged and rightless, the happy and the homeless, all the people of
South Africa, of the towns and of the countryside, let us speak together of
freedom.”

A part of the reply to that call - my comrade, the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, read it in full, but I just contend myself with this sentence –
was that the people said, “South Africa shall strive to maintain world
peace and the settlement of international disputes by negotiation, not
war.”

The conditions that informed the minds of the authors of this reply were
those of the aftermath of the Second World War. They were informed by the
memories of South Africans, black and white, from towns and countryside,
who had been drafted into the union armed forces, and had seen service in
European and African theatres. Amongst those at the Congress of the People
were those who had been rewarded with bicycles and jackets and overcoats,
when the majority of them had been better rewarded.

Those who were there included men who had seen the front at Tobruk, who
came back with a memory that was summarised as follows, and I quote:

  The Germans attacked the 5th South African Infantry Brigade from the
  south, killing 224. The dead, in the aftermath of the battle, were
  initially buried together in a common grave, white infantrymen and black
  native military corps, stretcher-bearers, side by side, but not long,
  however.


  An order from South African army headquarters soon had the corpses
  exhumed and properly sorted out. One grave for the whites, and another
  for the blacks.

With memories and accounts such as these fresh in their minds, the people
of our country, through their representatives at the Congress of the
People, adopted a positive outlook. They decided that nonracialism and
peace would become critical components of the agenda of our freedom, and
therefore committed us to this element of freedom in our country, in our
region, on our continent, and in the world.

It is important for all of us to keep this in mind, if we are to understand
the obligations that we now carry in this country, on the continent, under
the leadership of the President. This mandate informed the letter and
spirit of our national Constitution and all other relevant laws. It is the
foundation of South Africa’s current involvement in peace support
operations in Southern Africa and the continent.

As signatories to the United Nations Charter, we have bound ourselves to
international law to strive and work for the maintenance of world peace. It
is from there that we derive the mandate for the SANDF, a nonracial and
unifying force, its doctrine that of a defensive posture. Our commitment is
to international peacekeeping and development, and a policy of
nonproliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons.

I wish to concentrate, in this regard, on two areas of our work with regard
to the African agenda. The first is the question of the consolidation of
democracy in our region and the continent. The examples of the
participation of the SANDF in supporting electoral processes in a number of
countries in our region speak loudly of our commitment as a nation to
advancing and deepening democracy in the region and on the continent.

At the present time we are holding tight that the Burundi process for
preparing for the elections is sustainable, and that it concludes with the
holding of credible elections later this year. We have to support the
people of Burundi in completing the process of integrating the armed
formations in that country.

Similarly, in the DRC we are collaborating closely with the Congolese and
other friendly nations in ensuring that the integration of the armed forces
and preparations for the elections maintain momentum and are concluded
successfully later this year.

The second issue, that of peacekeeping, and the creation of stability for
the purpose of development on the continent, enjoins us to lead. Africans,
including South Africans, must lead this process of eliminating conflict
and creating stability in Africa, because it is we Africans who understand
the conditions on the continent best, and it is us who will directly
benefit from the fruits of stability and growth on this continent.

I therefore wish to urge the collective elected leadership of the people of
South Africa that on this issue, in this House, in the NCOP, in the
provincial legislatures, in local government, South Africa’s leaders must
speak as one. This is not an issue to debate. We must not only take it to
heart; we must make sure that we persuade increasing numbers of South
Africans that the duty of peace is one which cannot be debated or doubted.

When sceptics therefore question our ongoing and deepening involvement in
the resolution of disputes and the maintenance of peace missions, South
African leaders from all walks of life and of all political convictions
must speak with one voice. This is particularly important in this year,
when South Africa is honoured with chairing the SADC Organ on Politics,
Defence and Security and allied ministerial committees.

In this region we are the leading nation. We cannot afford dissenters on
the question of peace. We cannot, as a nation, be divided on this issue.
The obligations are huge, regionally. Our responsibilities include
participating in the finalisation and operationalisation of the SADC
Brigade, one of the five brigades of the African Union Standby Force.

The timeframe is that the SADC Brigade should be up and running, ready to
participate in peace missions, under the direction of the African Union by
the end of June this year. Through such means, we will contribute to the
stability of the continent and our region.

Mr President, I must take this opportunity to assure you and the House that
members of the SANDF, young men and women, black and white, from all
stations in life, are carrying out their responsibilities in the field, in
the DRC, in the Sudan, in Ethiopia, Eritrea, Burundi and so on. They are
doing so, united and very determined to make these projects a success.
[Applause.] If there is any doubt about their determination on this matter,
we can look at the records of their performance since we deployed them the
first time, which was even before other nations deployed in other theatres.
When we look at the record of their performance, their relations with the
communities in which they serve, their management of citizens in those
countries, we find that they are spoken of in very high terms. They are
holding the flag of the nation high. [Applause.]

It is the sterling example of these men and women over the years since
their deployment that persuaded the United Nations late last year to rank
South Africa as the tenth nation in the world that participates in the
peacekeeping missions of the UN. [Applause.] And yet, Mr President, I must
add with a measure of humility that we are following the outstanding
example of fellow African countries. Ethiopia is ranked number five, Ghana
number six, Nigeria eighth, Kenya number 11, Morocco number 12, Senegal
number 13, and Namibia number 18. Of the top 20 nations of the world, these
African nations are today leading nations around the world in peace support
operations. [Applause.]

I think, therefore, whilst we may be proud of what we ourselves have done,
we have to have humility when we look at what other nations of Africa are
doing with regard to peace and its advancement. I say this is further
evidence of Africa’s commitment to support peacekeeping under the United
Nations from a base of very limited resources. Look at some of those
nations which are ahead of us.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, your time has expired.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, you took my time last year, but I
will not insist on it this time. [Laughter.] [Applause].

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, we actually added two minutes because of
the information you were giving us. So don’t ever refer to last year - we
are squared up now!

Miss S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. His Excellency, our hon
President, hon Deputy President, hon members of Parliament, honoured
guests, I take this opportunity to convey to our hon President, our hon
leader Mr A Rajbansi’s best wishes. He requested me to convey his applause
for your most frank and honest diagnostic analysis of the country’s
progress over the past ten years in your state of the nation address.
[Applause.]

In view of our economy, we note that the hon President made reference to
the research of two independent institutes, namely the Rand Merchant Bank
and Unisa’s Bureau of Market Research. The observations of these economists
clearly serve to substantiate two excellent figures noted by the MF in the
hon President’s address on Friday. To have achieved a great rate of 5,6%
against the background of a long period of a -3% growth rate before 1994,
means that the country has had an effective growth rate of 8%, which a
country such as India took 50 years to achieve. Since 1994 our two
Presidents have set targets.

The analysis of our first 10 years of democracy has served to validate both
our achievement and shortfalls. We admire and support our hon President in
his pledged commitment to remove the tears and suffering from the
broadbased masses and we applaud the achievement rate of 72%.

Throughout the length and breadth of this nation, and both nationally and
internationally, our hon President’s state of the nation address is hailed
for its honesty. The media has even referred to the hon President in this
instance as being his own best critic. His honesty has affirmed the reality
of the South African situation, and the same honesty shall be our insurance
that the remedial measures our hon President has undertaken to deliver
shall succeed.

Hon President, this country has experienced the greatest peaceful political
resolution the world has ever seen, against the predictions of the prophets
of doom forecasting the collapse of South Africa. Hon President, under your
leadership and your able team of executives you have established South
Africa as the economic engine of Africa.

The MF suggests, hon President, that you ignore the criticism from the
pipsqueaks on the left side of this House about the time you spend in other
African countries. The MF values your efforts to bring about peace and
reconciliation in our neighbouring countries and abroad, as part of our
commitment to world peace and for the benefit of South Africa. These
pipsqueaks must realise that on this issue, cheap political point-scoring
leads nowhere, as the rise of Africa means the rise of South Africa. The
realisation needs to be embedded that South Africa belongs to a much larger
entity, and that entity is Africa. The components of this larger entity
supported us in our liberation struggle. Today we stand liberated and
committed to liberating, strengthening and advancing all of Africa.

In the same breath, I stand to support all the President’s and South
Africa’s efforts, both in the Pan-African Parliament and SADC. We further
share in the honour of being the permanent venue for the PAP, as well as
being the chair of the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security.

All of Africa appears to be supportive of the growth of this continent.
However, concern has been expressed over the Zimbabwean elections and the
delay of invitations to oversee the democratic elections as free and fair.
We trust that our hon President, together with the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, is working with SADC and PAP to ensure that the interests of the
Zimbabwean people are upheld.

Hon President, we applaud the good relations you are building for South
Africa abroad, not only in relations that will benefit our economy, but
with regard to our proud assistance with disasters, such as the recent
tsunami disaster. You are an inspiring example of selflessness, and a true
ambassador to the pride of our nation. We salute you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: You might get a job if you go on!
[Interjections.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: I have my own job, thank you.

The MF acknowledges that in another forum the hon President made reference
to the revolutionary engine which must be of high quality, thereby issuing
a notice to public servants. Once again, your honesty has shown the
failures of the previous decision to make do with less, and the need to
expand the Public Service. It is comforting and encouraging to note that
this increase in the government’s personnel costs will not mean a decrease
in social spending.

The shortage of qualified individuals in professions in health, education,
engineering, the police and sectors of the economic service will, once
supplied, improve the service and help to overcome unemployment and
poverty, contributing to the sustainable development of our nation.
However, here too the influx of personnel should be monitored and all
sectors subjected to systems of transparency, as a shortage of personnel is
not the only reason for our setback in delivery, since the evils of
incompetence and corruption have been spotted in our corridors.
Transparency is key to stamping out such crime. However, the MF supports an
increase of personnel in the Public Service as a means of addressing the
shortfall.

How is it that the first and second provincial commissioners of Gauteng,
who are people of colour, happen to be Indians from KwaZulu-Natal, and yet
they are unable to attain promotion in their own province? Can this country
afford qualified South Africans who attained such medical qualifications
abroad with their own finance, who are unable to find employment in South
Africa? Yet the government is employing medical personnel from abroad.
There are a few glitches in our system that deserve to be looked at even
closer. Hon President, we are, however, confident of your commitment to
correct this, and that your commitment advances to all South Africans.

When listening to your state of the nation address, hon President, the MF
was reminded of a famous phrase by the renowned Mahatma Gandhi:
      Do not judge India by the bright lights of the city; judge them by the
      millions in the villages who suffer.

In conclusion, Mr President, the MF holds your honesty in the highest
esteem, and the day that you retire, the people will say in all honesty,
“Thank you, sir.” The Soccer Bid for 2010 was a hard battle to win.
Remember it happened during your Presidency, and we pray that you will
still be with us in 2010.

Mnu Mongameli, qhubeka ndodana yaseNingizimu Afrika. Sikanye nawe
sizobambana ukulungisa inkinga yaseNingizimu Afrika ngoba izandla
ziyagezana. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isizulu paragraph
follows.)

[Mr President, go ahead, son of the soil of South Africa. We support you
and shall work together with you to solve the problems faced by South
Africa since one hand washes another.  Thank you. [Applause.]]

Nkk N C KONDLO: Sekela-Somlomo, uMongameli, uSekela Mongameli, amalungu
abekekileyo aleNdlu namaqabane ngokubanzi, mandothulele umnqwazi
uKhongolozi ngesakhono, umonde nomxhino wokuthi emva kweminyaka engamashumi
amahlanu wamkela umqulu wenkululeko, abe nanamhlanje uthi la malungelo,
uninzi lwabantu baseMzantsi Afrika bayawaxhamla kwaye akabuyi ngamva
ekuqinisekiseni ukuba ekugqibeleni bonke abantu nabemi baseMzantsi Afrika
abamnyama nabamhlophe baya kuwaxhamla lamalungelo ngokulinganayo,
nangokwasemthethweni njengoko usitsho loMqulu.

Sohlala siwakhumbula amadelakufa ancama ubomi bawo khona ukuze mna nawe,
nabo bonke abanye abantu sibe sikhukulekile. Ndithetha mna ngabantwana
besikolo semfundo ephakamileyo iNompendulo eMpuma-Koloni, abemka nomlambo
ngexesha babeleqwa ngamapolisa orhulumente wephandle iCiskei kuba besithi
abasifuni isibhulu njengolwimi lokufunda. Ndithetha kwanangaxhoba ka-
“Azikhwelwa” awabulawa esitishini sikaloliwe eMdantsane ngamapolisa
aseCiskei ngelo xesha kuba ayengafuni kukhwela ziibhasi kuba kwenyuke
amaxabiso. Ndithetha mna ngabo itshoba lalala umbethe kubo ngomhla
wesixhenxe kuSeptemba ka1992 eBhisho.

UMzantsi owakhiwa nguKhongolozi umiselwe kwiinjongo zaloMqulu. Lo mqulu
njengoko igama lawo lisitsho ubeka elubala onke amalungelo ababengawaxhamli
abantu bethu phantsi korhulumente wengcinezelo. Ukuba ke uwufunda kakuhle
lomqulu wophawula ukuba ugxininisa amalungelo abantu. Unozala woku ke
kukuba ingcinezelo nocalucalulo phantsi korhulumente wamabhulu
lwalungabavumeli abantu bakuthi ukuba bawaxhamle la malungelo. Ukuba ke
umongo walo mqulu yayikukuba, kwaye isekukuqinisekisa ukuba abantu
bayawaxhamla la malungelo, umbuzo ekufanele ukuba siwuphendule ngowokuba
ungakanani na umgama esele uhanjwe ngurhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC
ekufezekiseni ezi njongo nalemibono.

Oneendlebe zokuva makeve. Kule minyaka ilishumi nje kuphela igqithileyo,
sinomgaqo-siseko oqulethe amalungelo abantu ngokwalo Mqulu weNkululeko.
Sinamaziko afana neekomishoni ezijongene namalungelo abantu, ezijongene
nesini, ezolutsha, uMkhuseli woLuntu kunye namanye amaziko amaninzi
aqinisekisa ukuba la malungelo axhanyulwa sithi sonke ngokufanayo
nangokulinganayo phambi komthetho. Okwesibini, lo rhulumente unemithetho
emininzi ayisusileyo nebinjongo zayo ikukucinezela abantu bethu nje kuba
bengemhlophe ngebala. Okwesithathu, mininzi imithetho ewiswe yile Ndlu
enjongo zayo ibikukuphumeza imibono yabantu beli lizwe njengoko iqulathiwe
kuMqulu weNkululeko, ukusukela kwiminyaka engamashumi amahlanu egqithileyo.

Undoqo ke kuyo yonke le miba ingentla kukuqinisekisa ukuba abantu
baseMzantsi Afrika bephela, kwaye ngokungaphandle kocalucalulo basela
amanzi acocekileyo, banezindlu ezindilisekileyo, banelungelo kumhlaba,
umbane, impilo engcono, njalonjalo. Ukuza kuthi ga ngoku baninzi abasele
bewaxhamla la malungelo kwaye baphila ubomi obungcono nobunesidima ngenxa
kaKhongolozi. EMpuma-Koloni nje kuphela zifikile kuma-216 iikliniki ezithe
zalungiswa, nezazibubugoxo phantsi korhulumente wangaphabili. Zifikile kwi-
131 iikliniki ezakhiweyo kwiminyaka emihlanu egqithileyo. Zingaphezulu
kwama-600 izikolo ezakhiweyo. Zingaphezulu kwamashumi amahlanu iindawo
zokudlala nezokonwaba ezakhiweyo kweli phondo, ngeenjongo zokuphuhlisa
isakhono sokudlala kulutsha lweli phondo. Noxa urhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC
eqhubela phambili ngokumilisela lamalungelo, mininzi imiqobo ahlangana nayo
endleleni, ephakathi kwayo kukho urhwaphilizo. Bambi baluchaza urhwaphilizo
njengendlela abantu abasebenzisa ngayo amandla noxanduva kwii-ofisi ezo
babekwe kuzo ukufezekisa iimfuno zabo.

Zikho ke iindidi ezichazwa ngokwahlukeneyo, bambi bazichaza
ngokwezopolitiko, bambi bazichaza ngokwezomnotho. Ngokwezopolitiko ke
urhwaphilizo luchazwa njengokusebenzisa ii-ofisi ezo ubani abekwe kuzo
khona ukuze azizuzele. Obu buqhophololo ke nolurhwaphilizo buzalwa phakathi
kwezinye, ngorhulumente abathatha izigqibo beligcuntswana; ukungabikho
selubala kwendlela asebenza ngayo urhulumente lowo; izimali ezinkulu
zikarhulumente ezijongene nemisebenzi eyenziwayo ukuphucula ubomi babantu;
ukungabikho ngqingqwa komthetho, maxa wambi zithi ezi ngcali zichaza
urhwaphilizo, lwenziwa yimali encinci ehlawulwa abasebenzi bakarhulumente.
Kambe ke, loo nto ayithethi kuthi ukubakho kwezi zinto kuwo nawuphina
urhulumente urhwaphilizo lukhona.

Urhwaphilizo ke lungumceli-mngeni onzima kakhulu kuba luchasene nophuhliso
nenkqubela phambili. Lusengela phantsi ulawulo lwesininzi norhulumento
olusulungekileyo, kuba zonke iindlela ezizizo zokusebenza ziyaphetshwa. Loo
nto yenza ukuba iinkonzo zize ngokungalinganiyo eluntwini kuba kaloku
akukhathalelwanga ndlela isemthethweni yokusebenza. Ekugqibeleni le nto ide
idelise urhulumente onyulwe sisininzi. Iinkqubo zikarhulumente azixhanyulwa
ngabo zibafaneleyo njengesizwe kodwa zixhanyulwa ngabo bazithengayo
ngokungekho mthethweni. Bonke ke oorhulumente basesichengeni sokuba
ngamaxhoba oorhwaphilizo. Simbonile urhulumente wengcinezelo indlela
amilisele waluphumeza ngayo urhwaphilizo ngokwasemthethweni ngenqwaba
yemithetho awayimiselayo, khona ukuze urhwaphilizo lungene nzulu kwisizwe
sethu. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N C KONDLO: Deputy Speaker, President, Deputy President, hon
members of the National Assembly and comrades at large, let me take my hat
off to the African National Congress for the efforts, patience and
perseverance it has shown fifty years after the Freedom Charter was
accepted. Today all South Africans, black and white equally, legally
benefit from the rights as stipulated in the Freedom Charter.

We shall remember all the patriots who died so that we can enjoy our
freedom. I refer to the pupils of Nompendulo High School in the Eastern
Cape who drowned while fleeing from the police of the former independent
state of the Ciskei, after protesting against the use of Afrikaans as a
medium of instruction. I refer also to the victims who were killed at the
Mdantsane train station by the Ciskei police because they refused to ride
on a bus because of raised fares. I also refer to those who died at Bisho
on 7 September 1992.

The South Africa developed by the ANC has its objectives based on the
Freedom Charter. The Freedom Charter, as the name states, mentions all the
rights regarding which people were previously discriminated against by the
apartheid government. If one reads the Freedom Charter carefully, one will
notice that it emphasises human rights. This emanates from the fact that
the apartheid government did not allow people to enjoy human rights. If the
essence of the Freedom Charter was to ensure that people enjoy human
rights, then a question we are expected to answer, is how far has the ANC-
led government succeeded in achieving those goals?

Those who have ears must listen. Only for the past ten years have we had a
constitution based on the Freedom Charter. The Human Rights Commission,
Gender Commission, Youth Commission, Public Protector and many others now
see to it that we equally and legally benefit from human rights. Secondly,
the government has done away with the laws that discriminated against
nonwhites. Thirdly, so many laws are passed in the House with the aim of
satisfying the expectations of the people of this country for the past
fifty years.

The main aim of the points above is to ensure that the people of South
Africa have access to clean water, decent houses, rights to the land,
electricity and better health, etc.

In the Eastern Cape alone, there are 216 renovated clinics that were
uncared for by the previous government. About 131 new clinics were built
during the past five years. There are more than 600 newly-built schools.
More than fifty recreational centres and playgrounds have been developed in
this province to improve youth skills in sport.  Although the ANC-led
government continues to ensure human rights, there are obstacles in the
way, such as corruption. Some people describe corruption as the way people
manage their office, by using their power to fulfil their needs.

There are many different ways to describe corruption, sometimes it
politically or economically. Politically, corruption is explained as using
an allocated office for one’s own benefit. These cunning acts and
corruption stem from, among other things, unilateral decisions by the
previous minority government; secrecy about a code of conduct; huge sums of
money for community development; unavailability of strong governing laws;
and sometimes the low salaries of government officials. Nevertheless, this
does not mean the abundance of the above in any government implies
corruption.

Corruption is a challenge, as it goes against development and progress.
This squanders the majority rule and pure governing, as the right channels
are avoided. This hampers delivery, because of unscrupulous ways of
working. This act despises majority government. Government development
programmes no longer benefit those they were intended for, but only those
who get in illegally. All governments are exposed to corruption. We have
witnessed how the apartheid government succeeded in planting the seed of
corruption, legally, in order to strengthen it roots in our country.]

Apartheid colonialism was corruption. Denying the majority of our people,
on the basis of their colour, access to clean water, education, decent
houses, social security, land and participation in sport was corruption. A
justice system that commanded little authority because of its role in
maintaining apartheid was corruption.

Ngendlela ephucukileyo luye lwendela urhwaphilizo ngexesha lorhulumente
wengcinezelo. Kambe imizila isekho isabonakala. Noxa kunjalo simothulela
umnqwazi urhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC kuba uzenzile iinzame zokulususa
neengcambu olu rhwaphilizo. Ndiza kuthi gqaba nje, ndibethe koomofu
ngemizekelo emininzi yaseMpuma Koloni, apho urhulumente alususe neengcambu
urhwaphilizo. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[In a polite way, corruption increased during the apartheid era.
Nevertheless, the traces are still there, but we take our hats off to the
ANC government for trying to stamp out corruption.  I will quickly state
some examples from the Eastern Cape where corruption has been rooted out.]

I am referring here to the case of the State versus Bongani Booi, the first
money laundering conviction in the province; the case of the State versus
Baijoo, the second money laundering conviction in the province; the case of
the State versus Madosi; the case of the State versus Simawusi; and the
case of the State versus Nolundi Yanta.

Bonke ke aba barhwaphiliza iimali zenkamnkam kwiphomdo laseMpumakoloni
kodwa sithetha nje bakwezimnyama izisele. [These persons were all involved
in the social grants affair in the Eastern Cape and they are now in jail.]

I want to share with the House current cases that are before the courts. A
case that involves a pharmaceutical company which defrauded the Department
of Health and made corrupt payments to government officials, was heard in
court yesterday. There is also the case of the contractors who were hired
to build 818 houses, but failed to build the required number, even though
they claimed the full price.

An attorney practising in Port Elizabeth devised a scheme in terms of which
he invited shareholders to invest in his brother’s business venture. Fifty-
three investors responded. Over R3 million was invested, but the
shareholders never received any returns.

Somlomo, xa ndigqibezela, ndifuna ukuthi, ndivumele ndiveze imiceli-mngeni
esinayo ekuqhubeleni phambili, ngokutshintsha ubomi babantu bube ngcono
ngokuphumeza umqulu wenkululeko.

Okokuqala, liphulo lokuqinisekisa intatho-nxaxheba yabantu bethu
ngokwesininzi sabo ekuguquleni ubomi babo khona ukuze bawaxhamle
ngokupheleleyo la malungelo. Okwesibini, iPalamente ifanele ngalo lonke
ixesha ukuba yenze umsebenzi wayo wokuqinisekisa ukuba amaziko amiselwe
ukuba aqinisekise ukuxhanyulwa kwamalungelo, akwenza oku ngokwamagunya
awanikiweyo.

Okwesithathu kukutshintsha ingqondo nendlela yokusebenza kwabo banolona
xanduva lukhulu lokusa iinkonzo ebantwini. Inzima ke loo nto kuba akukwazi
kuyabela nemali, nokuyigcwangcisela imali ukutshintsha abantu iingqondo.
Kananjalo isakhono sikarhulumente ngokwamasebe akhe ngokuphathelene
nezemali abelwa zona ukwenza lo msebenzi. Nesakhono sabasebenzi bakhe
ukwenza lo msebenzi mkhulu kangaka wokuphumeza iinjongo zoMqulu
weNkululeko.

Xa ndiza kuhlala phantsi Sekela-Somlomo, ndifuna ukuxelela amalungu eNdlu
asekunxele, ingakumbi abesakuba ngamaxhoba engcinezelo ukuba namhlanje
kulaa lali ndakhulela kuyo ndandisikha amanzi echibini ndivuka ndiye
kutheza iinkuni khona ukuze kuphekwe ekhaya. Namhlanje impompo yamanzi
ixele apha kuwe phaya ekhaya. Ungena nje endlwini ucofe incukudu edongeni,
ulayite umbane. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Speaker, in conclusion, allow me to highlight the challenges that we are
faced with in trying to change the lives of people in accordance with the
Freedom Charter.

Firstly, it is to ensure people participation in enjoying their rights and
changing their lives for the better. Secondly, Parliament must ensure that
the departments responsible for the rights of people do their work
accordingly. Thirdly, we need to change the mind-set and the way of working
of those who have a greater responsibility of delivering services to the
communities. This is a difficult task, as no budget can be set to change
people’s mind-set. There is a lack of strength among government departments
in handling their budgets, as well as a lack of skills among the employees
to deliver and fulfil the aims of the Freedom Charter.

In brief, Deputy Speaker, I want to tell the members of the opposition, and
also those who were victims of apartheid, that in the village where I grew
up, I used to go and fetch wood and draw water from a well in order for us
to prepare a meal. Today fresh water taps are nearby, and we now use
electricity to light up.]

Let us for once in our lifetime, as opposition parties, just accept the
truth that, indeed, the freedoms enshrined in the Freedom Charter are being
enjoyed by the majority of people in our country. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, the President of South Africa, the Deputy
President, Ministers, all the hon members of Parliament, it is an honour
for me to respond to the state of the nation address. As we close the first
decade of democracy and begin the second one, we should ask ourselves the
following questions: How far away from poverty are the poor today after the
first decade of democracy? Has the quality of the lives of our people
improved, and to what extent? Have we closed the gap between the poor and
the rich in our society?

On behalf of Azapo, I will attempt to present to you some of the situations
and conditions that still need our collective attention in order to improve
the lives of the poor in our society. I implore those of you who have
either lived or have observed what I am going to say to continue to listen,
for what I am about to reveal is merely an attempt by Azapo to reflect on
the South African reality as we experience it today.

Before attempting to depict this reality, allow me to steal a word or two
from a discussion document written by D. Callear for the Kagiso Trust in
1997. She suggests the following: The poor have certain inabilities when
engaging in meaningful entrepreneurial activities. I quote:


  They have the lowest level of education, the poorest ability to obtain
  access to resources. They often, especially women, have responsibility
  for others and many calls on their time and earnings. They find it
  difficult to separate enterprise earnings from household budget, and to
  plan, and then stick to enterprise development. They have little
  information about markets; or possible niches within the economy.
Azapo agrees with these observations, and that is why, when government puts
emphasis on the review of regulatory frameworks governing small, medium and
micro enterprises that will result in the exemptions of certain taxes and
levies, we rejoice. The same goes for the setting up of the Small
Enterprise Development Agency.

Azapo has noticed, though, that over the past 10 years, our country has
embarked on a process of transformation in all the spheres of our lives.
Parliament passed the relevant laws consistent with the transformation
agenda, thereby leaving the implementation process to the sphere of
government departments. More importantly, Parliament also left the
independent judiciary with the task of interpreting the spirit and letter
of all laws passed. Little did Parliament suspect that some persons who are
part and parcel of the decision-making processes within the judiciary
needed transformation themselves.

At some time in 2004, South Africans woke up to learn that racism still
exists within the judiciary, and that there were still judges and
magistrates who were clinging to the past norms, values and standards of
apartheid. The mistake made was to assume that changing the laws would, by
itself, lead automatically to the changing of the hearts and minds of
racists. The racists who are part and parcel of our judiciary, Azapo
believes, should be rooted out. In fact, Azapo can say without fear of
contradiction that racism is still alive and kicking in our country, and
that it is still being used to discriminate against black people. Azapo
believes that drastic steps have to be taken to root out this evil
phenomenon.

You will remember that our people have also come to realise that Rugby SA
still needs to be transformed. Our people have also realised that Cricket
SA still needs to be transformed. [Interjections.] We cannot allow people
who believe that criminality and incapability is rooted in the genes of
black people to continue to be part and parcel of the judiciary.
[Applause.] We cannot allow them to continue to be selectors of our
sportsmen and women. We run the risk of never having black players in their
numbers in the national rugby and cricket teams. [Interjections.]

Azapo also believes that as we open chapters in the second decade of
democracy, we should confront racism squarely. Azapo, therefore, is
encouraged by the actions of the Judge President who has appointed a team
to investigate the presence of racism within the judiciary. This kind of
investigation should be extended to cover the police, the army and
business. [Applause.]

Allow me now to turn to other aspects of the lives of black people. A
report commissioned by the Nelson Mandela Foundation and written by the
HSRC reveals that more than 90% of rural people in KwaZulu-Natal and the
Eastern Cape, as well as Limpopo earn less than R6 400 a year. Expanded
unemployment is about 54% in the Eastern Cape, and 49% in KwaZulu-Natal and
Limpopo.

The report goes further to state that under these circumstances, and I
quote the report:


  Even those with good matric passes are unlikely to find employment if
  they remain in the villages. Each village has a large group of young
  people with a sense of nowhere to go and nothing to do. Their presence
  preys on the minds of the youth still at school.


Statistical figures aside, we can conclude with a fair degree of confidence
and a small margin of error that it is tough out there for the rural youth
and the adults. The picture painted leaves us with no option but to urge
government to accelerate the Expanded Public Works Programme and to
increase the capacity of municipalities to deliver.

To this end, Azapo agrees with government’s intention to build school
infrastructure, increase transport facilities and to provide training for
women and the youth. Azapo has, during the years of the struggle, come to
the conclusion that peace, truth, freedom and democracy, as well as
national independence cannot be defended by good laws alone, but that good
governance and progressive laws should be accompanied by efforts that raise
the standard of living of the poor and the marginalised.

At the same time, the readiness of our security forces to protect and
defend the territorial integrity of our country is equally important.
[Applause.] Azapo therefore agrees with government’s intention to better
salaries and conditions of employment for the police, for that reason and
that reason alone.

Azapo further commends the government’s commitment to seeing to it that
electricity is made available to all citizens. Azapo has come to realise
that speeding up the supply of electricity and water can contribute
immensely to the liberation of rural women and girl children. The supply of
water and electricity eases the burden of having to carry water and wood
for long distances. [Applause.]

Azapo has, over the past years, complained about the quality of houses
being delivered to the poor. Quite often, inspectors were not overseeing
the process of construction of these houses, with the result that their
occupation is always accompanied by unending complaints of poor
workmanship. They are very small and leave no room for improvement or for
small gardens. The newly announced strategy on housing seems to cover some
of the areas mentioned. Azapo is, however, convinced that the question of
land availability is still a problem. To this end, we urge government to co-
ordinate spatial development plans at national, provincial and local level
in order to make sure that land is available for housing the poor.

I shall not have done justice to my presentation if I do not call upon
those municipalities in which pit and bucket toilet systems still exist to
get rid of those systems as speedily as possible. The central government
must crack the whip in this regard. [Applause.]

Azapo believes that if we accomplish all these things and more, then, in
the words of Steven Bantu Biko, “In time, we shall be in a position to
bestow upon South Africa the greatest possible gift - a more human face.”
Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, the hon Nefolovhodwe is going to have to improve
his electoral base and some of his arguments before what Azapo believes
begins to matter. [Interjections.] However, there were some useful ideas we
can all share.

Some of this debate has made me nostalgic again for the old transitional
ANC. It has been good to hear for a change, and over and over again, how
South Africa belongs to all who live in it – live in it, and yes, to the
hon Minister of Defence, those who have died for it, especially when they
were volunteers.

The only problem is that this nonracial credo is from the wrong document.
Expressions of adherence to our actual Constitution have been very few and
far between. Another problem, it seems to me, is that more of South Africa
seems to belong to some economically empowered persons than to the rest of
us, black and white. And it is not, for the information of the hon Ben
Turok, because the market favours the billionaires, but because of ANC
intervention in the market, and a lurch to the left is the last thing that
we need.

A further problem I’d like to note is that South Africa also appears to
belong to retired Caribbean politicians with poor human rights records.
[Interjections.] I must say, and I’d like to say this with feeling, that I
found Jean-Bertrand Aristide’s presence in the gallery on Friday extremely
uncomfortable, as was the acknowledgement of him alongside President
Mandela. [Interjections.] Our hon President has told us in his online
letter number 39 how, in his view, Haiti in 1804 and South Africa in 2004
were both victims of Afro-pessimist plots, to paraphrase paragraph 12, read
with 11 thereof.

Aristide’s presence in the gallery does therefore tend to illustrate,
perhaps, an attachment to the view ascribed to the hon President by the
Financial Mail, namely that some in our country have “a preconceived idea
of black government’s potential for dictatorship, war, poverty and chaos”,
even if the hon Minister Pahad replied in Thursday’s edition of the
Financial Mail that the hon President had said no such thing.

The hon Dr Pahad himself, and the ruling party itself, has most
emphatically said that whites and certain brainwashed blacks mistrust and
misrepresent a black ruler. In fact, six full pages of the ANC’s 19-page
submission to the Human Rights Commission’s Media Racism Inquiry were
devoted to that proposition.

Now, a storm of dispute has finally begun blowing up with the force of
Friday’s southeaster against the use of race as an instrument of censorship
and control. It rages everywhere, including on the ANC’s own website.

The series running there on the Sociology of the Public Discourse, I have
to tell hon members, reminds me sharply of the Human Rights Commission’s
Inquiry Report after the Media Racism Inquiry, which likewise engaged in
what it called “social analysis… rather than mere legal certainties”. Mere
legal certainties, please!

I want to make an appeal: We have to break free now from this sterile,
circular disputation in which the censorious ANC accuses its accusers of
censorship in turn.

It is nonsense to assert, as the discourse did this Friday, that the Leader
of the Opposition argues that race is no longer a factor in South African
society and should not be raised in discussion. [Interjections.] That is
nonsense.

On the contrary, we took a strong position against prohibiting free speech
on racial issues when negotiating the Constitution. I argued that race
would always be part of politics in South Africa, and that if you inhibited
its discussion you would inhibit democracy. Only the advocacy of actual
hatred constituting incitement to cause harm was defined out of the
protection of the free speech right. However, the systematic erosion of
such “mere legal certainty” has begun to close down democratic debate and
the open society we briefly were.

The closed black society, which guaranteed seamless control, cannot survive
the struggle for succession, and it cannot survive the doctrinal tensions
within the tripartite alliance, Freedom Charter or no Freedom Charter.

The only place where a closed society can be kept intact is North Korea!
[Interjections.][Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, comrades, President,
Deputy President and hon members, all speakers from the ANC have recalled
the Freedom Charter. You also, Comrade President, made reference to that
document when you delivered the state of the nation address.

We have used the Freedom Charter, not as a ritualistic incantation of
principles of a bygone era, but as reaffirmation of our commitment to the
building of a better South Africa where, as our Constitution says, “The
divisions of the past would be healed and a society would be established
based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights.”

We have been speaking to the stipulations of the Freedom Charter to remind
ourselves of the work we still need to do to advance the cause of ongoing
freedom, nonracism and nonsexism for our people. All of these principles
underpin our democratic dispensation.

Njengoko isigqeba esikhulu sikaKhongolozi sisoloko sisenza minyaka le,
umhla wesi-8 kuJanuwari usetyenziswa njengekhwelo kubo bonke abathandi
bolawulo lwenkqubo yedemokhrasi eMzantsi Afrika lokuba bayiqinise imibhinqo
bezabalazela ulawulo olululo, uxolo elizweni, ubulungisa, indyebo nentlutha
kumntu wonke ukuze siqinisekise inkululeko epheleleyo yabantu bethu.

Ngundoqo lo wesifundo esasifundiswa ngamatshantliziyo ezwe lakowethu
ngomnyaka ka-1955, eyigqithisela kuthi le mfundo ngoMqulu weNkululeko
yabantu owaba yinkwenkwezi eqaqambileyo nesikhokelo sobomi obutsha.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[As the National Executive Council of the ANC annually does, the 8th of
January is marked as a day to remind all those who are committed to
democratic rule in South Africa to re-affirm their commitment to proper
governance, peace in the country, justice, wealth and prosperity for all,
so as to assure complete democracy for our people.

This is the original lesson taught to us by the compatriots of our country
in 1955, which they carried over to us through the people’s Freedom
Charter, which became the milestone of new life.]

The cadres of the ANC and of its allies, the SA Communist Party and the
Congress of South African Trade Unions, as well as members of the
population who are mobilised under the SA National Civics Organisation, are
committed to this.

We know their calibre. We can best describe the majority of those cadres in
the words of that professional revolutionary, President Fidel Castro,
leader of the Cuban revolution and head of state of that country. When
responding to a sustained systematic, reactionary campaign against Che
Guevara, he said on September 28 1959, and I quote:

  We know from abundant experience who will stay through difficult times.
  We know from abundant experience who will fight to the death and who will
  jump ship. We know how far each person will go, and we have the right to
  know which comrades can always be counted on to defend this revolution.

The members and supporters of the ANC and Congress alliance who stay the
course will be available always, Comrade President, to discharge the
obligations they have to make the lives of our people better … [Applause.]
… and together with government and the security services will create
conditions for peace and stability in our country.

The safety and security of our people is a key element of peace and
stability. In 1992 the ANC defined what kind of police structure would be
necessary to create the circumstances that would lead to safety and
security in our country. The first thing was to reorientate and refocus the
police, and to transform them from a militaristic structure to one whose
main thrust would be service to the people.

Xa sasiwuxovula lo mba, sathi amapolisa kunyanzelekile ukuba asebenzisane
nabantu, kuba sabona mhlophe ukuba eyona ndlela yokulwa ulwaphulo-mthetho
kukuhlanganisa amapolisa nabantu, bekunye bajongane nabenzi bobubi
abangqondo-gqwirha. Wathi uKhongolose ke ngoko, ingekho le ntsebenziswano
akukho mapolisa anokusebenza ngempumelelo.

Kwakucacile kuthi, sikhokelwa yi-Freedom Charter, ukuba phantsi
kweempembelelo zenkululeko eyeza ngonyaka ka-1994, uxolo nobudlelwano
phantsi kolawulo lwabantu lulo olwaluya kusiphathela ubomi obutsha nozinzo.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[When we discussed this issue, we said it is high time that the police work
hand-in-hand with the community, because we saw clearly that the best way
of combating crime is through a joint effort between the police and the
community, confronting criminals whose minds are like that of a witch,
together. The ANC said that without this co-operation the police would not
be able to do their job with success.

It was clear to us, guided by the Freedom Charter, under the influence of
the democracy which we achieved in 1994, that peace and friendship, under
the people’s governance, would bring new life and stability.]


That is the reason we argued for a democratic election in South Africa soon
after 1990, when the people’s organisations were unbanned, political
prisoners freed and those who had gone into exile allowed to return home.
That is the reason the legitimate government, installed in the aftermath of
the all-inclusive democratic election, became the best instrument to bring
peace and stability to our country.

Indeed, third-force activities were brought to a halt. The struggling
masses saw a return to peace in their communities and the path towards
freedom, democracy, peace, justice and prosperity became clearer.

In the first decade of freedom our people have participated as a nation
united in action to create conditions for peace and stability. In their
commitment to the building of a better South Africa and a better world,
they continue to say: “There shall be peace and friendship. Kuya kulawula
uxolo nobudlelwane.”

Shenge, allow me to assure you that the security services under our
democratic control will never allow for the resurgence of political
violence from whatever quarter, not in KwaZulu-Natal and not anywhere else
in our country.

The matters you raised yesterday will be investigated, and will be
investigated thoroughly. I have a report that refers to some of the matters
that you raised, which I will share with you.

However, the one thing that I want to raise here relates to the murder of
the mayor of Nongoma, Mr Sikhonde. It is a matter of public record that
investigations happened in that case and, finally, at the trial in the High
Court at Mtubatuba one Clifford Nkuna was brought in as a witness. He had
made certain allegations, but in court he not only failed to substantiate
those allegations, he was thoroughly discredited by the court.

Just listen to what the judge said in his summary referring to the evidence
that Nkuna had given, and I quote: “It was wild, nonsensical and a frolic
of his own.”

However, the police were still instructed to continue to investigate the
allegations that he had made, and in the end it was proved that the
allegations were false, and consequently Nkuna was arrested and charged
with perjury. So it is incorrect that all the Nkuna allegations should be
brought out, because they were false and proven to be false.

The SA Police Service celebrated the 10th anniversary of its existence on
27 January, and there are many things that they were celebrating that day.

There are a number of people who have come into partnership with the police
in order to deal with crime as crime fighters. I want to mention the fact
that many of the people involved with crime have also indicated that crime
has gone down. However, when we reported last year that the levels of crime
had gone down in South Africa, the hon Leon said we lied.

Of course, he will not say that big business is lying when they say the
same thing. He will not say that the American Chamber of Commerce is wrong
when it says that crime and personal safety are no longer the primary
concerns of American business people wanting to invest in our country. He
will not accuse the banks of lying when they say that bank robberies and
cash-in-transit heists have subsided.

There are a number of leaders of the opposition parties here who, when I
sit there or am speaking here, I admire - very respectable people, from
Shenge here right down, people who are disciplined. [Interjections.] They
never behave the way that the leader of the DA does, who cackles like a hen
all the time when people are speaking here. [Interjections.] He does not
care who is at the podium. When the President speaks, he cackles on like a
hen. Whenever I speak or any of the people here speaks, he continues to
cackle like a hen.

Well, I suppose he is doing this because his advisers have said to him: “It
is correct to do so.” So let us not blame him; let us blame those advisers.
They are wrong. [Interjections.] He believes that what he is doing is
correct. [Interjections.] Let us allow him to continue cackling like a hen,
as he usually does … [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Do you have a point of
order, hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I just needed to
be advised on the Rules of Parliament in relation to whether members are
allowed to take photographs in the Chamber. I chanced on Mr Leon taking a
photograph of Minister Nqakula. I know he admires him, but is it
parliamentary? [Interjections.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I will delete it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The Leader of the Opposition has
indicated that he will delete the photograph. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, the point is the principle, whether
or not members of Parliament are allowed to bring cellular phones and use
them in that way.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Minister, you are quite
correct; it is not permitted in terms of the Rules of Parliament.
[Interjections.] Order!

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Chairperson … [Interjections.] Hon members
should please take the advice of their hon Minister. He spoke about the
opposition heckling. Will members allow me my constitutional right, please?
[Interjections.]

Mr Chairperson, Mr President, Deputy President, hon members of Parliament,
I also share the observation made by the Minister that every single ANC
member who came to this podium referred to the Freedom Charter. I
understand and appreciate the historical value of that document. I also
share the sentiments they have. I can understand that. However, the Freedom
Charter does not suspend the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.
[Applause.] And the Freedom Charter does not absolve the government from
accountability. Let’s talk about that.

History will judge the Mbeki presidency harshly for its key policy failures
and its inability to give life to the values of transparency and
accountability enshrined in the Constitution.
No single issue better illustrates the misallocation of resources and
corruption than the arms deal. [Interjections.] The squandering of
resources on the arms deal represents the worst kind of betrayal of the
priorities and values demanded by the Constitution. Idasa describes the
arms deal scandal as the litmus test of South Africa’s commitment to
democracy and good governance.

There is no escaping the fact that the government has failed this test. The
President himself needs to take a large share of responsibility for this
failure. The President chaired the Cabinet subcommittee that negotiated the
arms deal package. He must therefore take responsibility for the fact that
officials of the Department of Defence now plead in Parliament that the
costs of the arms deal are such that the SANDF cannot even maintain its
existing equipment and that many millions more are required for the
integration and operationalisation of the strategic defences packages. Ask
the Minister of Defence: he will tell you more about that.

Still more bizarre is the acknowledgement of an equipment mismatch which is
so severe that the weapons we have purchased are unsuited for peacekeeping
operations in Burundi and the DRC.

The first arms deal revealed the abuse of powers of public office by the
President and his Ministers and other large-scale irregularities. Undaunted
by these failings, government has now embarked on a second arms deal which
was rushed through in mid-December when Parliament was in recess. The
proposed purchase of up to R14 billion worth of A400M military transport
aircraft has never been referred to Parliament, nor has it been shown to
meet the requirements of section 217 of the Constitution, which requires
government’s procurements to be conducted in accordance with a system that
is fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost-effective.

Furthermore, government has also failed to explain why the deal is being
negotiated by the Department of Transport and not the Department of
Defence. Is this because the Department of Transport is not compelled to
follow the recommendations made in the JIT report which sought to avoid the
sort of irregularities that blighted the first arms deal?

It appears that government has clearly not learned from the mistakes of the
first arms deal. The affordability study that went to Cabinet in 1999
warned Ministers about the risks of the first arms deal. It warned that the
expenditure on the arms deal would crowd out social investment in housing,
education, health and welfare. It noted that the government would face
mounting fiscal, financial and economic difficulties. It also noted that
instead of creating 65 000 jobs, the negative economic consequences would
see the loss of between 115 000 and 200 000 jobs. It is also known that
senior military officials and other officials within government opposed the
arms deal.

I do not have much time. I just want to ask four questions in conclusion,
Mr Chair, if you will allow me to do so. Firstly, what pressure did the
President apply to the Auditor-General to effect changes to his draft
report? Secondly, why did he disband the Heath Special Investigating Unit,
when this was the one unit with the requisite legal powers to uncover
instances of corruption? Thirdly, why did he and his colleagues ignore the
unambiguous warnings of the affordability study and why was that report
never referred to Parliament? Finally, how could the President have been so
gullible as to believe that R30 billion spent on the arms deal would
magically translate into off-set benefits of over R100 billion? Please
answer these four questions. [Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Rev K M ZONDI: Deputy Chairperson, on Friday the President spoke of a
strong and vibrant nation invigorated with hope and promise – a country
reborn, a country that is striving day by day to leave the divisions and
discords of yesterday behind, a country that has taken its place in the
family of nations and is respected as an African continental leader.

The picture the President painted was one which I think we all recognise,
support and promote. The President also drew attention to South Africa’s
solid market fundamentals and bullish economic outlook, with growth edging
towards 4%. Macroeconomic stability has been achieved.

Parts of the economy have been liberalised and some economic sectors have
become more competitive. These are major achievements. The IFP, as a
constructive opposition, acknowledges the government’s role in helping to
create this virtuous framework. However, we urge government to quicken the
pace of change and economic liberalisation. If we are to compete
successfully in the global economy, this is not the time to be complacent
or to go wobbly.

Economic growth remains low compared to other developmental states and is
lower than government’s own stated aspirations. Most alarming, the number
of entrants to the labour market is growing three times faster than the
economy is able to create jobs. We are in many ways experiencing what some
economists have described as jobless growth and, paradoxically, it is the
crippling rigidity of the labour market legislation which was designed to
protect workers that in our view makes it onerous for work seekers to gain
access to the labour market.

The Expanded Public Works Programme, which we fully support, no matter how
laudatory, cannot be an economic panacea or a solution to create
sustainable employment. Despite an investment of R1,5 billion, so far only
76 000 jobs have been created. These, we must be reminded, are only short-
term for three to six months duration. In order to create jobs, government
must do more to attract direct foreign investments, which are lagging
behind other developing states, as well as increase internal investments.

Investors, of course, we are informed, are also concerned about the impact
of HIV and Aids on our work force. We therefore urge companies to follow
the example of Anglo-American and other progressive companies, which have
over the past two years  implemented extensive voluntary counselling and
testing for HIV infection, coupled with antiretroviral therapy for
employees progressing to Aids.

Investors have also invariably expressed concern over the manner in which
black economic empowerment is implemented. The IFP fully supports the
principle of black economic empowerment. However, it calls upon government
to give opportunities to companies that comply with social transformation
requirements and on their ability to add commercial value to the business.

Potential conflicts of interest must be avoided at all times. The
reluctance of government to develop standards, anti-trust and pro
competition legislation to break the grip of our private and public cartels
and monopolies on our economy is also a matter of concern. Indeed, these
negative factors are ominous clouds on the horizon, which could, if
unchecked, compromise our long-term political and social stability. We
would nevertheless like commend President Mbeki for his candour in
acknowledging that government has fallen short in its endeavour to create 1
million jobs, and in meeting its own service delivery targets which the
President gave in his state of the nation address last year.

The IFP believes that Parliament must exercise a greater public policy
oversight role over the executive. It is equally important that government
itself is accountable to this forum. We commend the President for taking
the lead in this regard. We look forward to hearing Ministers explain to
this House how and why their departments failed to live up to the
President’s targets. I must strike a cautionary note and say that it is
vital to our public discourse and national stability that the ruling party
does not make promises that it cannot realistically fulfil.

The ANC campaigned on the basis that it would create 1 million jobs and
laid out ambitious proposals to provide housing, improve transport and
basic services. In making promises that are difficult to keep, we must be
careful not to raise unrealistic expectations and thus create a culture of
entitlement and dependency. The state has limited resources and capacity –
the President reminded us last Friday. Real transformation is brought about
by a community taking initiatives about their plight and only assisted by
government and others to success in a bottom-up approach. It is vital that
we give people a hand up, not a hand down, and rather equip them with life
skills of self-help and self-reliance.

We were encouraged by the President’s condemnation of the constitutional
charade in Togo, and his upholding of tenets of good governance and
transparency, as enshrined also in Nepad and throughout the African
continent. We must be vigilant in defending democracy and the rule of law
at home and abroad at all times. We are particularly mindful at this time
of the people of Zimbabwe who will soon be going to the polls. The question
that must be posed is: Is all we have done pertaining to Zimbabwe all there
is to do, is that the best we can do? Is there no more we can do as this
great self-respecting nation?

We have achieved much. In many ways the next decade will be more difficult
than the last, as the imperatives of nation-building and reconciliation
give way to the pursuit of progress and prosperity for all, not just an
elite few. We believe we will achieve this by building healthy partnerships
between government and society, between the individual and the community
for the betterment of the situation for us all. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S C CWELE: Chairperson, as the President was speaking on 11 February, we
were touched by the spirit of John Langaliballe Dube …

… uMafukuzela onjengezulu, uzikhala zemithi ngokudedela imisebe yelanga,
umongameli wokuqala we-ANC, ivolontiya loxolo eladlulela kwelokhokho ngaye
futhi umhla ka-11 February ngo-1946.

Sathintwa umonya wenkosi u-Albert Luthuli owahola u-ANC ngezikhathi
ezinzima zesihluku sikahulumeni wobandlululo. Nango-1955 amaBhunu aze
amvimba ukuthi aye kwinkomfa eKliptown eyayiyobumba umqulu wenkululeko
yabantu baseNingizimu Afrika. Yiwo lo mqulu owaba umthombo wamandla
okulwisana nobandlululo ezizukulwaneni ezalandala, uhlahla indlela eya
enkululekweni. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Those who know him would say…Mafukuzela who is like heaven, spaces between
trees letting the sun shine through. The first President of the ANC. The
volunteer of peace who died on 11 February 1946.

We were touched by the spirit of Albert Luthuli who led the ANC during
tough times of the apartheid government. In 1955 the Afrikaners prevented
him from taking part in the Kliptown conference that made the Freedom
Charter for the people of South Africa. It was that charter that became the
power to fight against apartheid for the generations that followed and that
mapped the way to freedom.]

Chair, we bring greetings of peace from the people of KwaZulu-Natal, who
have emerged from three decades of chaos, intolerance and violence that has
claimed more than 20 000 lives. They, like the rest of South Africans, have
committed themselves to an irreversible path of peace, freedom and
development. As the communities wash each others’ wounds, they say: We are
not afraid of our past. Together we must start building memorials for the
dead as a reminder that never again will we revert to conflict.

These community initiatives started in places such as Gcilima and Mgababa
and they are happening all over KwaZulu-Natal. This year marks the tenth
anniversary of the Shobashobane massacre.

Lapha Mongameli nawe Sihlalo, sivakashelwe ngomunye ubaba owasinda kulesi
sigemegeme, ubaba uPhansi Cele uphelezelwa yinkosi yakwaVukuzithathe nemeya
yogu uMagaye. [Ihlombe.]

Lezi zithunywa ziyakumema Mongameli, ukuthi ubuye, hhayi ukuzocosha
izidumbu kodwa uzogubha uxolo nokubuyisana emiphakathini.

Ngemizamo kaHulumeni we-ANC namuhla sebephumile ebumnyameni. Banogesi,
abasaphuzi amanzi nezilwane, sebenamanzi ahlanzekile. [Ihlombe.]

U-ANC ukwazile ukuletha uxolo ngisho nasezinhlanganweni zamatekisi
ezintathu ebezilwa endaweni yakwaNongoma. Lezi zinhlangano beziholwa
nguSputla Mpungose, nguNkalankala Zungu kanye noMangisi Buthelezi. Laba
osomotakisi balwe iminyaka elinganiselwe ku-15, sebesetshenziswa
nangamaqembu ezombusazwe angathandi uxolo nokuthula.

Namuhla kunqamukile ukugobhoza kwegazi endaweni yakwaNongoma nasoLundi.
Abantu bakhona bathi bakhathele ukulwa sebezinikele ekuthuleni. Namuhla
ngemizamo yalaba baholi endaweni yakwaNongoma sekuqale uhlelo lokulima
ummbila emakhaya olunconywa
Umhlaba wonke. Abantu bakhona Mongqmeli bayabonga kakhulu bathi uHulumeni
kaKhongolose usitholile isixazululo sokuxosha indlala emakhaya ngokulima.

Pho ngabe liyini icala lalaba baholi esibathunaza kule Ndlu? Ngabe ukuthi
sebeqoke ukujoyina u-ANC? Ngabe yingoba besebenzela uxolo nentuthuko?
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Today, Mr President, Chairperson, we are visited by the survivor of that
massacre, Mr Phansi Cele, accompanied by Inkosi from Vukuzithathe and the
Mayor of Ugu, Mr Magaye.

These delegates are inviting the President to go there, not to fetch
corpses, but to celebrate peace and reconciliation of communities.

They have come out of darkness because of the ANC-led government
initiatives. They now have electricity. They no longer share water with
animals. They have clean water. [Applause.]

The ANC has succeeded in bringing peace to three taxi factions in the
Nongoma area. The taxi factions were led by Sputla Mpungose, Nkalankala
Zungu and Mangisi Buthelezi. The taxi owners fought for almost 15 years.
They were also used by political parties that hate peace.

There is no bloodshed in the Nongoma and ulundi areas. People from these
areas say that they are tired of fighting and they are committed to peace.
The initiatives by these leaders in Nongoma area have led to the programme
of growing mealies which is admired all over the world. President, people
from this area are thankful to the ANC-led government for coming up with
the solution of stopping hunger through the growing of mealies. What is the
crime against the leaders we normally condemn in this House? Is it because
they have joined the ANC? Is it because they are working for peace and
development?]

Chairperson, the Sunday Times reported that Sipho Nhlapo, the chairperson
of the DA youth at Phumolong in the Free State, claimed that, and I quote:

  People have been unhappy. We are trying to attract attention to our
  problems. We are burning tyres and setting barricades.

Does the leader of the DA, Tony Leon, approve of these actions of sabotage?
[Interjections.] What will they gain from this chaos, except short-term
political expediency? We call for calm. We call upon all patriots in the
Free State province to work with the government to address these challenges
that confront them today, but are the result of years of deprivation.

As we celebrate this peace and friendship we will continue to forge
partnership between our communities and our security establishment. We will
build on the community police forums and create all-inclusive community
safety forums in order to allow people to participate in shaping all
aspects of their security.

We may not achieve lasting peace if weapons still flood our communities.
Masses of people are responding positively to the national call to
surrender weapons to the police. We will intensify this campaign as we move
towards 31 March.

Lo mkhankaso wokubuyisa izikhali uzofika kuzo zonke izindawo. Izibhamu
siyazi zisebantwini, zisezinhlanganweni. Labo abayozithola besaqhinqe
nalezi zikhali emuva kosuku lomnqamulajuqu bayozithola bebhekene nengalo
ende yomthetho. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[This operation of returning all firearms will reach all places. We know
that the firearms are with people and organisations. Those who will be
found in possession of weapons after the expiration of the indemnity date
will face the long arm of the law.]

Today, Mr President, we have a South Africa that is at peace with itself,
its neighbours and the world. We will continue to be inspired by the
demands of the Freedom Charter that there shall be peace and freedom rooted
in the firm foundation of equal human rights, opportunities and status for
all the people. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Mr Chairman, at the outset let me state that the DA joins
the President in welcoming the fact that South Africa’s real domestic
output growth accelerated to 5,6% in the third quarter of last year, a
result, primarily, of macroeconomic stability, limited liberalisation and
increased competitiveness of certain sectors of our economy. Four-quarter
results, however, were a more modest 4%, while the annual growth-rate
figure of 3,8% was more modest still, as are the projections for the
future.

There is a consensus in South Africa that economic growth in excess of 6%
is the key to halting the rising unemployment, alleviating poverty and
achieving reasonable standards of living for all South Africans. Yet we are
unable to achieve this. Contrary to what the President says, we do lag
behind our peers in emerging markets. Thailand is growing at 6%, India at
6,6%, and Malaysia and Chile at 6,8%, to quote just a few. There are many
other examples.

Now the question has to be asked: Why are we unable to achieve these levels
of growth, on a sustainable basis? One of the constraints, if we are frank,
has been identified by the Economic Freedom of the World Index, compiled by
the Fraser Institute, namely over-regulation of labour markets and
administrative obstacles facing the start-up of new businesses,
particularly small business. Here let me welcome the President’s commitment
to address this, particularly exemptions with regard to what he terms
“central bargaining and other labour arrangements”.

Let me immediately commend to the President an agreement reached last week
between the National Union of Leather and Allied Workers – not a Cosatu
union, I might add – and the footwear industry. The arrangement, by
exempting some employers from industry wage rates, effectively introduces a
form of two-tier labour market, a policy long advanced by us and long
slammed by the ANC. The result of this agreement will not only stop the
loss of jobs, but it is estimated that within five years, Mr Turok, could
be doubled to 32 000. This is what we should be doing: unshackle the
economy, unshackle the workers, unshackle the jobless, and create
opportunity.

However, increasingly another constraints are emerging, those of skills. It
is estimated that South Africa suffers from a current shortage of about
500 000, workers, and this figure is rising. The exodus of expertise by way
of emigration is worrying, and from the Public Service alarming and short-
sighted.

Let’s not play with words, Minister Moleketi. Whether one calls it
voluntary severance packages or retrenchments, the fact is that government
in the late-1990s spent R1 billion encouraging teachers to leave their
posts, and today we are spending R600 million encouraging them to come
back.

Let’s also be frank about the Setas. The potential for them materially
affecting our skills shortage is minimal, even if they spend their entire
budgets, and we know from history they haven’t spent their entire
allocations. The 25 Setas have a target of 85 000 trainees for the present
year and 200 000 trainees for the next three years. Even if the Setas
reached the target of trainees, a Mail & Guardian survey revealed that only
14% of the trainees actually complete their training. That constitutes just
over 11 000 graduates. Now we have to be frank and admit that in terms of
our skills requirement this is just a drop in the ocean. We have
fundamentally change the way we tackle the skills shortage. Setas, we have
to acknowledge, have been a dismal failure.

Let’s also be frank about our immigration policy, or lack thereof. Even the
latest draft regulations can only be described as investor-unfriendly.
Small and medium-sized businesses create more jobs than large businesses,
yet these draft regulations, particularly the high cash guarantee
requirement and the requirement that the businesses shall contribute to the
geographic spread of economic activity, hit small businesses particularly.

Government needs to stop telling business what to do and where to do it. It
needs to get out of the business of business and remove the constraints on
business. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, Comrade President, Deputy
President, hon members, colleagues, comrades, we dedicate this debate to 50
years of the Freedom Charter, to the aspirations that our people had for
their country, their wish for the future their children should have and the
undiminished hope that such a future is realisable.

We’ve made a lot of reference in the past to a group of people called the
architects of apartheid. Today, I think, the time is right for us to make
some reference in recognition of what I want to call “the architects of
freedom” or “the architects of democracy”.

At a time when it was difficult to hope and our nation was embroiled in
war, hatred and suffering, these architects of freedom envisaged for our
country a future that to many seemed an utopia that could only remain a
dream. They declared, through the Freedom Charter, that indeed South Africa
belongs to all who live in it, black and white.

Our President has challenged us to test the reality of such a commitment
and to assess whether we are on track to realise the goals of the Freedom
Charter and, most importantly, whether we have the capacity to implement
that which is outstanding in this work. In essence, what have we been doing
to justify our eminent place in the architecture of freedom and democracy?
Comrade President, siyavuma - we agree.

We also believe that this is a challenge to which we should respond and
with which we should engage honestly, with a view to isolating those areas
in our respective responsibilities that have been addressed, identifying
the limitations and shortcomings, and properly planning for the tasks
ahead.

Ten years on, an assessment of our work as government cannot merely be
based on policy statements and commitments in principle. The Freedom
Charter was not meant for implementation by the apartheid government. We
were committing ourselves to the standards by which a future government
should be measured. We made these bold undertakings and today we will be
honest enough to judge our work against that basis.

  This is what we said: “All shall be equal before the law!”

We further said:

  No-one shall be imprisoned, deported or restricted without a fair trial;
  No-one shall be condemned by the order of a government official ...

In the past 10 years we’ve moved swiftly to transform a judiciary whose
purpose in the past was to perpetuate the subjugation of the majority of
our people to oppression and indignity.

We’ve emphasised the need for a criminal justice system that is based on
the uttermost respect for human rights and sanctity of human life. At our
own insistence, no one individual is above the law and even all of us here
are subjected to the same law. Of course, we are accorded similar rights as
everyone else.

At times, Chairperson, we’ve been accused of interference in the judicial
system. If we ever had this opportunity, why would we have allowed a man
widely known to be the mastermind behind the poisoning of our people to
walk free in our streets? Wouldn’t we have intervened, for instance, to
ensure that a man who is responsible for frustrating our President’s
efforts towards peace in Africa through the funding of mercenary activities
does not walk free, whatever our views?

Whatever power we are perceived to have, we’ve chosen to suffer in silence.
Instead we’ve defended rulings as decisions of the court that need to be
respected. For the record, the ANC government is the only government in
this country that has ever guaranteed the independence of the judiciary,
and we will continue to defend it … [Applause] … the way we have defended
the many other gains of democracy.

The principle of a fair trial, as envisaged in the Freedom Charter, is
centrally embedded in our system. Of course, there have been those that
have sought to undermine it. And if anybody dares to challenge some of the
dubious decisions taken in our courts, we are then intimidated into
accepting these in the name of the independence of the judiciary.

To demonstrate that this is neither about independence nor interference,
we’ve seen people within the judiciary itself being attacked for
challenging some of these decisions. Maybe the problem with this argument
is the attempt at separating the transformation of the judiciary from the
independence of the judiciary. For us it is not a question of one or the
other. In a nutshell, the ANC is transforming a judiciary, which, by the
way, was never independent. [Applause.]

The independence of the judiciary, therefore, is a result of the
transformation that we introduced in this country. If the argument is that
the judiciary is not a subject for transformation, then those who advance
such an argument have never come out clearly to say so.

The transformation of the judiciary in this country therefore remains a key
challenge for this government and for this country, for the record, since
1994. Statistics indicate that 58% of the judiciary is white, 42% black and
13,3% women. We saw them walking in here on the day of the opening of
Parliament, and we actually had to say, “Malibongwe igama lamadoda”.

The entire membership of the Constitutional Court was here, but Yvonne was
not here, and we are saying the judiciary must not be transformed. We also
said that all laws that discriminate on the basis of race, colour or belief
should be repealed.

The biggest challenge facing the architects of democracy has always been
that of reversing the damage done to our society by years of racial
discrimination and animosity throughout our country. Today our entire
nation has been mobilised behind the commitment to build a nation and
reconcile our past.

I must say, Chairperson, that because racism was so institutionally and
systematically entrenched, the mere repealing of laws was not going to
suffice in healing our society of this scourge.

Understandably, there have been a lot of areas in our society that have
served to perpetuate racism. These have included access to mainstream
economic activity, particularly outside the public sector and other social
engagements. So while a lot of work has been done in this regard, the
challenges indeed continue.

Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition challenged us from this podium to
choose one path or the other. We were challenged not to continue our
obsession with the race issue, because we would fall short of the practical
goals we’ve set for our country’s progress. This sounded like a man with a
stomach full of food who tries to ask those who are hungry not to speak of
their hunger, because, for the sake of progress, they must forget their
hunger and concentrate on the work to be done. [Interjections.]

It did not end there. We were told, in an opportunistic way, that Afrikaans-
speaking South Africans should be allowed to have Afrikaans-medium schools,
to the exclusion of others, because the rest of us have our own English-
medium schools. The presumption is that the rest of us who constitute the
majority of this country are English.

If the argument should be made that Sepedi-speaking children should go to
Sepedi-medium schools and that Zulu-speaking children should do the same,
what implications will that have for a South Africa that is nonracial and
unified, a country that belongs to all those who live in it, black and
white? [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Let’s no advise one another to keep quiet about the past, lest we forget
about it. There is a great danger that future generations might repeat the
same mistake we made.

In this regard, Comrade President, we are encouraged by your recognition of
those white South Africans who, when it was difficult, took the first
initiative to make contact with the ANC. To their list I would like to add
a group of women who were the first to come and meet with other women in
Zimbabwe. Those women were mostly mothers of children who were in the
apartheid army fighting in the frontline against us. They shared with us
their reasons for sacrificing their children in defence of a system we were
fighting, and their pride in washing and ironing their children’s military
uniforms.

We also shared with them our perspective and our own commitment to the
cause, and the things their sons and husbands were doing to the children of
South Africa. We spoke, we shared and we understood one another. We cried,
we agreed, we broke the barriers. These are the things that we need to talk
about amongst ourselves. [Applause.]

There are those amongst us in this House who never made an effort and who
are resisting to make an effort towards reconciliation. However, they find
it comfortable, because the seats are warm, to point fingers at people who
seem not to want to reconcile. [Interjections.]

It is unfinished business because you don’t want to talk about these
things. You better open the wounds so that they can heal. Thank you very
much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs C-S BOTHA: Chairperson, on Friday the President presented a detailed
and considered evaluation of the state of the nation, but he had very
little to say about the biggest employer of labour in the country, namely
agriculture, while this employer is in deep, deep trouble.

Drie jaar gelede is daar op ’n strategiese plan ooreengekom tussen
President Mbeki, as verteenwoordiger van die regering, en georganiseerde
landbou, as verteenwoordigend van bestaande en ontluikende boere. Hierdie
plan het ’n vennootskap tussen landbou en die regering in die vooruitsig
gestel wat sou streef om toegang tot en deelname in die landbou te
vergemaklik, terwyl internasionale mededinging tegelykertyd ontwikkel en
instand gehou sou word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Three years ago agreement was reached on a strategic plan between
President Mbeki, as representative of government, and organised
agriculture, representing existing and emerging farmers. This plan
envisaged a partnership between agriculture and Government that would
strive to facilitate entry into and participation in agriculture, while at
the same time developing and maintaining international competitiveness.]

The President did mention the aspects of broadening access and
participation, albeit almost in passing, considering the importance of the
exercise and the magnitude thereof. However, he did not address the aspect
of international competitiveness. He made no reference to it at all,
despite agriculture in this respect facing its worst crisis in years, if
not decades.

This is a direct result of the dumping of undergrade, subsidised wheat in
South Africa. The World Bank Report: Global Agricultural Trade in
Developing Countries clearly states that developing countries are investing
to increase their agricultural productivity, but these gains will not be
fully translated into poverty reduction, unless industrial and some middle-
income countries reduce agricultural trade protection.

The report goes on to say that continued subsidies by developed countries,
coupled with increased productivity in poor countries, will inevitably
result in overproduction and price declines, causing even greater rural
poverty.

Dis presies wat nou in Suid-Afrika gebeur het. Subsidies in ontwikkelde
lande stimuleer oorproduksie wat die wêreldprys afdwing, en dan word
daardie oorproduksie in ontwikkelende lande soos Suid-Afrika gestort, wat
die plaaslike prys op sy beurt laat ineenstort, soos nou gebeur.

Dit is algemeen bekend dat boere in ontwikkelende lande soos Suid-Afrika
weerloos is teen sulke subsidies. Daarom is daar ruimte geskep in die reëls
van die Wêreld Handelsorganisasie om beskerming te verleen by wyse van
tariewe.

So kan Suid-Afrika ’n invoertarief van 72% op ingevoerde koring hef, en
daarmee die Wes-Kaapse koringbedryf, die plattelandse ekonomie en ook die
infrastruktuur red. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This is exactly what has happened now in South Africa. Subsidies in
developed countries stimulate overproduction, which forces down the world
price, and then the overproduction is dumped in developing countries like
South Africa, which causes the local price to collapse, as is happening
now.

It is generally known that farmers in developing countries like South
Africa are defenceless against such subsidies. Therefore provision has been
made in the rules of the World Trade Organisation to provide protection by
means of tariffs.

In this way South Africa can impose an import levy of 72% on imported wheat
and thus save the Western Cape’s wheat industry, the rural economy and the
infrastructure.]

In her speech today the Minister said: “Give the farmers the resources to
use the land.”

Dit is onverklaarbaar dat die Minister nog nie ‘n rede gevind het om dit
vir die koringboere te doen nie, en dat daar met die huidige 2% tarief
volstaan word. [It is inexplicable that the Minister has not yet found a
reason do to this for wheat farmers, and that the current tariff of 2%
should suffice.]

To aggravate this, ineffective quality controls at the point of importation
allows in products containing so much poisonous seed that a South African
producer would not be allowed to deliver such a product at grain silos in
this country.

In addition, the imported wheat mostly does not measure up to the stringent
milling and baking standards set for South-African-produced wheat, and is
only suitable for use after mixing it in with high-quality locally produced
wheat. The cumulative result is extremely unfair international competition,
with the poorest South Africans in essence - I do not know if this is what
you wish to happen - subsidising the European and American producers’
subsidies.

Added to this parlous state of affairs is the newly legislated property
rates regime on agricultural enterprises, notwithstanding the reservations
of the Fiscal and Financial Commission.

The Free State legislature, in fact - I do not know if everybody is aware
of that - recently voted unanimously for a moratorium on the implementation
of property rates on agricultural enterprises.

While rejoicing in the positive mood …

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: [Inaudible.]

Mrs C-S BOTHA: Thank you, Mr President … of a country on the rise, all in
agriculture will remain on the desperate fringes if we do not intervene
proactively. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA: Chairperson, our President has again raised the issue of
the so-called second economy in his state of the nation address. In his
rather statesmanlike speech, he opines that the people now trapped in the
second economy should not be left behind as the benefits of growth accrue
mainly to skilled persons and members of the black elite. The President is
right.

Indeed, a major goal of our economic policy should be to reduce the size of
the second economy as the vibrant first economy absorbs participants of the
second. In the medium to long term, we do not want, and should not have,
any second economy at all. Unfortunately, the first economy is currently
unable to exert any tractive force on the second, because the government is
yet to bridge them and the transmission mechanism linking the two is too
weak and clogged – the result of a decade of over-regulation.

Participants in the second economy typically engage in the informal sector
to which over-regulation has confined them. This has prevented them from
joining the formal sector and engaging in more lucrative activities. For a
long time now the DA has been calling for an easing of the regulatory
burden that stifles the development of the small business sector and the
creation of formal sector jobs.

Over-regulation is swelling the ranks of the unemployed. The government’s
recent 10% wage hike for farmworkers, at a time when drought and the strong
rand have virtually brought agriculture to its knees, will put thousands
out of work. Similarly, the liberalisation of textile imports without
changing the inflexible wage policy for the textile industry has already
cost 30 000 jobs.

The DA therefore cannot but welcome the President’s plan to deregulate the
small business environment. However, the President gave no details
regarding his plan. [Interjections.] The DA suggests that any plan to
deregulate the small business environment should aim to exempt small
businesses from Bargaining Council wage-setting arrangements which impact
negatively on small labour-intensive businesses; establish a second-tier
labour market substantially to enhance overall labour market flexibility;
ease the restrictions on employment and retrenchment and relax the
employment equity legislation; streamline complaints and appeal processes
at the CCMA and Labour Court; simplify the process of registering new
businesses, particularly small businesses; and reduce the effective
corporate tax rate by significantly lowering the tax rates on small
businesses and eliminating much of our hidden or payroll taxation and
simplify the tax code.

The DA has repeatedly called for these measures and will enthusiastically
support any government plan to address them. If the plan achieves these
things, the President will go down in history as the one who built a bridge
between the first and second economies and laid the basis for the building
of a single, deracialised vibrant economy.

Such a plan will, of course, meet with stiff opposition, alas, from the
President’s own camp. We ask him to brace himself and stand firm, for what
is at stake is the economic emancipation of millions of black people now
trapped in poverty. Mr President, we urge you to work to make the second
economy history, no matter the cost. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr M STEPHENS: Chairperson, His Excellency the President and hon members,
as the President stated in his address, we are indeed at a very auspicious
confluence of events in our history. Bold leadership is required. Now is
the time to take the tide at the flow. [Interjections.]

Mr Mboweni’s pusillanimous response to the country’s economic challenges is
thus doubly regrettable. He says there are risks involved in lowering
interest rates, but there will always be risks! Will he wait until there
are no risks? He will wait until hell freezes over – and even then there is
a risk. Hell might thaw out again. Ambition should be made of sterner
stuff, said the Bard.

Risks that should concern him, he ignores: the stifling of economic growth
- we see it already in Statistics SA’s latest report - and unrelenting
unemployment and poverty that will not be made history soon. He discounts
the vast opportunity cost of not lowering interest rates. Interest rates,
Mr President, are kept high on the backs of the unemployed and the poor.

No, we require vision and leaders with the intestinal fortitude to go where
none have gone before. It is not useful to remind me that the Reserve Bank
is independent, as His Excellency did previously. The bank is only
operationally independent. Government appoints the Governor, sets the
targets and monitors the performance. Its own programme requires it to work
closely with the bank.
Mr President, the buck stops with you. The bank’s operational independence
gives you no succour. Get Mr Mboweni to come on board or cut him loose! Set
him adrift, but let him not delay this ship any longer. The tide will not
always be in our favour.

Even sound economic growth will not turn the second economy soon. South
Africa’s formal sector is just too small to absorb the unemployed masses by
incremental growth. Private enterprise and entrepreneurs convert growth
into employment very parsimoniously. Drastic intervention is required.

The second economy will develop by the growth of state enterprises and new
strategic industries, enterprises not primarily driven by profit, but by
beneficiation and service. Yesterday the hon Holomisa reminded us of
Iscor’s and Sasol’s history in this context. New strategic industries must
be given the highest priority. For example, Biomass is one of the planet’s
most important energy resources. It is the only renewable alternative for
liquid transportation fuel. We would be myopic to ignore such a massive
opportunity.

Transportation fuels, commodity chemicals and combined heat and power
technologies have already been developed. We don’t have to invent them -
they already exist. [Time expired.]

Mnr W P DOMAN: Agb Voorsitter, agb President en lede, plaaslike regering is
tans ongelukkig vir alle Suid-Afrikaners die konsentrasiepunt van
teleurstelling. Die daaglikse ervaring van veral armer Suid-Afrikaners is
dat munisipaliteite nie die nodige dienste lewer nie, en dat magsmisbruik,
korrupsie en nepotisme deur raadslede aan die orde van die dag is.

In die Vrystaat, na die sogenaamde September-revolusie, het onluste nou
weer uitgebreek op dieselfde dag wat die President sy rede gelewer het. Op
televisie sien ons hoe ANC-raadslede in Casspirs gered moet word van hul
eie kiesers. As dit nie vir die ANC se houvas op gemeenskappe in ander
munisipaliteite was nie, sou onluste nog wyer uitgebreek het oor die gebrek
aan dienslewering.

In Johannesburg gaan die ligte letterlik van tyd tot tyd af, en is daardie
magtige stad nie in staat om ordentlike rekeninge te lewer nie, soveel so
dat die Randse Waterraad nou sy eie waterrekeninge apart wil lewer.

Die instelling van “community development workers” is klaarblyklik
noodsaaklik, omdat ten spyte van oor die miljoen staatsdienswerkers en
honderde duisende plaaslike regeringsamptenare en raadslede, nie genoeg
gedoen word om die publiek by regeringsdienste uit te bring nie. Gaan hulle
nie maar net betaalde politieke agente vir die ANC wees nie?
[Tussenwerpsels.] Indien hulle op enige wyse betrek gaan word by die
plaaslike regeringsverkiesing, sal dit die regverdigheid van daardie
verkiesing in gedrang bring.

Die nasionale departement sê self: 139 munisipaliteite is disfunksioneel.
Dat Project Consolidate wil ingryp by 136, byna 50% van die 284
munisipaliteite is, is ’n bewys van die nood.

Van die Tesourie hoor ons nou dat hulle nooit geken is deur die
Afbakeningsraad in die lewensvatbaarheid van munisipaliteite nie. Die
regering vind dit nou nodig om met allerhande maatreëls kapasiteit en
dienslewering by munisipaliteite te verbeter, en ons verwelkom dit, mnr die
President, maar ten minste op drie terreine het die ANC self hierdie
toestand teweeggebring.

Eerstens, terwyl die Vryheidsmanifes bepaal dat almal deel behoort te neem
aan die administrasie van die land, voel veral wit en bruin amptenare dat
hulle uitgesluit word. Net soos in onderwys, het die sogenaamde
transformasie van personeel, soos toegepas deur die ANC-beheerde
munisipaliteite, gelei tot die uittog van duisende kundige amptenare wat
oor die vermoë beskik het om te lewer. Die huidige uittog, wat deur
pensioenfondse bevestig kan word, toon dat die verwerping steeds ervaar
word.

Om mnr Truman Prince, wat gisteraand op Special Assignment was, aan te stel
as munisipale bestuurder vanaf burgemeester, is ’n tweede advertensie
spesiaal geplaas sodat hy kon kwalifiseer. ’n Vorige lid, Bruce Kannemeyer,
is nou die munisipale bestuurder op Stellenbosch. [Tussenwerpsels.] Hy mag
bekwaam wees, maar het hy die kundigheid om klaar te kom sonder vyf
topamptenare wat afgedank is? Kaapstad wil 4 600 hoofsaaklik bruin
amptenare uit diens stel.

Die DA, mnr die President, steun die sosiale kohesie waarvan u gepraat het.
Dit kan veral versterk word as kundige amptenare welkom voel, politieke
lojaliteit nie vergoeilik word nie, en die omgewing geskep word waar goeie
amptenare kan gedy. Tweedens, terwyl die Vryheidsmanifes sê “The people
shall govern”, is dit ongelooflik dat die ANC misbruik maak van die
uitvoerende burgemeesterstelsel deur burgemeesterskomitees soos geheime
kabinette te laat regeer.

’n Goeie voorbeeld hiervan is die Big Bay fiasko in Kaapstad wat in volkome
geheimhouding geskied het. Daar is vandag baie meer geheime besluite op
plaaslike regeringsvlak as wat daar ooit in die ou bedeling was. Ander
raadslede, veral van opposisiepartye, het eintlik oorbodig geword, want
hulle word totaal in die duister gehou.

Die DA staan vir ’n oop regeringstelsel, want alleen dit sal goeie
dienslewering verseker.

Derdens en ten slotte, waar die Vryheidsmanifes mense en diens aan mense
eerste stel, veroorsaak swak dissipline van veral die ANC, wat verreweg die
meeste munisipaliteite beheer, dat burgemeesters en raadslede by die een
skandaal na die ander betrokke is weens selfverryking.

Waarom moet die publiek wag vir kriminele en siviele sake teen raadslede,
terwyl die ANC al lankal op partypolitieke vlak kon opgetree het? Hoe is
dit moontlik dat burgemeesters en raadslede ten spyte van skuldigbevindings
en ondersoeke nog steeds aanbly in hul posisies? In dieselfde mate as wat
die regering wil optree teen staatsamptenare wat nie presteer nie, behoort
ook met partypolitieke dissipline opgetree te word teen raadslede wat
betrokke is by wanadministrasie en korrupsie. [Tyd verstreke.] [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN: Hon Chairperson, hon President and members, local government
is unfortunately the focal point of disappointment for all South Africans
at present. The daily experience of especially the poor in South Africa is
that municipalities do not deliver the necessary services and that abuse of
power, corruption and nepotism on the part of councillors are the order of
the day.

In the Free State, after the so-called September revolution, unrest once
again flared up on the same day that the President delivered his state of
the nation address. We saw on television how Casspirs had to rescue ANC
members from their very own voters. Had it not been for the hold that the
ANC has over communities in other municipalities, unrest would have erupted
over an even wider area because of the lack of service delivery.

In Johannesburg the lights literally go out from time to time, and this
powerful city is not able to provide decent billing, so much so that the
Rand Water Board now wishes to undertake its own billing.

The establishment of community development workers is clearly necessary
because, in spite of over a million Public Service workers and hundreds of
thousands of local government officials and councillors, not enough is
being done to bring the public into contact with government services. Will
they not just become paid political agents for the ANC? [Interjections.]
If they are in any way involved with the local government elections, this
will impact negatively upon the legitimacy of that election.

The national department itself has stated that 139 municipalities are
dysfunctional. The fact that Project Consolidate wants to intervene in 136
or almost 50% of the 284 municipalities is proof of the crisis.

We now hear from the Treasury that the Demarcation Board did not consult
them with regard to the feasibility of municipalities. The government now
finds it necessary, by way of various steps, to improve the capacity and
service delivery of municipalities, and we welcome this, Mr President, but
in at least three areas the ANC itself has brought about this state of
affairs.

Firstly, although the Freedom Charter provides that everyone should
participate in the administration of the country, white and coloured civil
servants in particular feel excluded. As with education, the so-called
transformation of personnel as applied by the ANC-controlled municipalities
has led to an exodus of thousands of skilled officials who had the capacity
to deliver. The current exodus, which can be confirmed by the pension
funds, indicates that rejection is still being experienced.

To appoint Mr Truman Prince, who appeared on Special Assignment last night,
as municipal manager from the position of mayor, a second advertisement had
to be placed to ensure his eligibility. A former member, Bruce Kannemeyer,
is now the municipal manager at Stellenbosch. [Interjections.] He may be
competent, but does he possess the necessary skills to survive without five
top officials who have been dismissed? Cape Town wants to retire 4600,
mainly coloured, officials.

The DA, Mr President, supports the social cohesion you have mentioned. It
can be strengthened especially if competent officials are made to feel
welcome, political loyalty is not an excuse and a climate is created in
which officials can thrive. Secondly, whilst the Freedom Charter dictates
that “the people shall govern”, it is incredible that the ANC abuses the
executive mayoral system by allowing mayoral committees to govern like
secret cabinets.

A good example is the Big Bay fiasco in Cape Town that took place in
complete secrecy. There are currently far more secret resolutions at local
government level than was ever the case in the old dispensation. Either
councillors, especially those from opposition parties, have actually become
superfluous, because they are kept completely in the dark.

The DA stands for open governance, because only that will ensure good
service delivery.

Thirdly and in conclusion, whereas the Freedom Charter gives priority to
people and service rendered to people, a lack of discipline, especially in
the ANC, which controls by far the most municipalities, has led to mayors
and councillors being involved in one scandal after another due to self-
enrichment.

Why must the public wait for criminal and civil action to be instituted
against councillors when the ANC could have taken action a lot earlier at
party-political level? How is it possible that mayors and councillors
alike, in spite of being found guilty and ongoing enquiries, are still
occupying their posts? To the same extent that the government wishes to
take action against public servants who do not perform, councillors
involved in mal-administration and corruption should also be subjected to
party- political discipline. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Chairperson. Unfortunately, I
can only refer to two hon members from the other side: one needs a little
tender-loving care and the other needs a kick in the bottom. The one who
needs the tender-loving care is my friend, the hon Minister of Home
Affairs. I want to assure her that the DA has a far better opinion of her
than that held by the ANC Youth League. We do not regard her or her
organisation as holy cows.

Talking about the bovine brings me to the hon Minister of Labour, who seems
to have had a rush of blood to the head as a result of all this reference
to the Freedom Charter, and already he seems to be running away from the
President’s commitment to do something significant and substantial about
deregulating small business in South Africa. I think the hon President
should talk to that Minister and pull him into line by the time we have a
reply tomorrow.

For the past 11 years we have heard virtually nothing about the Freedom
Charter. Over the past two days, on the other hand, every single governing-
party speaker has referred to it in hushed and reverent tones. Some of the
promises of the Freedom Charter are universal, and are still valid. Other
aspects have been overtaken by the tide of history.

When the main author of the Freedom Charter, Rusty Bernstein, penned its
ringing phrases, he and others still believed that socialism was the way of
the future. The fall of the Berlin Wall confined socialism to the dustbin
of history, and that it is the way of the future is believed nowadays only
by millionaire communists such as Ben Turok. [Applause.]

One of President Mbeki’s achievements has been to reject populist socialism
and move South Africa towards a market economy, to the incredible benefit
of the freedom and the prosperity of this country. It is strange then that
the ANC should measure itself against a political manifesto espousing a
defunct ideology, when there is a much more important document. It is one
which most South Africans committed themselves to in a grand and moving
national consensus. I refer to the Constitution of South Africa.

Our Constitution contains all of the worthwhile features of the Freedom
Charter, including some of the wonderful values of equality, freedom and
justice, which should guide us. The ANC should measure itself against that
Constitution and its promises, rather than an outdated political manifesto
of 50 years ago. [Interjections.]

Ironically, the ANC is doing something which Rusty Bernstein then, and the
drafters of our Constitution now, would never have believed. It has moved
significantly away from nonracialism towards racial nationalism, and the re-
racialisation of our country. We have the Registrar of Deeds suggesting
that race classification must be introduced in the title deeds of property
transactions. Doctor Verwoerd would be smiling. Are we really going back to
group areas affidavits, front companies, nominee owners and legislative
attempts at defining whether people are black, white, Asian, coloured or
“other coloured”? Are we going to try the pencil test and the fingertip
test again to check? [Interjections.] No wonder that the hon Marthinus van
Schalkwyk and people of his type are fitting in so well with the ANC today.
[Applause.]

The commitment to fairness, equality and justice enshrined in the
Constitution should apply not only to ordinary citizens, but also to
members of this Parliament. We have recently been confronted by allegations
that senior government officials met in secret and tried to thrash out a
special deal, a gentlemen’s agreement, for disgraced ANC Chief Whip Tony
Yengeni. Whatever else Yengeni might be, he is not a gentleman.

South Africans find it unacceptable that a special deal for the politically
powerful elite is also looming in the Travelgate scandal. [Interjections.]
The DA insists that the innocent must be exonerated, but those who betrayed
the trust of the people, and stole the people’s money, must be criminally
punished. [Interjections.] They must also refund the people’s money and
they must lose their seats in Parliament, and those sanctioned must include
the 35 or 40 members currently taking the blame, as well as the other 60
that we hear about who seem to be getting off scot-free.

The ANC has delayed the investigation and it tried to intimidate the
Scorpions. My hon friend, the ANC Chief Whip, went out of his way to point
his finger at the Scorpions instead of blaming the crooks. Why didn’t he
talk about the people who were responsible, and not the people who are
investigating? I want to warn hon members that this scandal will not go
away unless it is properly concluded. Like the arms deal, it will continue
to fester away with bits and pieces leaking out if, at the end, justice is
not done and not seen to be done. We owe it to the people to ensure that
there are not two types of justice in our country, one for the political
elite and friends of the ANC on the one hand and another for ordinary
voters and ordinary citizens. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

If the ANC were to measure itself against the Constitution today, could it
credibly say that it had achieved the goal of equality before the law, as
set out in that document, in the Constitution? Would it be possible for the
ruling party to say, with any integrity, that its obsession with race-based
transformation conforms to the spirit of equality, of liberty, of justice,
as enshrined in the Constitution of South Africa?

It is time that the ANC reviewed its commitment to our Constitution before
turning to the populist rhetoric of an outdated political manifesto, which
is obviously going to be used to present themselves as the victims on the
outside, bravely putting on this fight for the people of South Africa.

It’s false, it’s absolutely false, and what you need to do is accept the
responsibilities of power. You have been in power for 11 years, and the
people must be told that. And they must also be told what you are doing to
carry out the promises and the values of the Constitution, because the
Freedom Charter might have been wonderful 50 years ago, but the
Constitution of South Africa is the one you and we are sworn to uphold.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, a day before the funeral
of Chris Hani, the hon Govan Mbeki was interviewed by Felicia Suttle.
Telling us about the life on Robben Island, he summarised it in four words.
He said, “We longed for bread”. They longed for bread on Robben Island.

You can understand why all these people, all of them, speak in the manner
in which they do. From their leader, hon Tony Leon, down to Mr Douglas
Gibson, what they have in common is that they never longed for bread.
[Applause.] They have a romantic relationship with poverty. They
romanticise poverty. They imagine what poverty is about. That’s why the sum
total of all those inputs has no mere mention of the words, “poor people”.
[Interjections.]

You can understand, because I conducted a survey in the street where hon
Tony Leon stays. I asked people in that street whether they know him or
not. They said they did not know him at all. He pulls out in his car,
greets nobody and rushes to a media briefing. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

We received the state of the nation address, which is an honest assessment
on the part of government in the quest of giving meaning to the people’s
contract to create work and fight poverty. We would like to make a brief
contribution about the central role that Parliament should play to assist
that process. Yesterday, the Speaker alluded to some of the factors that
constrain Parliament’s ability to contribute to this process - as much as
we would have desired to do so. This relates to both the resource and
capacity challenges.

This year, our approach to constituency work and oversight will have to put
these matters into context. We will have to use all instruments at the
disposal of Parliament to ensure effective oversight over the programmes
that the President tabled before this House. This is a role of a tribune of
the people.

As Parliament and as South Africa, the major problem we face in this regard
is that not all of us buy into this vision that the President is placing
before us. It’s a vision that is based on the Freedom Charter. Not all of
us buy into it. There are those who see their only duty to the nation as
being to grab every opportunity to stare at the media cameras and
microphones, blurting out abstract sound-bite criticism without providing
any solutions. This year, the possibility exists for all parties to come
together in a non-partisan manner to support government programmes as a
further contribution to the goal of bettering the lives of our people. As
Parliament, this must be our way of celebrating 50 years of the Freedom
Charter.

Mr Douglas Gibson said it’s only now that he heard us speaking of the
Freedom Charter. He could not have heard because he never listened.
Regarding the RDP in which some of your committee members participated,
that committee arose out of the Freedom Charter. [Interjections.] That’s
why it preaches and talks of a people-centred development. The Freedom
Charter speaks of the people governing.

What is the difference there? [Interjections.] It’s true because all
progressive legislation that is informed by the charter and has been placed
before this House, the DA has voted against. [Interjections.] Now he comes
and says we never spoke of the Freedom Charter. As a fitting tribute, I
want to repeat this: on the 50th anniversary celebration of the Freedom
Charter, we must locate constituency work at the centre of parliamentary
programmes. In connection with that, the budget process, debates of votes,
questions, statements and interpellations must increasingly be utilised to
enhance the oversight role of the legislatures.

Let me talk about practical examples of what this government has done to
actually give effect to the Freedom Charter, President. One of your
Ministers, the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, Comrade Sonjica,
went to a community that is experiencing grinding poverty in Cradock. She
gave that community 2 000 trees: 1 000 pear trees and 1 000 apple trees.
She was joined in that process by the provincial government which gave the
same community 500 citrus trees. Total South Africa donated 600 citrus
trees to that very same community. Those trees were distributed to all the
homesteads there. People now have fruit trees in their houses. This, they
say, is part of a process of a people-based horticulture – where they want
to receive seeds, distribute them through the area committees and street
committees. Mr Leon would never be elected even as a street committee
chairperson where he stays. [Laughter.]

Those people want those who come with practical solutions to these problems
that are facing our nation: deprivation, hunger and want. Your Minister,
hon Marthinus Van Schalkwyk, went to that very community on a drive-
through. He came back and said to the people there, “Tourism is booming in
Cradock, but it’s not benefiting the African people at all.” He made a
commitment to that community and said, “I will come back in May. I am going
to help some of you to benefit from the tourism industry.” There he is.
[Applause.]

President, regarding that community, white farmers came together with the
government and some business people. They are designing a sugar beet
project, which has the possibility of creating no less than 4 000 jobs.
They came up out of their own will. Government supports them because the
Eastern Cape government has given them R10 million, and R5 million of that
is for helping that proposal become a bankable proposal so that funders can
be galvanised. That is a very important intervention because it will not
only change the life of Cradock, but it will change the whole life in the
Karoo Midlands area. There are many DA supporters there. They are waiting
for leadership from Mr Leon in order to deal with these problems. He is
nowhere to be found. [Interjections.]

President, all of them look forward to the day when you will visit that
area, sir, because this year is the 20th anniversary of the murder of the
Cradock Four. Incidentally, the last public appearance of the Cradock Four
was on 26 June 1985 where a meeting on the Freedom Charter was held in the
community hall in Lingelihle. I remember vividly. When Matthew Goniwe spoke
there, he spoke of something that seemed to be far away: a government of
the people. He ended his input by saying, “These freedoms we shall fight
for side by side.” [Applause.]

When you listen to the stories that are told in the inquest, you cannot
help but feel that not only him, but many cadres of this movement, as they
were tortured in the chambers in this country, as they were led to their
unsuspecting gruesome deaths, certainly said, “These freedoms we shall
fight for side by side.”

President, because I don’t have any time left, let me make this last point.
Where you sit, President, you represent the embodiment of the will of the
people. You represent the most progressive interpretation and application
of the vision of the Freedom Charter. You are surrounded by a cloud of
witnesses, by the aspirations and the wishes of revolutionaries past and
present. You have placed in front of us, not only on this occasion but also
in many others, a well-thought-out programme to lift our entire nation and
the entire continent out of the abyss of poverty, want and deprivation. All
that we ought to say is what our forebears said in 1955 when they said,
“These freedoms we shall fight for side by side.” I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:49.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

1.    Membership of Rules Committee


     (1)    The following change was made to the membership of the Rules
         Committee of the National Assembly:

         Appointed: Van den Heever, Mr R P Z

2.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail
              Commuter Corporation Limited (SARCC) for 2003-2004, including
              the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              for 2003-2004 [RP 105-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 - Department of
              Transport for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2003-2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
              Aviation Authority (CAA) for 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 164-2004].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry:


         (a)     Government Notice No 1135 published in Government Gazette
              No 26848 dated 8 October 2004: Establishment of the
              Ventersdorp-Dolomite Water User Association, Magisterial
              district of Coligny, Koster, Lichtenburg and Ventersdorp, in
              the North West Province, Water Management Area number 9 in
              terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (b)     Government Notice No 1136 published in Government Gazette
              No 26848 dated 8 October 2004: Transformation of the Elands
              Valley Irrigation Board, Magisterial districts of Belfast,
              Waterval Boven and Nelspruit, Mpumalanga Province, into the
              Elands River Catchment Area number 5, Mpumalanga Province in
              terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (c)     Government Notice No 1138 published in Government Gazette
              No 26848 dated 8 October 2004: Restrictions on the taking of
              water from the Tosca Molopo Dolomite Aquifer in terms of the
              National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (d)     Government Notice No 1316 published in Government Gazette
              No 26962 dated 12 November 2004: Proposal for the
              Establishment of the Crocodile (West)- Marico Catchment
              Management Agency in terms of section 78(3) of the National
              Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (e)     Government Notice No 2478 published in Government Gazette
              No 26962 dated 12 November 2004: Prohibition on the making of
              fires in the open air: Districts of Clanwilliam, Piketberg,
              Ceres, Tulbagh, Worcester, Caledon, Paarl, Stellenbosch,
              Strand and Somerset West in terms of the National Forests Act,
              1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

         (f)     Government Notice No 2479 published in Government Gazette
              No 26962 dated 12 November 2004: Prohibition on the making of
              fires in the open air: Districts of Swellendam and Montagu in
              terms of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

         (g)     Government Notice No 2480 published in Government Gazette
              No 26962 dated 12 November 2004: Prohibition on the making of
              fires in the open air: Western Cape in terms of the National
              Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Joint Standing Committee
         on Defence:

         The Acting President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 10
         January 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing
         Members of the National Assembly of the employment of the South
         African National Defence Force in Sudan.


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Citrus Board for 2001-2002 [RP 204-2004].

         (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Meat Board for the year ended 31 December 2001 [RP 196-
              2004].

         (c)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the President's Fund for 2002-2003 [RP 84-2004].

         (d)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Special Pensions Board for 2003-2004 [RP 193-2004].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
         Government:


         (a)     Government Notice No 1474 published in Government Gazette
              No 27124 dated 23 December 2004: Adjusted allocations in terms
              of the Division of Revenue Act, 2004 (Act No 5 of 2004).

         (b)     Government Notice No 1432 published in Government Gazette
              No 27077 dated 10 December 2004: Notice setting out
              particulars of areas demarcated by Municipalities of
              Ethekwini, Tshwane, Emfuleni, Sol Plaatje, Manguang, Buffalo
              City and Mbombela in terms of section 13quat of the Income Tax
              Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962), which shall constitute urban
              development zones.

         (c)     Government Notice No 1404 published in Government Gazette
              No 27044 dated 1 December 2004: Exemptions from supply chain
              management provisions in terms of the Local Government:
              Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

         (d)     Government Notice No 1405 published in Government Gazette
              No 27044 dated 1 December 2004: Amendment of Government Notice
              No 773 dated 1 July 2004 in terms of the Local Government:
              Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

         (e)     Government Notice No 1433 published in Government Gazette
              No 27084 dated 8 December 2004: Approval of allocations in
              terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2004 (Act No 5 of 2004).


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Proclamation No R.62 published in Government Gazette No
              27139 dated 22 December 2004: Fixing of date on which sections
              121(1) and 148(1)(e) of the Second Revenue Laws Amendment Act,
              2001 (Act No 60 of 2001), and section 164(1)(c), (i) and (j),
              sections 169(1)(e) and section 170(1)(b) of the Revenue Laws
              Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 45 of 2003), shall come into
              operation in terms of the Second Revenue Laws Amendment Act,
              2001 (Act No 60 of 2001) and Revenue laws Amendment act, 2003
              (Act No 45 of 2003).

         (b)     Government Notice No 1429 published in Government Gazette
              No 27070 dated 10 December 2004: Notice fixing amount of tax
              in dispute for purposes of appeal to Tax Board in terms of
              section 83A of the Income Tax Act, 1962 and section 33A of the
              Value-Added Tax Act, 1991 in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962
              (Act No 58 of 1962).

         (c)     Discussion Paper on Retirement Fund Reform.


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Joint Budget Committee for consideration:

         Supplementary Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on
         the Division of Revenue Bill for 2005-2006 and the Medium Term
         Expenditure Framework (MTEF) for 2005-2008, tabled in terms of
         section 9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997
         (Act No 97 of 1997).


     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

         Letter from the Minister of Public Enterprises dated 3 February
         2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
         Alexkor for 2004.


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Housing. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the South African Housing Fund
         for the period ended 31 March 2004, including the Reports of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004, 2000-
         2003, 1998-2000 and 1994-1998 [RP 154-2004].


     (10)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         Letter from the Minister of Arts and Culture dated 29 October 2004
         to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Reports
         of Arts, Culture and Heritage Institutions for 2003-2004.


     (11)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
              Intellectual Property Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2003-
              2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (b)     The National Industrial Participation Programme for 2003-
              2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Trade and Investment
              South Africa (TISA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
              [RP 164-2004].

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial
              Development Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for the
              year ended June 2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 2004.

         (e)     Sustainability Report of the Industrial Development
              Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2004.

         (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency
              Affairs Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.


     (12)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry:


         (a)     Bilateral Trade Agreement between the Government of the
              Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
              Croatia, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum of the Bilateral Trade Agreement
              between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
              Government of the Republic of Croatia.


     (13)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications:

         Strategic Plan of Government Communication and Information System
         (GCIS) for 2005-2008.


     (14)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Health:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of
              Pension Funds for 2003.

         (b)     Exhange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
              of South Africa and the Government of the People's Republic of
              China concerning the provision of water supply materials [No.
              198], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution of
              the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (c)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
              the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
              Government of the People's Republic of China concerning the
              provision of water supply materials [No. 198].

         (d)     Exhange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
              of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
              Germany concerning the decentralised development planning
              programme [No. 141], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108
              of 1996).

         (e)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Exhange of Letters between
              the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
              Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
              decentralised development planning programme [No. 141].

         (f)     Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
              of South Africa and the Government of the People's Republic of
              China concerning the Implementation of a Human Resources
              Project [No. 579], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108
              of 1996).

         (g)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
              the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
              Government of the People's Republic of China concerning the
              Implementation of a Human Resources Project [No. 579].

         (h)     Programme Grand Agreement between the Global Fund to Fight
              Aids, TB amd Malaria and the Government of the Republic of
              South Africa: Strengthening national capacity for treatment,
              care and support related to HIV and TB, building on successful
              behaviour change initiatives in South Africa (SAF-102-G02-C-
              00) [No. 480], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108
              of 1996).

         (i)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Programme Grand Agreement
              between the Global Fund to Fight Aids, TB and Malaria and the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa: Strengthening
              national capacity for treatment, care and support related to
              HIV and TB, building on successful behaviour change
              initiatives in South Africa (SAF-102-G02-C-00) [No. 480].

         (j)     Programme Grand Agreement between the Global Fund to Fight
              Aids, TB amd Malaria and the Government of the Republic of
              South Africa: Enhancing the care of HIV/AIDS infected and
              affected patients in resource - constrained settings in
              Kwazulu-Natal (SAF-102-G03-C-00) [No 462], tabled in terms of
              section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
              Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (k)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Programme Grand Agreement
              between the Global Fund to Fight Aids, TB and Malaria and the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa: Enhancing the care
              of HIV/AIDS infected and affected patients in resource -
              constrained settings in Kwazulu-Natal (SAF-102-G03-C-00) [No
              462].

         (l)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Germany
              concerning financial co-operation for 2001-2002 [No. 612],
              tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution of the
              Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (m)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Germany concerning financial co-operation
              for 2001-2002 [No. 612].

         (n)     Programme Grand Agreement between the Global Fund to Fight
              Aids, TB amd Malaria and the Government of the Republic of
              South Africa: Strengthening national capacity for treatment,
              care and support related to HIV and TB, building on successful
              behaviour change initiatives in South Africa (SAF-102-G01-C-
              00) [No. 479], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108
              of 1996).

         (o)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Programme Grand Agreement
              between the Global Fund to Fight Aids, TB and Malaria and the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa: Strengthening
              national capacity for treatment, care and support related to
              HIV and TB, building on successful behaviour change
              initiatives in South Africa (SAF-102-G01-C-00) [No. 479].


     (15)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development:


         (a)     Proclamation No R.49 published in Government Gazette No
              26905 dated 18 October 2004: Referral of matters to existing
              Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of
              the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
              1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

         (b)     Proclamation No R.50 published in Government Gazette No
              26912 dated 20 October 2004: Referral of matters to existing
              Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of
              the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
              1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

         (c)     Proclamation No R.51 published in Government Gazette No
              26912 dated 20 October 2004: Referral of matters to existing
              Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of
              the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
              1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

         (d)     Proclamation No R.52 published in Government Gazette No
              26912 dated 20 October 2004: Referral of matters to existing
              Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of
              the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
              1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


     (16)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs. The Reports of the Auditor-General
         and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements are
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Veterinary Council for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.

         (b)     Annual Financial Statements from the National Agricultural
              Marketing Council on the Statutory Levy Administrators on
              Agricultural Products for 2001-2002 and 2002-2003, including
              the Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2001-2002 and 2002-
              2003 [RP 1-2004].


     (17)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration and report:


         (a)     African Union Convention on the Prevention and Combating
              of Corruption, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
              Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the African Union Convention on
              the Prevention and Combating of Corruption.


     (18)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         Letter from the Minister of Finance dated 16 November 2004 to the
         Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 8(3) of the
         Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining
         the delay in the tabling of the consolidated financial statements
         for 2003-2004.


     (19)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         Letter from the Minister of Transport dated 19 November 2004 to
         the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a)
         of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
         explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the
         Department of Transport and other public entities for 2003-2004.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     Municipal Investment Regulations and Municipal Public-Private
     Partnership Regulations, in terms of section 168 of the Municipal
     Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     Report of the Public Service Commission on the State of the Public
     Service, 2005 [RP 216-2004].


