---
title: 'National Assembly - 26 May 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-05-26
---

THURSDAY, 26 MAY 2005

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 1 – The Presidency (reply by President)

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and
Deputy Speaker and Speaker Mwanamwambwa - I am very glad to see you here.
As you know, I am also a Zambian. [Laughter.] Hon leaders of our political
parties and Members of Parliament, Ministers, Deputy Ministers,
distinguished guests, friends and comrades, yesterday we celebrated Africa
Day. Perhaps it is fitting that we follow that day with yet another
important campaign on our national agenda and that is bringing a girl-child
to work. I’d like to say welcome to all of the girl-children in the House.
[Applause.] And in particular I want to welcome the ones that were part of
the staff of the Presidency today, namely Noluvuyo Sixholo, Anelisa
Balfour, Celiwe Luthuli and Lauren Hendricks, who are sitting in the box
here behind me. [Applause.] Indeed, it has so far been a most enlightening
morning for all of us and I trust that at the end of the day, by the time
they leave, the girl-children who have been working with government and
with Parliament will have a better insight of the workings of government at
all its levels. From the ones that we had in the Presidency, I think, we
have four potential presidents for the country. [Applause.] Indeed, their
presence amongst us reminds us that the things that we have to do today are
very directly relevant to what happens to them in future. They have asked
me to raise a number of questions with the National Assembly about matters
that they think are important to the future of our country. I have
undertaken to do that as faithfully as I can. They have asked that after we
adjourn here, we should meet. They want to give an assessment of whether I
represented them correctly. [Laughter.]

One of the issues they raised is the following: They say that knowledge is
power and therefore it is critically important that we should attend to the
matter of education, drawing particular attention to education in the rural
areas. Many children in the rural areas are disadvantaged and don’t have
access to the sort of facilities they need and therefore it is a matter
that we need to attend to. They mentioned also the issue of street
children. We need to ensure that we reach out to the street children so
that they themselves get empowered by having access to education. In that
context they also raised the question of the need to provide bursaries for
the poor so as to ensure that no young person is excluded from education
simply because they come from a poor family. They said that the matter of
education relates directly to the issue of unemployment. The focus that
they were paying to the matter of education relates to ensuring that our
people do not end up unemployed because they are uneducated.

In that context they have raised the issue of the need to take some steps
to increase levels of employment and in that regard referred in particular
to matriculants. They say that health is one of the critical challenges
that we face and it seems to them that there are some shortages in terms of
health personnel. Why don’t we then take matriculants who have completed
their schooling and give them the necessary training so that they can make
up the shortfall with regard to health workers? With regard to the area of
health, they raised the question of the availability of antiretroviral
drugs for pregnant mothers.

They say that it is important also to move faster with regard to some of
the social challenges that we face, such as housing. Some people have
waited for too long to have access to housing and that is why some people
are resorting to violence. They don’t approve of it, but that is the reason
for the violence, namely that people have waited too long for such
services.

They say that one of the matters we need to address is the issue of gender
parity. They say that historically men have put down women, but that what
we need now is a 50-50 solution. [Applause.] In this regard the boys should
bear with the girls, because the girls are determined. It was believed in
the past that girls would not be able to understand and cope with subjects
like engineering, but they are determined to show the boys that they can
cope with such subjects. [Applause.] The girl-children have said that
within our society women are also taking charge and they are determined
that we should pursue this task of ensuring gender equality. They say that
people need to be patient with regard to meeting the challenges that we
face. This is in relation to the matter of resorting to violence with
regard to housing, but these things will take time and we need to be
patient.

They also say it is important to address the challenge of the people who
were disempowered. Therefore there shouldn’t be complaints within our
society about black economic empowerment. It is important that black
economic empowerment programmes should continue in order to bring in people
who were excluded in the past. [Applause.] They say that this relates to
the challenge that we don’t want to see our people working as sex workers
or becoming drug abusers. This will happen if we do not engage this process
of black economic empowerment, which will bring people into the economy and
enable them to earn a livelihood other than that of a sex worker and give
them hope, which will ensure that they don’t resort to drug abuse.

It is important that in our society we should stop discriminating against
one another. It is important that we should understand one another, coming
as we do from different backgrounds, as the understanding of one another is
important in terms of building a new society. They have raised the question
about how to deal with the problem of language use in schools and because
they come from this province, generally the Eastern Cape, the Western Cape,
and the Northern Cape, they cited examples of schools where you might have
a clash in terms of use of Afrikaans and Xhosa as the mediums of
instruction. They believe that it is important to avoid these divisions and
conflicts and have suggested that, in situations of that kind, it is
necessary to find a neutral language to use so that you don’t have this
competition between these two languages. I will explain later to them why I
am not going any further with their proposal on this matter. [Laughter.]
They have raised this question, saying that we need to find a way of
dealing with the tensions that arise at school with regard to this medium
of instruction. It may very well be that, rather than having a fight to the
end between two languages, one should find another language with which both
factions would be comfortable. I will explain to them why I am not going
any further with their proposals with regard to this matter.

Finally, they say that they believe it to be important for the Members of
Parliament to give answers to these particular challenges that they have
posed to them. The Members of Parliament should give direction to the
country with regard to this matter, as well as with regard to the matter of
gender equality, language equality, black economic empowerment, the
struggle against poverty, access to education, and so on. Indeed, Madam
Speaker, I believe that they raised questions that are relevant to the
future of our country, as relevant as the matters that were raised by the
hon members yesterday.

I would like to thank the hon members for their participation in that
debate, in which we sought to focus particularly on the issue of the role
of the state in meeting our development challenges. I will try to indicate
what the government is doing to improve the capacity of the state to
respond to those development challenges. But, naturally, this being the
debate of the Vote of the Presidency, it allows for much wider discussion
and, indeed, I think that the hon members raised issues that are of
importance to the general challenge of transformation. I would like to
mention some of these.

For instance, there is the hon Pieter Mulder, who raised issues about
Afrikaners, Afrikaans, place names of the Afrikaner heroes and heroines and
who indicated a sense of unease - I suppose, to put that mildly – about a
process he believes is a process of marginalisation with regard to the
Afrikaners, to Afrikaans and of the destruction of place names that are of
great emotional value to the Afrikaner people.

The hon Lee raised similar concerns about coloureds, and even suggested,
Minister of Sport and Recreation, that Brian van Rooyen is in trouble
because he’s a coloured.

The hon Carol Johnson raised issues concerning white fears and black
stereotypes. I believe that all of these issues are indeed very important
in terms of what happens to South Africa today and tomorrow.

The hon Motsoko Pheko, perhaps like the girl-children, said that the people
have waited too long for houses, for jobs, for land and so on, and
explained what has been happening in some of our towns and cities on the
basis that the people, indeed, have waited for too long, which seems – I
think – to substantiate or perpetuate or support the notion that it is not
possible in one decade to eradicate the legacy of the past. And, therefore,
ten years or 11 years becomes too long.

Hon Rev Meshoe suggested in that same context that this legacy we talk
about has become immaterial to contemporary South Africa and that we should
therefore not even refer to it. Referring to it is a mere device to avoid
our responsibilities.

Hon Bantu Holomisa thought that, to succeed in our effort to address our
socio-economic challenges, we need national consensus. He therefore
suggested that we needed an economic Codesa, suggesting the problems are so
deep-seated that they require the most effective forms of national unity
for us to be able to overcome them.

Hon Tony Leon presented the views of the DA on the important matter of the
relationship between the state and the market and this is a critically
important question about how we construct our society; who plays what role,
who does what, in order to meet the challenges that we face.

And, in responding to the hon Dr Buthelezi, the hon Mbulelo Goniwe
suggested that we ask the question whether we understand South Africa in
the same way. He suggested that if we could agree on this, even the terms
of understanding South Africa, how could we agree on what action to take.

When he discussed the Freedom Charter and apparently some comments that had
been made about this – about the Freedom Charter – the hon Diale, I think,
raised issues concerning the question of which elements of our history
constitute part of our national heritage. Similar questions, I am sure,
will arise from the comments made by the hon Pieter Mulder, as to what in
our history constitute part of our national heritage.

When they were speaking, particularly with regard to the matter of place
names, I thought about the town Grahamstown. Grahamstown, as I’m sure the
hon members are aware, is named after Colonel Graham, a Scotsman, who was
part of the British forces at the time of the so-called frontier wars in
the process of the colonisation of South Africa in the Eastern Cape. In
IsiXhosa this place is called Rhini, but it is officially known as
Grahamstown. Col Graham was a member of the Scottish aristocracy and a
soldier. What was peculiar about Colonel Graham was that he was the most
brutal and most vicious of the British commanders on that frontier.
Introduced in the course of those wars, was the practice of a scorched-
earth policy. You didn’t only fight the soldiers on the other side, but you
burnt their fields, you killed their cattle, you starved them into
submission. You killed them into submission through hunger. He was the most
brutal of the British commanders on that frontier in a period of perhaps a
100 years. You have a town called Grahamstown, named after him. The
question must arise: Why do we celebrate a butcher? [Applause.]

This place has got a name and it is eRhini. We celebrate a butcher, and we
see it in the dispatches of the British governor at the time and what the
British governor said in praise of Graham. He praised him for his
brutality, because it would break the back of the natives. It may very well
be that there are people of Scottish descent in the Eastern Cape, among the
1820 Settlers, who would feel aggrieved if the people in the Eastern Cape
decided to change the name of Grahamstown to eRhini. They will say that
this was our national hero and a member of the Scottish aristocracy, valued
among our community. Why do you obliterate his name?

We do indeed face many challenges in the country, as reflected by the
various inputs that hon members made yesterday. We raised matters that went
beyond the narrow confines of the matter we sought to address. I believe
hon members sought to raise those questions within the context of the
fundamental proposition in our Constitution, which I think is accepted by
all, that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in their
diversity. All of us accept that. The challenge is how to translate that
into reality in the process of the transformation of our country. When we
talk about building a nonracial society, it is a requirement in our
Constitution and a matter about which all of us are agreed. What do we
mean?

When you talk about affirmative action and say that we should introduce
affirmative action and actually do so, part of the response is that, as a
result of that, particularly Afrikaner men become an endangered species.
You say affirmative action, in order to create a nonracial society, but
some people would then respond to that action by saying that actually
results in the marginalisation, disempowerment and exclusion of a section
of our population. If indeed we agree that South Africa belongs to all who
live in it, united in our diversity, how to we deal with that tension?

That understanding of a South Africa that belongs to all of its people,
united in their diversity, requires that we deal with the matter raised by
the school children of the equitable treatment of languages. That raises
its own tensions, as all of us know. If the Venda-speaking people insist
that Venda historically, even among the African languages, has not enjoyed
the position and status that it should and that something needs to be done
about that, as a result of this we then insist that one of the languages
that should be used in terms of our legislation is Venda, that displaces
another language. If you use two languages and you cannot afford to use
five, it displaces another language. So, what do we do if, for example,
Minister Mufamadi decides in the legislation on intergovernmental relations
to use English and Venda, rather than English and Afrikaans? What do we do
with the tension that arises as a result of that?

I have mentioned the matter of place names. Rhini had a place name before
it became Grahamstown and if some people say we should return to the
traditional name of this place and another says no, and that we should keep
the current name that was born out of the system of colonialism, it raises
tensions because we want an inclusive South Africa that belongs to all who
live in it, united in their diversity. And yet these challenges arise.

I discussed with the Minister of Sport and Recreation what was happening to
rugby a few days ago. He assured me that he has made no decision about what
should happen to the leadership of rugby, because it’s not a ministerial
decision but a decision of the sports organisations. But there’s an
important issue arising with regard to that - and I’m sure all of us are
interested in this – namely this franchise. Who should get this franchise
in terms of the Super 14?

I’m currently reading a book about the history of cricket in South Africa.
It’s a very interesting history written by André Odendaal, who says that
there is a false image of the history of cricket in this country, which
doesn’t recognise the fact that some your first cricketers in South Africa
were black people in the Cape. It’s a similar story to the evolution of the
development of rugby, but that discussion about this franchise
fundamentally has to do with this question: What is it that we need to do
in order to produce, to create, a nonracial South Africa?

It produces tensions and conflicts, and challenges the issue that we are
indeed trying to build a South Africa that belongs to all who live in it,
united in our diversity. Because if you say dissolve the Cats and let the
Lions and the Bulls form one franchise, and give another franchise to the
Eastern Cape, the Transkei and the Southern Cape, somebody has lost
something. Somebody else has gained something. In the totality of this
matter, has the country gained? Has it communicated the message that it
belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity? The tensions can’t
be avoided.

We all say that we need a nonsexist South Africa. I see iNkosi Mangosuthu
Buthelezi is here and he might correct me here, but some of our traditional
leaders may very well say that succession is determined according to the
male line in the family.

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Kunjalo! [It is like that!]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Kunjalo? [Uhleko.] [Is it? [Laughter.]]

So that’s in the tradition; male succession, but we’ll say that no, we want
to build a nonsexist society. Why shouldn’t women succeed? That will raise
tensions, and yet we are saying that we want a South Africa that belongs to
all who live in it, and therefore we don’t want exclusion of the
traditional leaders from that society. We want their inclusion, but at the
same time we are saying we want to build a nonsexist South Africa. Tensions
arise. How do we resolve them?

I’ve had discussions and I’ve had people raise this matter with me about
issues of race and gender. It’s an interesting challenge, with black women
saying that in a number of instances the gender issue has indeed been
addressed, and it gets addressed by putting in place, recruiting,
appointing and so on, white women. So the gender issue is addressed, but
the black women say the race issue is not addressed. We can’t object to
white women being appointed, because the gender equality issue is
important, but how do we balance these two?

I’m mentioning this to again illustrate the tensions that arise, some of
which you can discuss within the context of the matters that were raised by
the hon members yesterday, one of whom raised this bit of a conundrum that,
in terms saying we need a democratic South Africa, we have one party that
gets 70% of the votes. It’s a democratic outcome, but seen by some people
as a threat to democracy. [Interjections.] How do you deal with that?

Perhaps we need to discuss the question of the role of the political
minorities – I’m not talking of racial minorities – in determining national
policy, because of this fear that a democratic majority might be a threat
to democracy. Perhaps you could seek to address it by asking, in order to
deal with the challenge of people who might feel marginalised because they
are political minorities, excluded and therefore not part of this South
Africa to which they belong, united in its diversity, isn’t there something
we should discuss and do to increase their sense of participation in
determining national policy?

It might relate to what the hon Holomisa said about an economic “Codesa” so
that despite whatever majority the ANC has, with regard to fundamental
matters like the direction of our country in economic terms, we bring in
the political minorities as well to decide what should happen to the
economy. It may be that we need to discuss things like that. As I’ve
indicated, one of the girl-children says: “People must understand the
importance of black economic empowerment.”

But one of the tensions that arises in the public discourse is that we’re a
capitalist country with some very successful capitalists, whom we celebrate
every day. But there’s an argument with regard to black economic
empowerment, that it should not produce successful black capitalists. When
it does, there’s something that is wrong about it. [Interjections.] The hon
Mbulelo Goniwe raised this matter yesterday. The existing capitalists must
remain and succeed as capitalists. The new ones who are being born ... No,
no, they shouldn’t be. There should be broad-based ownership.

One understands it because indeed we want broad-based development and a
general attack on poverty and all that, but how do we deal with this
tension that we defend and protect and work within a capitalist society,
but are averse to the emergence of black capitalists? The hon Nefolovhodwe
spoke about this and spoke about how few black people apart from sponsored
travellers he sees on SA Airways, and he said he’s well sponsored by
Parliament! I can give many examples of this.

You have the problem of access to land. This is part of the process of
building a prosperous South Africa, which is an inherent part of the South
Africa that belongs to all of you and all who live in it, united in their
diversity. We say that therefore we must expand access to land. But the
landless cannot own land until somebody else who owns land loses some of
the land. It’s unavoidable. [Interjections.] State land, sure, but how much
state land is there? [Interjections.] No, we shouldn’t ... Let’s leave the
propaganda about this matter. I’m talking about the bulk of the land in
this country. You can’t deal with the question of equitable access to land
without somebody who owns land losing that land. You can’t do it!
[Applause.]

But we will all agree that yes, indeed we need to produce a nonracial South
Africa. We need to expand the base of the economic actors, one of the
elements of which is access to land. We’ll all agree. In practice,
particular challenges arise.

I believe therefore that there’s a particular challenge that faces this
House, namely to ask how this House answers the questions posed by these
young people. If we’re talking about gender equality, beyond the good
speeches that all of us in this House would make about it, when we come to
the practical detail of effecting it, what is it that we need to do? You
are the leaders of our people in this House, recognised by the nation as
our leaders. What do our leaders say?

When we say we want to produce a nonracial South Africa in all of its
elements, how do we sort out the tensions that must arise in the process of
transformation towards creating a nonracial South Africa? How do we balance
the losses and the gains?

I believe that, given our history, given our challenges, given our
possibilities, the things that we are discussing, the things that the girl-
children raised today are matters that in reality also preoccupy many other
countries in the world. I think our particular fortune is that we have the
possibility of actually making significant progress with regard to the
solution of these challenges.

But together we must perhaps do what the hon Holomisa was suggesting,
namely to put our heads together and answer the questions as to what is to
be done. I do not believe we need a Codesa other than this “Codesa”, so let
this “Codesa” discuss these matters. I have, in the 11 years of our
democracy, never seen a 10-page pamphlet coming out of Parliament, saying
these are the practical steps that the National Assembly says should be
taking to create a nonracial South Africa. [Applause.] I’ve never seen it.
And yet, these young girl-children here expect that these leaders who sit
here will indeed answer these questions for them. Why don’t we do that?

I’d like to thank the Deputy President, the Minister in the Presidency, the
director-general and our entire staff for their tireless efforts towards
fulfilling the obligations to which we are committed. I’d also like to
thank the Ministers and Deputy Ministers of other departments, Premiers,
provincial and local governments for the co-operation that they’ve shown
towards the Presidency, and I’m sure that working together we will be able
to answer quite correctly these various questions. I thank the members for
their attention. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 14:46.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Assembly:

1.    Membership of Committees
      (1)   The following members have been appointed to serve on the Ad
         Hoc Committee mentioned, viz:

            Appointment of Deputy Public Protector

            African National Congress:
                       Hendrickse, Mr P A C (Alt)
                       Mahlawe, Ms N M
                       Makasi, Ms X C
                       Meruti, Ms M V
                       Mokoto, Ms N R
                       Mgabadeli, Ms H C
                       Mzondeki, Mr M J G
                       September, Ms C C
                       Sibanyoni, Mr J B
                       Schneemann, Mr G D
                       Tolo, Bishop L J

            Democratic Alliance:
                       Camerer, Ms S M
                       Delport, Dr J T

            Inkatha Freedom Party:
                       Van der Merwe, Mr J H

            New National Party:
                       Johnson, Ms C B
            African Christian Democratic Party:
                       Swart, Mr S N

            United Christian Democratic Party:
                       Pule, Mr B E

            Pan Africanist Congress of Azania:
                       Likotsi, Mr M T

      (2)   Ms E Ngaleka, has been elected as acting chairperson of the
         Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs with effect
         from 25 May 2005.

      (3)   Mr J B Sibanyoni, has been elected as chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Appointment of Deputy Public Protector with effect
         from 26 May 2005.


TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of senior
         magistrate Mr. S E Tebe.

      (b)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of magistrate
         Mr. L D Monageng.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:
National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry on
     Budget Vote 34,  dated 13 April 2005:

      The budget review of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
     (DWAF) was conducted on the 6th and 7th of April 2005. The Portfolio
     Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry, having considered Budget Vote
     34: Water Affairs and Forestry, reports as follows:

      A.    Introduction

      The Committee received presentations from various stakeholders in the
     sector, which includes:

      (a)   The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF)
      (b)   The South African Local Government Association (SALGA)
      (c)   The Overberg Water Board
      (d)   The Timberwatch Coalition
      (e)   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry
      (f)   Geosphere
      (g)   The National Movement of Rural Women
      (h)   The Mvula Trust
      (i)   The South African Water Caucus

      A list of representatives from the different organizations is
     annexed. The report does not follow the order in which organizations or
     individuals presented during the hearings, but has been consolidated to
     avoid incoherence.

      2.    Political input by the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry,
Ms B.P. Sonjica

      The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, Ms B P Sonjica addressed
     the Committee and Forestry, and raised the following key issues:

      (a)   Water Affairs

      The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry has initiated a process
     of substantive change and restructuring currently in process and that
     is reflected in the budget vote. The process of transferring water
     services to local authorities has gathered momentum in that 20 transfer
     agreements have been signed.

      An audit of all water services schemes to be transferred has been
     completed and a total of 512 schemes are to be transferred. She
     mentioned that some local authorities were not ready to receive these
     functions, as they still needed to develop/enhance their capacity. The
     local authorities that require intervention are in the process of being
     identified and assistance will be provided to them. This assistance
     will either be in the form of technical or financial capacity.

      The Minister emphasized that it is important that the commitment with
     respect to enhancing democracy at local government level is delivered.
     Within this context, the transfer of water services to local
     authorities is important. The Constitution also mandates the transfer
     of these services to local government. The necessary guidance and
     leadership for local government will be provided to ensure the success
     of this process.

      Expenditure relating to water resource management is accorded
     priority status. The primary purpose of this process is to ensure that
     the country’s water resources are protected, used, developed, conserved
     and managed in a sustainable and equitable manner for the benefit of
     all people. Because the country is going through a period of climatic
     change, water resource management needs to be given serious priority. A
     strategy for this has been developed and the National Water Act also
     provides guidelines in this regard. In National Water Week, 2
     strategies were launched. One of these is the National Water Resource
     Strategy.

      The implementation of this strategy will be prioritised, including
     the institutional reform of water service provision arrangements. The
     National Water Resource Strategy provides the national framework for
     managing water resources and for the establishment of catchment
     management agencies. These agencies are intended to bring about equity
     in the allocation of water resources. These agencies will perform water
     resources management functions performed by DWAF regional offices.

      Expenditure in relation to water resource management has increased
     rapidly in the last few years. This is largely because the Operations
     of Water Resources sub-programme has more than doubled. Provision has
     also been made for continuing the investment in water infrastructure.
     Three dams are being built in Limpopo. The raising of the Flag Boshielo
     Dam in Limpopo is expected to be completed in 2006. Advance works for
     the Berg River water project have begun and the Olifants River water
     resources development project has been approved. Water summits are
     being held in all provinces to consult with the public on matters in
     the public interest.

      The Minister emphasized that policies that are friendly to the poor
     must not be compromised in the restructuring process. The Free Basic
     Water and Sanitation policy is a step towards ensuring universal access
     to basic water and sanitation. The Department’s role in this regard
     will include ensuring that water and sanitation projects and agencies
     that manage these services are sustainable and can maintain and expand
     access.

      There is a need to focus on the infrastructure-related projects to
     create the capacity to deal with reducing the backlog in implementing
     poor-friendly policies. Addressing this backlog is central to the
     eradication of poverty. Direct responsibility for infrastructure has
     shifted away form DWAF and funding will in future come from the
     municipal infrastructure grant, the local government equitable share
     and the capacity-building grant.

      (b)   Forestry

      The Minister indicated that there is a need for the restructuring
     process in relation to forestry conservation to be accelerated.
     Employees are frustrated because this process is moving very slowly.
     Timeframes must be determined for the completion of this process. The
     Department’s main role in this regard will be to provide the national
     policy and regulatory framework within which appropriate institutions
     will manage forest resources with sustainability as a critical
     priority. The Minister noted that efforts to monitor the implementation
     of forestry-related policies would be increased.

      Priority has been accorded to the consideration of Broad Based Black
     Economic Empowerment in forestry conservation and in their commercial
     and community uses. In this way, the contribution of forest resources
     to economic development and poverty eradication is ensured. A national
     forestry indaba will be held on 14 April 2005 to further explore the
     contribution to Broad Based Black Economic Empowerment.

      With regard to the transfer of indigenous forests, the transfer of
     forests in the Eastern Cape has been delayed. The management of several
     State forests has been transferred to external institutions such as
     SAFCOL.

      (c)   General

      In relation to expenditure on administration, it is expected that
     expenditure pertaining to administrative costs may decrease once the
     restructuring process is completed. Expenditure in this regard has
     increased steadily over the course of the past four years. Much of the
     increase in expenditure is to cover the costs of transferring water
     service operations to local government.

      Efforts have been made by the Department to ensure compliance with
     the PFMA and to achieve a clean audit report. This is because qualified
     reports have been received in the past. To resolve this issue, the
     Minister has met with various Directorates to discuss the issues. It
     subsequently emerged that the Finance Branch is grossly under-
     capacitated, both in relation to being under-staffed and in relation to
     a lack of capacity among the staff employed. A need has been identified
     to upgrade posts and 3 Director posts have been advertised.

      The Minister noted that the African Minister Council would meet to
     discuss matters pertaining to the access to finance for attaining the
     Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) for countries on the continent.
     Finance is particularly required for the poorer countries on the
     continent.

      The Minister concluded her address by emphasizing the need for the
     Department to contribute to the development of the first economy and
     the integration of the second economy into the first economy to ensure
     that the most important beneficiaries of the Department are the poorest
     of the poor.

      (d)   Discussions

      Members of the Committee raised the following issues during the
discussion:

 • What is meant by the impact of serious climatic change over the course of
   a medium to long-term period? What would the impact of such change
   entail?
 • In relation to the financial resources that will be transferred to local
   authorities, will municipalities be in a position to manage these
   resources adequately? It is critical that these resources are used to
   assist the poorest of the poor. How will this be monitored?

 • A question was posed as to whether local authorities were sufficiently
   involved in the National Water Week Campaign.

 • With regard to the building of technical and financial capacity among
   local authorities, it was stated that SALGA had indicated that the
   budgetary allocations for the 2005/2006 period are insufficient to
   maintain the desired level of support to local authorities.

 • The Committee on Trade and Industry is currently considering the Co-
   Operatives Bill [B4-2005]. What has the Department of Water Affairs and
   Forestry done to ensure that there are synergies between the Trade and
   Industry and Water Affairs Departments?

 • A question was posed as to whether the Department has considered the
   issue of aquaculture.

The Minister responded with the following key points:

 • With regard to the changes in the climate, the industrial world has
   increasingly been producing more pollution, which has resulted in a
   blanket around the earth causing it to warm. This impacts upon climate
   patterns. In South Africa, it is forecast that this will result in
   increased dry conditions on the west side of the country, which means in
   turn that this will result in hotter conditions and that dams here will
   yield less water. Because global warming affects us at an international
   level any one country in isolation cannot change this situation. It must
   be addressed at an international level. South Africa as a country could,
   however, prepare for the impacts of global warming.
Africa as a continent also needs to consider the impact of climate changes,
given that poor countries are likely to suffer most as a consequence.
Discussions in this regard are necessary.

 • With regard to aquaculture, the Minister pointed out that South Africa
   does not have a fish farming industry to the same extent as many other
   countries in the world. This industry is more pronounced in the other
   parts of the world, which depend less on fishing from trawlers and more
   on fish farming. One of the main controversies pertaining to fish farming
   relates to the pollution that it causes.

 • The Minister raised the issue that there has not been much engagement as
   yet on the Co-operatives Bill. There is a need to engage on the legal
   framework for agricultural co-operatives.

 • The Minister mentioned that there are currently 139 local authorities
   that have been identified as requiring assistance in terms of developing
   their technical and financial capacity. A project has been developed to
   deal with and monitor project consolidate.

 • The Minister stated that South Africa is classified as a water-scarce
   country. In periods of good rainfall, the sum total of rainfall is
   estimated to average 454mm a year. In comparison to the average in most
   other countries, which is estimated to be at about 860mm, South Africa is
   clearly at a disadvantage. Within the context of an expanding population,
   this problem becomes critical. It is therefore essential that a culture
   of using water efficiently is inculcated. Public campaigns in this regard
   are therefore designed to communicate this to the public in general. The
   Minister raised the point that much work has been done in this regard,
   but there is a need to ensure that these campaigns reach communities.

3.    Presentations by Government and Organizations

3.1   The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF)

The Director-General of DWAF, Mr. Mike Muller, briefed the Committee on
trends in the Department’s Budget.

The total budget of the Department comprises 2 parts, i.e. the Exchequer
Account and the Trading Account. The Exchequer account refers to the
account voted in Parliament, while the Trading Account refers to those
accounts that are intended to generate revenue, such as the income from
water users. If the Trading Account generates insufficient revenue, it is
augmented from the exchequer allocations. The generated revenue and the
augmentation therefore make up the total Trading budget.

In the 2005/06 financial year, the Exchequer Account constitutes R2 069 993
million (34%) of the total departmental expenditure, whilst expenditure on
the Trading Account amounts to R4 103 397 million (66%).
Total DWAF expenditure therefore amounts to R5 342 million. Expenditure in
the Exchequer Account remains fairly stable between 2001/02 to 2007/08,
whilst expenditure in the Trading Account increases rapidly during the same
period.

3.1.1 Trading Account

The Department’s Estimates of National Expenditure (ENE) distinguishes
between 2 different trading accounts, i.e. a water trading account and an
equipment trading account.

The Water Trading Account has 2 main sources of funding, i.e. revenue
generated by a water management charge levied on all registered water
users, and revenue collected through the sale of water in bulk to various
institutions and individuals. The shortfall is funded through allocations
from the National Revenue Fund in the normal budget process. Expenditure
under the Water Trading Account is divided into 4 components. Each
component is designed to provide a channel for funding a specific activity
in the water sector. These components are:

1. Integrated water resource management - this component aims to develop
   catchment management plans and to implement these through the effective
   integration and rollout of water quality standards, water use and water
   conservation measures in all catchments in the country.

2. Integrated systems - where locally available water resources in a
   particular area cannot meet the demand, water is transferred from water-
   rich areas. This component reflects the management, operation and
   maintenance of these schemes as integrated systems, as well as the
   revenue collected from water users.

3. Bulk water supply - expenditure in this component covers operations and
   maintenance, as well as management costs. Revenue is earned through the
   sale of water, mostly in bulk.

4. Water services - in 1994, a number of water and sanitation schemes were
   transferred from the previous homelands to DWAF. More than 7million
   people are currently served through these schemes. The operational,
   management and maintenance costs of these schemes are reflected in this
   component.

The Equipment Trading Account provides for equipment for the construction
and maintenance of government water schemes. This Trading Account has 3
main sources of income, i.e. income from leases; revenue from the sale of
plant and equipment; and the collection of maintenance fees.

3.1.2 Exchequer Account
The Department has organised the expenditure of its Exchequer Account into
4 Programmes, i.e:

1. Programme 1: Administration - This Programme provides for the management
   of the Department, including policy formulation; centralised
   administrative, legal and office support services; departmental personnel
   management and financial administration; Information technology (IT);
   determining working methods and procedure and exercising control through
   head office and regional offices. Expenditure under this Programme
   experiences a slight decrease of 3% in the 2005/06 financial year, but is
   expected to increase steadily over the medium term. The increase in
   expenditure will mainly be to cover the costs of transferring water
   service operations to local government. These include the personnel costs
   associated with the transfer and the operational costs. The increases are
   also a result of the change in the Department’s focus from operations to
   policy development and regulation, and the restructuring costs attached
   to such a change in focus.

2. Programme 2: Water Resource Management - This Programme ensures that
   water resources are used and managed sustainably and equitably. It is the
   priority programme of the Department, as it consumes the bulk (43%) of
   the budget. Expenditure under this Programme decreases from R1.6 billion
   in the 2004/05 financial year to R1.5 billion in 2005/06. Expenditure is
   expected to increase to R2.1 billion in 2007/08. Future increases in
   expenditure will finance the operations and maintenance of
   infrastructure, and the Working for Water Programme. The Sustainable
   Supply sub-programme increases rapidly between 2005/06 and 2007/08, from
   R344.4 million to R624.1 million. This includes the investment of R500
   million in dams and related infrastructure.

3. Programme 3: Water Services - This Programme ensures access to
   effective, sustainable and affordable water and sanitation services
   through policy development and planning and regulating and monitoring the
   sector. This includes institutional and implementation support to local
   government. The Programme experiences a steady decrease in expenditure
   and is expected to fall to R1.3 billion in 2006/07, as the expenditure on
   new water and sanitation connections are transferred to the municipal
   infrastructure grant. The large increase experienced by this Programe in
   the 2003/04 financial year was mainly due to drought relief allocations,
   to help reduce the backlogs in the provision of water and sanitation
   services and to support the process of transferring water services to
   local authorities.

4. Programme 4: Forestry – This Programme promotes the conservation of
   plantation and indigenous forests and their commercial and community
   uses, to achieve optimal social and economic benefits and to promote
   rural development through policy development, regulation, facilitation,
   as well as monitoring and evaluation. Expenditure under this Programme is
   heavily influenced by expenditure on the commercial and indigenous
   forests that are under the Department’s control. The aim in the long term
   is to transfer this responsibility out of the Department. However, the
   process is taking longer than expected, as it is difficult to hand
   commercial forests over in a sustainable manner. The trends in
   expenditure on this Programme are not consistent, although it is expected
   to rise steadily over the medium term.

The Department attributes fluctuations in expenditure to allocations to
restructuring packages for forests transferred to the South African
Forestry Company Limited in the 2001/02 financial year, and increased
funding to salvage fire-damaged timber, as well as to cover the operating
costs of the Mpumalanga forests in the 2003/04 and 2004/05 financial years.

3.1.3 Discussions

Questions that were raised by Members of the Committee during the
discussion following the presentation include:

 • From which Programme in the budget will the funds to transfer water
   schemes to local government be allocated? The Department indicated that
   these funds would be allocated from Programme 3: Water Services.
 • The Working for Water programme was started with foreign funding, and the
   question was raised whether the Department still receives foreign funding
   and if this forms part of the Vote amount. The Department indicated that
   the foreign funding is separate from the Vote amount. However, it does
   not envisage any increase in foreign funding and the programme is
   essentially funded through domestic sources, such as the grant from the
   poverty relief fund.
 • To what extent does the Department’s budget conform to the national
   priorities outlined in the State of the Nation Address and what are the
   difficulties in transforming, i.e. will the Department be able to meet
   its budget. The Department indicated that there is a degree of
   consistency between the State of the Nation Address and its budget. For
   example, it pointed out 3 specific areas in which the budget conforms,
   i.e. providing basic services; the 2nd Economy and rural development; and
   creating a framework for economic growth in the 1st Economy.
 • Why is the Strategic Plan of the Department and the budget not aligned?
   The Strategic Plan has 14 Programmes, whilst the Department’s expenditure
   is divided into only 4 programmes.

According to the Department this is a difficult process, as the Strategic
Plan has to conform to the format requirements of the Department of Public
Services, whilst the budget has to conform to the format requirements set
by the National Treasury. However, the activities in the Strategic Plan are
linked to the different Programmes of the budget. Furthermore, there is a
matrix system of reporting between the Head Office and Regional Offices,
which makes the linkage between the Strategic Plan and the budget possible.

 • The Department appears to have shifted targets that have not been met.
   The Department conceded the fact that targets set by them are optimistic,
   especially if the achievement of such targets is dependent on
   consultation with other role-players. In its opinion, the Department can
   only be held responsible where it has direct responsibility for an
   activity, but not where it has to achieve goals through other agencies,
   such as municipalities.

 • When will the restructuring process end? The Department is trying to
   adopt a responsible approach to the restructuring process that takes into
   account all role-players. The restructuring process is budgeted for in
   the Administration Pogramme and other line functions. This will take some
   time, for example, Water Services will only be transferred by April 2006.

3.2   The Overberg Water Board

Mr. D. Abrahams, Chairperson of the Water Board, and Executive Mayor of
Theewaterskloof Municipality, briefed the Committee on the work of the
Board as follows:

Overberg Water started out as a rural scheme, which was initiated by the
commercial farming community in Overberg. Initially, the scheme was State
controlled, as it was subsidised by Government. This meant that no reserves
were built up and tariffs were kept low. During the early 1990s, the Scheme
was transformed into the Overberg Water Board, and the subsidy from
Government was terminated. Despite the fact that the Board was at a
disadvantage because of a lack of reserves in the reserve fund, as well as
low tariffs, it was expected to be economically viable and sustainable. In
terms of its equity profile, the Board consists of 7 members, of whom 2 are
white males, and 5 are previously disadvantaged persons (of whom only 1 is
a female). Also, there is only 1 woman in the top management structure of 6
people and women constitute only a quarter (25%) of the entire staff
establishment of 75 employees. The Board has an equity plan in place that
is aimed at improving these employment figures.

The Overberg Water Scheme is expensive by nature, as relatively small
amounts of water are distributed over long distances, using expensive
infrastructure. The area of service is roughly ±200 km from Botrivier in
the West to Riversdal in the East, and ± 60km from the Langeberg to the
sea. Fortunately, the Scheme has a good cost recovery rate of almost 100%.
However, the challenge is to address the backlog in its reserve fund caused
by the previous regime.

Overberg Water distributes 60% of its water to rural areas (i.e. farmers)
and 40% to Towns. Despite its financial position, the Scheme has managed to
keep its annual increase in rural tariffs fairly low, at 4.8% over the last
10 years. The Scheme believes that its tariff structure is unique, as it
allows clients to be allocated water on request. The aim is to encourage
farmers to keep their requests for water allocations as low as possible,
and to use their allocations as efficiently as possible. As the nature of
Overberg Water differs substantially from other Water Boards and its tariff
structure is unique, it is difficult to ascertain which comes cheapest.
However, the Scheme’s tariffs do compare favourably with other Water
Boards.

As local government in the Overberg area battles with a lack of capacity,
Overberg Water considers itself to be in a good position to assist with the
provision of water services in the region. For example, the Scheme could
provide the quota of free basic water (6kiloletres) free to rural areas.
However, this is dependent on instruction from municipalities and an
agreement has to be entered into with municipalities. Negotiations in this
regard are ongoing with municipalities. Furthermore, the Scheme believes
that it can play a leading role in the setup of institutional mechanisms
for the provision of water services. However, a major obstacle that has to
be overcome relates to conservatism in the region. The Scheme plans to host
a summit (which they agreed after inquiry by the Committee should include
the whole province), to inform stakeholders about where Overberg is headed
in terms of the provision of water services.

Overberg Water also performs well in the Working for Water programme. The
Scheme is of the opinion that an increased Working for Water Programme
could possibly contribute towards curbing the problem of water shortage
experienced in the Western Cape. To this end, they propose that 1000
hectares in the Sonderend River valley, from the TWK dam to the confluence
with the Breede River be cleared (±120 km), at an estimated cost of R 4
million. The total amount of water, i.e. ±3,000 000 m3, that Overberg Water
subtracts from the river annually, can be saved. This water will then be
available for the metropole. It will cost approximately R34 million to
clear the whole valley. Overberg Water can also assist DWAF to manage the
river as well as the subtraction from the river and other rivers. This will
not only contribute to a further saving of water, but will also create jobs
for an estimated 176 people.

3.2.1 Discussions

Questions that were raised by Members of the Committee during the
discussion following the presentation include:

 • Overberg Water claimed that it would cost R4 million to clean up 1000
   hectares of land in an effort to save water. Has a cost estimation been
   done in this regard? The figure provided is rough, based on accurate
   research and calculations by DWAF.
 • Does the Board provide water services in consultation with anyone? Yes,
   services are provided in consultation with municipalities as the water
   authority, as there is a lot of capital that has to be invested in terms
   of infrastructure. In fact, the Board is in the process of proposing
   models to municipalities of how water services can be provided.
 • How will the Board address gender imbalances in its equity profile? The
   term of Office of the current Board expires on 30 September 2005. It is
   hoped that at top management level, this imbalance will be addressed with
   the appointment of the new Board. However, many of the posts in the
   establishment are of a technical nature, and there is only a small pool
   of women to draw from.
 • How affordable are the Board’s tariffs. The Board believes that its
   tariffs are favourable. This is evident in the low default rate of
   approximately 4%.
 • What steps have been taken against people who extract water illegally
   from dams? The Board noted that it is difficult to control unauthorised
   water extraction, as there is currently no system in place to do this.
   However, this can be done at some cost.
 • The Board indicated that the Working for Water Project creates jobs and
   alleviates poverty. How many people are currently employed in the
   project, disaggregated by categories such as race and gender? The Board
   did not have the data available, but indicated that it could provide the
   Committee with the information at a later stage.

3.3    The South African Local Government Association (SALGA)

The objective of SALGA is to assist municipalities in delivering services
in an equitable, affordable and sustainable manner. The Organization
recognizes that not all people are benefiting from government policies as a
result of local government’s poor delivery track record, and acknowledges
that many municipalities need to improve the efficiency of their water and
sanitation services.

Key challenges faced by SALGA include:

 • The delivery of Free Basic Water and Sanitation is a problem for people
   who do not have access to piped water.
 • With the restructuring process, it is important that DWAF assets are
   transferred in a sustainable manner.
 • It is difficult to eradicate the sanitation backlog in the absence of a
   comprehensive policy.
 • The impact of the restructuring of water services providers on local
   government.
 •
In general, SALGA supports the Budget of DWAF for the 2005/06 financial
year. Its presentation focused on 5 key areas in the budget, i.e.:

1. Sanitation - SALGA views the delivery of free basic sanitation as one of
   its key priorities. It acknowledges the fact that the White Paper on
   Basic Household Sanitation should be amended to align it with the new
   Water Services Strategic Framework. Furthermore, SALGA considers it
   necessary to revisit the sanitation policy and subsidy levels if the
   service delivery targets in the Strategic Framework document are to be
   met.

2. Free Basic Water - Local Government is making continuous progress with
   the provision of free basic water. Almost all municipalities now provide
   free basic water to their residents who have access to services. However,
   some of the challenges that confront municipalities in the provision of
   free basic water are:

     1. The development and implementation of indigent policies. There is a
        need to define that constitutes indigent or poor people in order to
        determine who should be getting the subsidized water.

     2. There is a need to extend the delivery of free basic water to those
        people who are not currently served and poor households, by
        extending water networks or constructing local water schemes. This
        requires funds and skills, but municipalities should be empowered
        to extend this service in a sustainable manner.

     3. Large-scale meter installation is required, which is an expensive
        exercise.

     4. Billing systems, debt collection and municipal arrears remain
        problematic.

3. Transfers - The Joint Transfer policy indicates that all schemes are to
   be transferred by June 2005. Although SALGA is supportive of the transfer
   process, it has consistently stated that the timeframes may not be met,
   as this is a process which requires co-operation between different role-
   players, including local government, communities, politicians, etc. SALGA
   is of the opinion that the transfer of schemes must be done in the proper
   manner, and that another year would constitute a reasonable timeframe for
   the completion of this process.

4. Catchment’s Management Agencies - Seven proposals for the establishment
   of catchment’s management agencies have been under consideration for some
   time and debates between SALGA and other agents with regard to the cost
   and where this will be sourced from has been ongoing. In terms of the
   Department’s targets, 6 catchment management agencies were to be
   established by March 2005.

5. Restructuring of water services providers in South Africa – the benefits
   of the restructuring process, as highlighted by SALGA, are that it
   provides an opportunity to:

   1. Create viable water services providers and use scarce human resources
      in the sector more effectively.

   2. Create water services providers that can provide competitive services
      to communities in South Africa and beyond its borders.

   3. Create efficient institutions that result in less duplication of
      functions and lower costs.

However, the restructuring process is an expensive exercise that needs to
be adequately funded and resourced. It is also important to ensure that
there is a regulatory framework within which the restructuring process
occurs, as the absence of such a framework will increase the costs and
impact negatively on the efficiency of services provided. SALGA is of the
opinion that the budget allocations in the 2005/06 budgets are insufficient
to maintain the desired level of support to municipalities.

   1. Discussions

Questions that were raised by Members of the Committee during the
discussion following the presentation include:

 • Are there any mechanisms in place for the maintenance of municipal
   infrastructure? A benchmarking project is underway to establish
   indicators for measuring loss. Unfortunately, local government inherited
   the legacy of poor maintenance from the past, and it requires a lot of
   funds and professional skills upfront to get the process started before
   getting any returns.

 • SALGA reported that one of the key challenges is to eradicate the backlog
   in the provision of sanitation services because of a lack of national
   policy in this regard. Do municipalities not create individual policies
   in this regard or do they have to refer to a national policy? SALGA
   indicated that a common framework is required in this regard. A lot of
   work has been done towards this, but the process needs to be concluded.
   For example, there is no agreement on what constitutes basic sanitation.

 • Another challenge reported by SALGA is that the concept of
   indigenous/poor people has to be defined, in order to determine who
   should benefit from the Free Basic Water programme. Members wanted to
   know who constitutes the poor. SALGA indicated that this couldn’t be
   measured, as there are no indicators in this regard. Steps should be
   taken to ensure that directing resources more accurately at them as the
   intended beneficiaries of the programme targeting the poor.

 • What is SALGA doing to address the lack of capacity in municipalities?
   Yes, SALGA does provide assistance to municipalities where there is a
   lack of capacity.

3.4   The Timberwatch Coalition

Timberwatch was founded in 1995 by a group of concerned members of civil
society. It has since developed a volunteer network, working together with
a coalition of environmental non-governmental organisations (NGOs). The
mission of Timberwatch is to promote and coordinate action by members,
organisations and the public, and to keep such bodies adequately informed,
in order to ensure that timber plantations are not established on land
where food, other crops and livestock could be farmed to the greater
benefit of both local communities, and South Africa as a whole. The
organisation is privately funded and does not receive any funding from
Government.

The organisation submits that natural resources such as forests,
grasslands, wetlands, clean air, water and food should be valued in order
to set off any loss of amenity against the claimed economic benefits from
plantations. This process is known as resource economics.

The impact of timber plantations is varied. On the social front, timber
plantations could, among other impacts, cause health problems from exposure
to toxic agri-chemicals and in-field injuries; disrupt family and community
life as a result of the contract labour system; and spread sexually
transmitted diseases as a result of both the contract labour system and the
trucking of timber. Implications for water resources include that large-
scale timber plantations negatively affect surface and groundwater
resources; and timber plantations (especially eucalyptus plantations) are
known to dry up local streams and wetlands. Other negative impacts include
damage to public roads; pollution of streams and rivers; air pollution and
water pollution.

The presentation highlighted the plight of the Sabokwe People who were
removed from their ancestral land north of Richard’s Bay (KwaZulu Natal) in
the 1970’s to make way for pine plantations. After 1994 the Sabokwe people
reoccupied a small portion of their land. However, they are now surrounded
by alien timber plantations, and do not have sufficient land to keep their
livestock. The people of Sabokwe feel that they have very little hope of
regaining their identity and self-respect as a community.

   1. Discussion

Questions that were raised by Members of the Committee during the
discussion following the presentation include:

 • Is there any consultation with traditional leaders when plantations are
   created? The Coalition indicated that traditional leaders are represented
   in some forums dealing with these issues, but that their representation
   could be increased.

 • What is the Coalition doing for the people of Sabokwe as an NGO? The
   Coalition has to some extent been involved in trying to assist the
   Sabokwe people. It identified youth development as important in the
   community, and has run a workshop with them. It is currently also working
   on a proposal for developing a project in the community, though with
   limited resources. A proposal for funding of such a project has to be
   submitted.

 • Is there any partnership between the Coalition and Government? The
   Coalition desires a working relationship with DWAF, as it believes it is
   in a good position to point out information to the Department. However,
   the challenge in the past has been to get an appropriate response from
   the Department to efforts made by the Coalition. The Coalition requires
   the co-operation of the Department to exchange ideas and information and
   possibly share resources.

3.5   National Movement of Rural Women

3.5.1 Water Affairs
In 2005 there are still people who do not have access to clean water.
Consequently, people source drinking water from rivers where there are
crocodiles and from places where animals drink water and this leads to
acquired waterborne diseases such as cholera, malaria, and diarrhea. The
needs of women are not catered for when discussing water issues and women
feel marginalized. Women are not consulted when there are discussions on
where to place communal taps, and when the taps will be connected to their
areas. Many women in rural areas are not catered for, nor are they
consulted when most of the water policies are being discussed, whereas the
President in his State of the Nation Address said, “ We must achieve a new
and democratic State which truly serves the needs of the people”. This
seems not to be the case when considering the marginalization of rural
women. Rural women are the ones who use water mostly, but the decisions on
where to erect taps are taken by men.

In the Mpumalanga areas of the Ntsikazi and Nkomazi regions there are
illegal connections of taps outside the borders of those regions. This is
the result of lack of running water for these rural people. Moreover,
people from Nelspruit come to Ntsikazi with trucks to sell water, because
there is a lack of infrastructure to provide clean water to the people.

In areas of Ga-Mashashane in the Limpopo province, women in this rural
village travel for long distances to collect drinking water. The Government
must provide for a budget to cater for water needs in the rural areas. The
situation is worse for children between 6 weeks and 6 years, 14% of whom
are dying because of waterborne related diseases like cholera, diarrhea,
and malaria found in rural provinces such as Northern Natal, Free State,
Northern Cape, Mpumalanga, and North West.
It seems that the Government has not put much emphasis on gender and
children’s issues in the Water Affairs and Forestry’s Budget Vote.

There is a need for water to be used for sanitary purposes. Government must
engage with the communities to allow for a situation where water will be
supplied for sanitation purposes.

The government must also negotiate with communities about the privatisation
of water services. The Movement is against the privatisation of water
services.

3.5.2 Forestry

The Government has abandoned Arbor Day, which was commemorated on a day in
a week dedicated to planting trees. There is a need to revive the custom of
having a specific day set aside for planting trees. There is also a need
for grazing land in the rural areas, since there is high demand for green
trees. There are people in the rural areas that sell firewood for profit
from trees that are not theirs, but belong to nature.

   3. Discussions

Members raised the following key general question during the discussion
that followed the presentation:

 • What is the relationship between the National Movement for Rural Women
   (NMRW) and the municipalities? They also wanted to know whether  is there
   any training is provided to women.

3.6   The Mvula Trust

3.6.1 Water Affairs

There is a need for Government to provide financial assistance to small-
scale farmers. The government has allocated R5000 per household to be
rolled out to five thousand households. This allocation is covered in this
year’s budget, which was increased from R27 million to R37 731 million.

According to the Trust there is a need to redefine what is meant by water
supply and sanitation. The Water Services Act provides for water supply and
sanitation and potable water.

The Government must commit itself to 6 000 kilolitres per month per
household of Free Basic Water. Moreover, the Government should devise the
best way for the Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) to be spent. There is
a need to develop water policy synergies within the Department of Water
Affairs and Forestry directorates for water for domestic and productive
use.

There is a also a need for engagement between DWAF, the Department of
Agriculture, the Department of Provincial and Local Government and the
SALGA on the application of the MIG funding to strengthen this important
initiative to provide sustainable water for multiple use to vulnerable
households.

3.7   The South African Water Caucus

3.7.1 Water Affairs

The South African Water Caucus (SAWC) is a national organization, which
represents civil society organizations in the area of water. The
organization is concerned that there are 1.5 million people who are
currently not serviced. There is a backlog that faces the Government. The
organization has questions that relate to the budget on which it is not
clear, as to why their budget has dropped from R236 209,00 to R157 364,00
for this current year.

There is also a need for the budget to cater for civil society
organizations to enable them to participate and make input into the vote
and enable them to attend public hearings. However, it is appreciated that
the budget for stakeholder empowerment has increased substantially.

The Budget vote does not provide for the empowerment of women.

The Government and other institutions have co-modified water. The
Government should therefore attempt to increase Free Basic Water to poor
households.

The SAWC is concerned that the consumers are charged higher rates than bulk
agricultural users. For this reason, it is suggested that the tariff
structure should be revised.

The SAWC is also concerned that the Department spends much money on
consultants and not on service delivery.

   2. Discussion

The following were key general questions and comments that were raised by
Members of the Committee during the discussion following the presentation:

 • The Members raised the concern that Mvula Trust has not made follow-ups
   after donating funding to communities for water connection to ascertain
   whether the money was used appropriately for the intended purpose. This
   arises out of the fact that there are communities that leave pipes lying
   around after they have put pipelines underground for transporting water.

 • The Members of the Committee also wanted to know whether Mvula Trust has
   alerted communities that water harvesting was temporary and whether they
   engaged with the communities where there are rivers and streams, such as
   KwaZulu Natal, to develop catchment areas.

 • Are there training programmes that the Women’s Movement is providing to
   women?
 • The Members wanted to ascertain whether the R27 million is money that is
   projected by the Trust or whether it is a Departmental budget allocation.


 • Members also commented that the input by SAWC was more of a list of
   questions and comments about the strategic plan than the Budget vote.

 • Lastly, Members wanted to ascertain whether the Trust has applied for
   funds as stipends to people who work on the water projects responsible
   for putting the pipelines in the different communities.

The following were general answers and comments to the above questions:

    • It was explained that there is a relationship between the NMRW and the
      different local municipalities. The Movement is also part of the local
      municipalities’ programmes.

    • With regard to training and skills development, women are being
      trained on different issues and the Movement works with the Women
      Development Forum. There is a grant for the Movement dedicated to
      training. The local clinics also provide training to women on boiling
      water to kill germs and to advise women on how to avoid acquiring
      waterborne diseases such as cholera.

    • The Mvula Trust no longer receives funding as it used to in the past,
      due to new fundraising legislation, and it now operates like a
      consultant for municipalities. The Trust does not participate in the
      catchment areas, but communities and municipalities do. The reason for
      not participating is that the Trust does not have the locus standi in
      respect of water issues in the different communities. The R27 million
      is a correct figure, which is contained in the Budget vote.

3.8   The Contact Trust

Contact Trust addressed the Committee on its work, particularly in relation
to opposing timber plantations and their “Value Grasslands” project. The
Chairperson raised the fact that the presentation did not address the
budget vote. Notwithstanding the presentation would be useful to the
Committee. The Chairperson therefore decided that no discussion would be
entertained in this regard, but requested that Contact Trust be invited to
do a full presentation at another meeting in future. The work of Contact
Trust will then be dealt with separately from the budget vote.

4.    Response by the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry to the
inputs

4.1   Essentially, water is governed by the Constitution of the Republic of
        South Africa.

4.2   The Government is restructuring entities that were established and
        operated beyond South Africa’s borders. During this process,
        municipalities would have to look for services that they can source
        from outside the government and itself.

4.3   The Water Services Act provides for authorities to come together and
        form a Water Services entity like the Umngeni Water in KwaZulu-
        Natal. The National Treasury will increase funding for the
        municipality as the Department lowers its contribution to water
        services to municipalities.


4.4   The definition of Free Basic Sanitation should be revamped, but not
        in the manner suggested by Mvula Trust, because currently the
        definition provides for safe, reliable, private, easy to keep,
        clean, hygienic and easily removable of human waste. Thus it is
        broad enough, but it may need further revamping.

4.5   There will be four catchment areas that will be established and R12
        million has been put aside for Catchment Management Services. The
        Department acknowledges that not everybody has access to clean water
        and it recognises what women are doing in the area of water access.

4.6   The Government will work with Water Service providers and
        municipalities on Water Service Development Plans (WSDPs).


4.7   The Government is also concerned about the illegal connection of
        water and steps will be taken regarding these illegal acts.

4.8   Arbor Week has not been scrapped. It is still being catered for in
        the Department’s calendar and will take place in the first week of
        September 2005.

4.9   The debate on privatisation of water services is not closed and the
        Department engages with stakeholders, including the South African
        Municipal Workers Union, Anti-Privatisation Forum, and other
        stakeholders.

4.10  There is a need for legislation that deals with the supply of water
        to
        communal taps and the catchment areas. The Government has allocated
        72%
        of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) to water and sanitation.



4.11  There has been spending on consultants and the Department will try to
        build an in-house capacity.

4.12  The Government is trying its best to develop gender sensitive
        policies at all levels, and all government policies are gender
        sensitive.

4.13  The Department will ensure that Regional offices communicate with the
        different civil society movements to invite them to engage with the
        Department on Water Affairs and Forestry matters.


 4.14 There are laws that govern forestry and veldfires. There are also
        Forestry Development Plans, which deal with forestation and other
        matters connected therewith and the Minister is still looking at
        these issues.

 4.15 The Ministry is also looking at the government’s Black Economic
       Empowerment (BEE) policy in forestry through the planned Izimbizos.
       An assessment will also be made on Sappi and Mondi’s BEE. This will,
       among other things, look at how the Previously Disadvantaged benefit
       from forestry. In the forestry Indaba, there will be a discussion and
       decision on how to use forestry, herbs to benefit the poor and the
       use of forestry by the traditional doctors.

Appendix A

Names of Presenters

Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
Mr M. Miller (Director General)
Ms N. Mohoboko
Mr L. Mufamadi
Mr P. Botha
Mr J. Sindane

Overberg Water Board
Mr D. Abrahams (Executive Mayor)
Mr D. Potgieter
Mr. A. Behardian

Timberwatch Coalition
Mr. W Mene

Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry
Hon Ms B.P. Sonjica

Geosphere  (Contact Trust)
Mr P. Owen
Mr G. Siloale

National Movement of Rural Women
Ms P. Sithole

Mvula Trust
Mr P. Davids

South African Water Caucus
Ms H. Deedat

South African Local Government Association
Mr Neil McCloud


Executive Summary: Key Issues Emanating From the Public Hearings Of the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry Budget Vote

1.  Introductory Overview

The key distinguishing feature of the budget vote of the Department of
Water Affairs and Forestry is that the budget is divided in two parts,
namely; the Exchequer Account and the Trading Account. The Exchequer
account refers to the account voted in Parliament, while the Trading
Account refers to those accounts that are intended to generate revenue,
such as the income from water users. In each financial year the exchequer
account and trading account, fused together, make a composite whole of the
budget vote.

In the 2005/06 financial year, the Exchequer Account constitutes R2 069 993
million (34%) of the total Departmental expenditure, whilst expenditure on
the Trading Account amounts to R4 103 397 million (66%).  The Department
has organised the expenditure of its Exchequer Account into 4 Programmes,
i.e: Administration, Water Resource Management, and Water Services Forestry

Programme 1 Administration                                             272
491
Programme 2 Water Resource Management                    1 506 657
Programme 3 Water Services                   1 405 075
Programme 4 Forestry                                 373 189

   2. Strategic Plan and the Budget Vote

The Strategic Plan of the Department has fourteen (14) Programmes while the
Appropriation is divided into four (4) programmes. It seems that there is a
disjuncture between the Budget Vote and the Strategic Plan of the
Department. The strategic plan contains the objectives of the department.
The objectives are or should be specific, measurable, achievable, real and
time-bound.  This will be able to merge with the Strategic Plan and the
Budget Vote together with the Appropriation.

The disjuncture between the two arises because the Strategic Plan has to
conform to the format requirements of the Department of Public Services,
whilst the budget has to conform to the format requirements set by the
National Treasury. However, the activities in the Strategic Plan are linked
to the different Programmes of the budget. Furthermore, there is a matrix
system of reporting between the Head Office and Regional Offices, which
makes the linkage between the Strategic Plan and the budget possible.

   3. Restructuring of the Department

The Department adopts a responsible approach to the restructuring process
that takes into account all role-players. The restructuring process is
budgeted for in the Administration Programme and other line functions. This
will take some time, for example, Water Services will only be transferred
by April 2006.The process is therefore dependent on the other cross-
departmental services.

Moreover, the Government is restructuring entities that were established
and operated beyond South Africa’s borders. During this process,
municipalities would have to look for services that they can source from
outside the government and itself.

4.  Gender and the Budget Vote

The government develops policies that are gender sensitive at all levels.
However, there is a weakness in the budget vote in that it does not cater
fully for rural women who bear the brunt in communities where there is lack
of sanitational and water services.

5.  State of the Nation Address

There is a degree of consistency between the State of the Nation Address
and the budget of the Department. For example, the budget provides for the
provision of basic services; the 2nd Economy and rural development; and
creating a framework for economic growth in the 1st Economy which are areas
covered in the State of the Nation Address.

RECOMMENDATIONS

     1.  Where the department has shifted targets in a budgeted year and
        are reliant on other departments and tiers of government, that
        those targets remain the responsibility of the department of Water
        Affairs and Forestry to monitor and effect through a process of co-
        operative governance.

     2.  That the restructuring process with regards to water services to
        local government and forestry to other departments, that the target
        dates be relooked at and that service delivery and human resource
        concerns and capacity not be compromised in the process.

     3. That all provinces, which have not held Provincial Water Summits,
        be encouraged to do so and that it should not be left for
        individual municipalities to organise.

     4. That the Working for Water programmes to be enhanced so as to
        contribute in curbing the water shortage problems as currently
        experiencing in the Western Cape.

     5. That the department of Water Affairs and Forestry in conjunction
        with provinces and municipalities take steps to continue to
        investigate illegal use or extraction of water where they occur.

     6. That the department of Water Affairs and Forestry assist in
        clarifying the policy positions on Basic Household Sanitation so as
        to build capacity in municipalities and ensure that service
        delivery targets are met and that our people obtain the quality
        services the budget sets out to be.

     7. That the department on Water Affairs and Forestry as sector leader
        provide guidance on the implementation on indigent policies so as
        to ensure that especially poor people who has not received free
        basic services by municipalities can receive them.

     8. As SALGA is of the view that the 2005/2006 budget is insufficient
        to maintain support to municipalities, DWAF together with SALGA
        should embark on further capacity programmes especially with regard
        to Project consolidate.

     9. That the department on Water Affairs and Forestry enhances its
        focus on the impact of inaccessible water services and forestry for
        women in rural areas in relation to clean drinking water and the
        impact on their health (water borne diseases).  That DWAF
        investigate the claim by the National Movement of Rural Women with
        regards to illegal connections of taps and that allocation of water
        services and infrastructure that mitigates against service delivery
        to women in rural areas, that the regional offices of DWAF initiate
        co-operate community participation to overcome these backlogs.

    10. That the department of Water Affairs and Forestry initiate
        engagement with the departments of Provincial and Local Government,
        SALGA, Agriculture and other relevant departments on the need to
        strengthen important initiatives to provide sustainable water for
        multiple use to vulnerable households including a programme on
        sustainable multiple use for forestry to vulnerable households.


