---
title: 'National Assembly - 26 October 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-10-26
---

WEDNESDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:57.

The Deputy Speaker, took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, in terme van die bepalings
van Reël 66 van die Staande Reëls van hierdie Huis, gee die VF Plus hiermee
kennis in ’n substantiewe voorstel:

  Dat die Huis -


    vra om die verwydering van Sy Edele regter John Hlope as regter van die
    hooggeregshof en Regter-president van die Hooggeregshof van die Wes-
    Kaap.

In ooreenstemming met die bepalings van artikel 177 van die Grondwet van
die Republiek van Suid-Afrika sou die volgende stellings, indien dit waar
bevind sou word, so ‘n besluit van die Huis regverdig. Beëdigde verklarings
wat dié bewerings bevestig, is reeds afgelê. Sy Edele regter-president
Hlope het na ‘n Kaapse prokureur, Joshua Greeff, verwys. Agb Speaker, dit
sal egter die integriteit van hierdie Huis aantas as ek die woorde wat hy
sou gesê het, herhaal. Ek sê dit wel hier in die dokument, maar ek sal dit
nie herhaal nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die ADJUNKSPEAKER: Dankie.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Sy Edele regter-president Hlope het gesê dat hy
opsetlik die hofsaak van die Wes-Kaapse LUR vir Onderwys teen die
beheerliggaam van die Laerskool Mikro na regter Thring verwys het, omdat hy
die saak, soos die regter dit sou gestel het . . . en weer eens sal ek nie
die woorde herhaal nie, want ek respekteer die integriteit van hierdie
Huis.

Hierdie beëdigde verklarings versterk verklarings vroeër vanjaar waarin
regter-president Hlope anti-wit, rassistiese opmerkings aangaande die
regbank gemaak het. Daar is reeds aangedui dat die Hoofregter en die
Regterlike Dienskommissie nie die aangeleentheid verder gaan ondersoek nie.

Hierdie aantygings regverdig vinnige en besliste optrede. Indien die agb
Speaker vind dat hierdie voorstel substantief is, is dit noodsaaklik vir
die Parlement om betrokke te raak en sy magte te gebruik om ondersoek in te
stel en getuies te dagvaar in ooreenstemming met die magte soos dit aan die
Parlement opgedra is, in terme van artikel 65 van die Grondwet. Ek gee so
kennis. (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Madam Deputy Speaker, in terms of the stipulations of
Rule 66 of the Standing Rules of this House, the FF Plus hereby gives
notice in a substantive motion:

   That the House requests the removal of the honourable Judge John Hlope as
   judge of the Supreme Court and Judge President of the High Court of the
   Western Cape.

In accordance with the provisions of section 177 of the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa, the following statements, if they should prove to
be true, would justify such a decision from the House. Affidavits that
confirm these allegations have already been made. The honourable Judge
President Hlope referred to an attorney from the Cape, Joshua Greeff.
However, hon Speaker, it would affect the integrity of this House if I were
to repeat the words that he used. I do state it here in this document, but
I will not repeat it. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: The honourable Judge President Hlope said that he had
intentionally referred the court case of the Western Cape MEC for Education
against the governing body of Mikro Primary School to Judge Thring, as he
would deal with the case, as the judge would have phrased it . . . and
again I cannot repeat the words, as I respect the integrity of this House.

These affidavits reinforce statements made earlier this year in which Judge
President Hlope made antiwhite, racist remarks against the judiciary. It
has already been indicated that the Chief Justice and the Judicial Service
Commission will not investigate the matter further.

These allegations justify swift and firm action. Should the hon Speaker
find that this motion is substantive, it is imperative for Parliament to
become involved and use its powers to launch an inquiry and subpoena
witnesses in accordance with the powers vested in Parliament, in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution. I so move.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon member. The notice will be looked at and
dealt with appropriately.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP I give notice that I shall
move that the House debates why the ANC consistently blocks motions in the
NA that make reference to the heroes of the Christian faith; with specific
reference to the ACDP motion that called on the House simply to note that
31 October is an important date on the Christian calendar; as it was on
this day in 1517 that Martin Luther made a courageous stand, which opened
the way for the Word of God to powerfully impact every area of life. I
thank you. [Interjections.]


                     A Joyous Deepavali AND EID MUBARAK


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


  (1) takes this opportunity to wish all Hindus a joyous Divali and a happy
        New Year and hopes that the year ahead will be prosperous, uplifting
        and fulfilling to our endeavours;


  (2) reaches out to all Hindus and Muslims across the globe, especially
        those devastated by the floods in India and earthquakes in Pakistan
        and Kashmir;


  (3) notes that the Muslim month of Ramadan is drawing to an end and prays
        that the holy month has been fulfilling and we kindly wishes all
        Muslims an Eid Mubarak;


     4) wishes that, during these auspicious celebrations, we remember our
        brothers and sisters around the world that have been disadvantaged
        by these calamities;


  (5) wishes to light a lamp for those in need and reach to our musallahs
        for their betterment, strength and hope;


  (6) calls for assistance to extend beyond prayer and to find the means
        possible to help those in need; and


  (7) once again wishes all our members, constituencies and all celebrating
        Deewali and Eid a very happy celebration filled with love, light and
        family. Divali Mubarak. Eid Mubarak.


Agreed to.


                          DEATH OF RICARDO MOWRIES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P A GERBER (ANC): Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, op Maandag 17 Oktober 2005
het ’n tragiese ongeluk die plaasgemeenskap van Wolseley geruk toe ’n 16-
jarige jong seun, Ricardo Mowries, grusaam verongeluk het. Sy klere het
verstrengel geraak in ’n baalmasjien wat hom toe verder ingetrek het tot
binne - in die masjien se lemme.

Rachel Mowries, sy moeder, het die volgende te sê gehad: “Wat ek nie kan
verstaan nie, is hoekom die plaaseienaar hom toegelaat het om met die
masjien te werk wat gewoonlik deur ouer mans met meer ondervinding
gehanteer word.”

Klousule 28(1)(f) van ons Grondwet lui soos volg:

  Elke kind het die reg –


  om nie verplig of toegelaat te word om werk te verrig of dienste te lewer
  nie wat –


   (i)            onvanpas is vir ’n persoon van daardie kind se ouderdom;
            of


   (ii)     ’n risiko vir die kind se welsyn, opvoeding, liggaamlike of
            geestelike gesondheid of geestelike, morele of sosiale
            ontwikkeling inhou . . .


Verder definieer die Grondwet in klousule 28(3) ’n kind as “iemand onder
die ouderdom van 18 jaar”. Die ANC is verontrus oor die totale minagting
vir hierdie belangrike klousule in ons Grondwet en versoek die Departement
van Arbeid om die aangeleentheid dringend te ondersoek. Indien enige
persoon enige wette of reëls oortree het, moet die reg sy gang so gou as
moontlik gaan. Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)

[Mr P A GERBER (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, on Monday 17 October 2005 a
horrific accident shocked the farming community of Wolseley when a 16-year-
old boy, Ricardo Mowries, died in a gruesome accident. His clothes became
entangled in a baling machine which then pulled him further into the blades
of the machine.

Rachel Mowries, his mother, said the following: “What I cannot understand,
is why the farm owner allowed him to operate this machine which is usually
handled by grown men with more experience.” Clause 28(1)(f) of our
Constitution reads as follows:

  Every child has the right –


  not to be required or permitted to perform work or provide services that –

  (i) are inappropriate for a person of that child’s age; or


  (ii)      place at risk the child’s well-being, education, physical or
            mental health or spiritual, moral or social development . . .
Furthermore the Constitution defines a child as “a person under the age of
18 years” in clause 28(3). The ANC is disturbed by the utter contempt for
this important clause in our Constitution and requests the Department of
Labour to undertake an urgent investigation into this matter. If anyone has
transgressed any laws or regulations, the law must take its course as soon
as possible. Thank you. [Applause.]]


              Corruption within ANC government IN KWAZULU-NATAL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M J ELLIS (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, KwaZulu-Natal Premier S’bu Ndebele
must be feeling very insecure as the ANC leadership battle rages on around
him. He is spending vast amounts of public money promoting himself and his
dwindling political authority in the newspapers and on the billboards of
the province. Perhaps he is hoping that the divisions within the ANC ranks
and his government’s own lack of delivery can be papered over by the flood
of adverts.

But the corruption uncovered in the provincial social welfare department
indicates that a culture of corruption has been allowed to take root under
the ANC leadership. The widespread defiance of President Mbeki and the
burning of ANC t-shirts in Durban recently suggest that the ANC is reaping
what it has sown, and that is a failure to separate party and state and the
belief that the party leadership is above the law.

A little less spending on self-promotion and a lot more spending on the
delivery of services is what the people of KwaZulu-Natal need. It certainly
is time that the Premier remembers whom he works for. I thank you.


         Five beaches in Kwazulu-Natal given Blue Flag status award


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, a Blue Flag is an
international annual award given to beaches that meet standards in the
areas of safety, amenities, cleanliness and environmental standards. At the
annual Blue Flag ceremony held at Kelly’s Beach, Port Alfred, in the
Eastern Cape earlier this month, the Deputy Minister of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism awarded Blue Flag status to a number of beaches around
the country.

The campaign was officially launched in South Africa in 2001, when there
were just three full-status beaches. For this season, KwaZulu-Natal alone
has five beaches that have been given Blue Flag status, while there are 34
beaches participating in this campaign. This is a remarkable growth, and
all involved in this campaign and who elevated their beaches to Blue Flag
status should be congratulated for their outstanding efforts and hard work.

The benefits of participating in the Blue Flag campaign are great, as the
presence of a Blue Flag beach within a municipality brings about improved
environmental management of areas adjacent to the Blue Flag area. People’s
experiences and enjoyment of the beaches are also increased, which is very
good for all, especially tourism. I thank you.


        GOVERNMENT ENCOURAGES ENTREPRENEURIAL SPIRIT IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu R Z NOGUMLA (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, urhulumente osezintanjeni, okhokelwa
ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC, uya kuthi rhoqo usebenzela ukwakhiwa nokuvuleleka
kwamathuba ezoshishino kuye wonke ubani, kungajongwanga bala nasini samntu.

Usapho lwakwaSaki lwaziqalela ishishini lokuthengisa iintloko zeegusha
eziphekiweyo kwiminyaka engamashumi amabini ananye egqithileyo. Olu sapho
lufundise, lwakhulisa kwaye lwanxibisa abantwana balo abasixhenxe ngenzuzo
yeli shishini. Namhlanje eli shishini laziwa kwiQonce lonke, kwaye
kubathengi kuqukwa namalungu eNdlu yoWiso-mthetho.

Eli shishini, lilincinci linjalo, lingumzekelo omhle obonakalisa
ukukhuthala nokuzithemba kubantu bakuthi. Olu sapho lungqina iphulo
likarhulumente oxhuzula imikhala elithi Vukuzenzele, kwaye likhuthaza
nabanye abantu ukuba baziqalele amashishinana abo ukuzama ukuziphilisa.
Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr R Z NOGUMLA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led government will always
work hard to create an environment for business opportunities for
everybody, without discriminating against colour or creed. The Saki family
started a business of selling cooked sheep’s heads 20 years ago. They
brought up their children and sent them to school with the proceeds they
received from their business. It is well known today in King William’s
Town, and among their proud and satisfied customers are some members of
this House.

This business enterprise, small as it is, is an example of the success one
can achieve by being diligent, industrious and confident in what one
embarks upon. This family serves as encouragement to other people as well
as motivation for them to initiate business projects as a response to the
call of Vukuzenzele. I thank you. [Applause.]]


                   ASSISTANCE NEEDED BY RICHMOND COMMUNITY


                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms N C NKABINDE (UDM): The UDM commends the people and political leaders of
Richmond, KwaZulu-Natal, on their continued efforts to secure peace in the
previously conflict-riddled area. On Sunday 23 October, the community and
political leaders from all the major parties in the area met and pledged
themselves once more to peace and to addressing the legacy of the political
violence that once plagued Richmond.

What was, however, especially significant was the presence of political
violence offenders. It is very significant that these offenders, more than
20 of them, have taken the initiative and publicly signed their own peace
pledge, in which they not only apologise for their past deeds, but also
commit themselves to future development of the Richmond community.

Their public renouncement of violence and acceptance of the wrongs they’ve
committed is an act of bravery that we salute. We understand that the
culture of violence and retaliation that these offenders grew up with means
that it takes more courage to lay down their guns than to pick them up.

The UDM then calls upon government - both provincial and national - to come
to the assistance of the Richmond community and to help them to rebuild
what decades of violence have destroyed. These scars will take a long time
to heal, but the whole community is committed to a peaceful and more
prosperous future. We urge government to recognise the special urgency of
this community’s needs. I thank you.


                     ID Support increasing at the polls


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Madam Deputy Speaker, for the record, we have in
recent times lost some our representatives, but they left with their
jackets only, because recent independent polls prove that our support has
increased substantially. We are grateful to all South Africans who have
given the ID overwhelming support. We have never been so popular, and I
want to thank you. [Interjections.]

Our appreciation also goes to the pollsters who’ve recently published
statistics that the ID is fast becoming the party of choice for all who
strive against discrimination and inequality. [Interjections.] We, as a
party, are giving the old guard of the DA a hell of a run, which, to be
honest, was never going to be much of a challenge in any case.
[Interjections.]

Furthermore, we are taking you, the ANC, head-on and with our recent by-
election victories are clearly making inroads into the heart and soul of
the discerning electorate. [Interjections.]

Our fears are single, that given the impending local government elections,
we find, yet again, that our offices, this time in Durban, have been broken
into. One could blame the crime that you fail to tackle, but given that
these criminals only took our hard drives; we believe that it was
politically motivated. [Interjections.] This, surely, cannot be acceptable
in a democracy. This is further proof that we are hurting them where it
hurts most, namely in their support bases.

What are you scared of - a one-woman party? We will show you that we will
continue to be the right choice for all South Africans. I thank you.
[Interjections.]

          TWO LEARNERS WIN ESKOM SCIENCE EXPO NATIONAL COMPETITION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M U KALAKO (ANC): Madam Speaker, under the leadership of the ANC South
Africa is deepening the culture of a caring government, a government that
is committed to providing a nonracial, nonsexist and equal education to all
the people.

Two Grade 9 pupils, Thabisa Mavume, 16 years old, and Portia Fipozo, 14
years old, both from Intlanganiso Secondary School in Cite C, Khayelitsha,
won in an Eskom Science Expo National Competition in the social science
category.
The two will be part of a group of six pupils who will be representing our
country in the international science exposition in Mexico next June.
However, despite their winning in the competition the two pupils face some
financial challenges. Each of them is expected to contribute an amount of
R1 500 towards the trip and their teacher, Mr Chris Diwu, is not included
in the trip.

The ANC salutes the bravery of the two pupils who will, despite their poor
background, have beaten the odds, and also urges the business community to
assist with funding for the two pupils and their teacher. I thank you.
[Applause.]


         KING HINTSA AWARD BESTOWED ON ROBERT SOBUKWE AND STEVE BIKO


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Hon Deputy Speaker, the PAC wishes to express
appreciation to the Xhosa royal family for bestowing the King Hintsa Award
on the first president of the PAC, Mangaliso Robert Sobukwe and on Steve
Bantu Biko of the Black Consciousness Movement. This is a very important
award.

King Hintsa led many wars of national resistance against colonialism in the
Eastern Cape. He fell in battle fighting against British colonial
aggression. He was beheaded by a British soldier, Colonel Harry Smith.
This colonial soldier was later honoured by the British government for the
spoils of colonialism, which robbed Africans of their economic power and
land. This created massive poverty for the Africans dispossessed through
the Native Land Act of 1913. To this day this land robbery is entrenched in
section 25 of this country’s Constitution.

The conundrum is that Harry Smith has a town named after him in the Free
State, Harrismith. His wife has a town Ladysmith in KwaZulu-Natal named
after her. King Hintsa himself needs to be properly honoured nationally.
The two towns must revert to their precolonial names of Tlokoeng and
Mnambithi respectively.

The Xhosa royal family must be commended for its Afrocentric view of the
world and African-needs orientation manifested in its honouring of Sobukwe
and Biko. Ah, Xolilizwe!


                    CIVIL ENGINEER CRISIS IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (FD): Hon Speaker, the FD would like to highlight the civil
engineering crisis that is facing South Africa presently and which is
likely to worsen over the next few years.

If we do not have a countermeasure South Africa will be requiring between 3
000 to 6 000 additional civil engineers, technologists and technicians
within the next few years, according to a report by the SA Institution of
Civil Engineering.

The projected net gain of 627 engineering professionals to enter the market
place from 2005 to 2009 is far below what is needed for our economy. There
are shortages at all tiers of government but especially at municipal level.
The freezing of many posts at local government level owing to budget
constraints is weakening the capacity of municipalities to do project
management, which is in dire need in order to handle the municipal
infrastructure grant.

We therefore urge government to take urgent short-, medium- and long-term
measures to increase the number of graduate civil engineers to make it
possible for our economy to grow to the targeted six per cent. I thank you.

  REQUEST TO MINISTERS TO DISTANCE THEMSELVES FROM ANTI-AFRIKAANS PROTESTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mev D VAN DER WALT (DA): Agb Adjunkspeaker, dit is baie duidelik dat die
ANC met twee monde praat wanneer dit by die beskerming van Afrikaans kom.
Aan die een kant word beloftes in die openbaar gemaak dat Afrikaans as taal
nie bedreig word nie, én dat dieselfde beskerming volgens die Grondwet van
Suid-Afrika wat aan al die ander 10 inheemse tale gebied word, ook vir
Afrikaans geld. Aan die ander kant is daar die ANC-amptenary en strukture
soos hul jeugliga wat hulle daarvoor beywer om van Afrikaans ontslae te
raak.

In Julie het ‘n senior amptenaar alreeds ‘n poging probeer aanwend om
Afrikaans in die Potchefstroomse Landboukollege te skrap. En dié week is
dit, onder andere, die ANC-jeugliga wat met ‘n hernieude oproep kom teen
Afrikaans op dieselfde kampus.

Die DA daag ministers Pandor én Jordan uit om op te staan en hulself van
dié ongrondwetlike optrede te distansieer. (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Hon Deputy Speaker, it is clear that the ANC speaks
with two voices when it comes to the preservation of Afrikaans.

On the one hand, promises are made publicly that Afrikaans as a language is
not under threat and that the same protection afforded to the other 10
indigenous languages, according to the Constitution, also applies to
Afrikaans. On the other hand, we have ANC officials and structures such as
the youth league that campaign to get rid of Afrikaans.
In July a senior official already made an attempt to have Afrikaans
scrapped at the Potchefstroom Agricultural College. And this week the ANC
Youth League, amongst others, made a renewed appeal against Afrikaans at
the same campus.

The DA challenges Ministers Pandor and Jordan to stand up and distance
themselves from this unconstitutional behaviour.]


           PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP IN GREENHOUSE GAS MONITORING


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D A A OLIFANT (ANC): Madam Speaker, on Monday, 17 October 2005,
government and business signed a memorandum of understanding whereby the
private sector has committed itself to monitoring greenhouse gas emissions
linked to global warming.

This agreement is a voluntary commitment by the private sector and will
play an important role in assisting the government to create a system for
monitoring and reporting on the levels of greenhouse gas emissions in South
Africa, taking into account that South Africa is the largest economy on the
continent and also Africa’s biggest consumer of fossil fuels, which
scientists associate with rapid climate change.

This agreement is an important step in addressing the challenges that South
Africa will face due to climate change. The impact of global warming and
climate change is a global threat and is fast becoming a reality.

This proactive step taken by government and business will play an important
role in ensuring that South Africa is prepared for these consequences. This
private-public partnership will also put South Africa in the best position
to initiate the necessary policy and investment decisions to plan for the
future and be ready to deal with the implications of this threat. I thank
you. [Applause.]


               EXPORT TAX AND QUOTAS ON RAW MINERAL RESOURCES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms E S CHANG (IFP): Deputy Speaker and all the Ministers, the IFP believes
that it is critical to take the country to a high growth plan. Government
should consider proposals to aid all export tax and export quotas on all
raw materials of our mineral resources to be exported out of this country.

The Department of Trade and Industry should look into this matter to
protect our country’s natural resources, to give downstream industries the
space to produce goods, with more value added, to be exported, so we can
create more jobs. Thank you.

                     IHSA HOLDS INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N J NGELE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC congratulates the Institute for
Housing of South Africa on holding a successful international 2005
conference from 16 to 19 October 2005 and particularly its ability to bring
together housing practitioners to contribute to housing policy debates.

IHSA has been instrumental in promoting a close working relationship
between the public and private sector. One of the observations of the
conference was that contractors are forever emerging and the fact that
female contractors have not yet taken their rightful position in the
building and housing industry.

We are happy that the institute has committed itself to working with
government and all stakeholders in addressing these challenges.

It is at this conference that the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Housing, Zoliswa Kota, received an IHSA 2005 Presidential Award for her
outstanding contribution in the housing sector. [Applause.]

Sithi, halala ntombazana! Iqobokazana lingalal’ endleleni kunyembelekile.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] [We say congratulations, lady, on a job well done!]
[Applause.]]


                GROSS MISMANAGEMENT IN PHUMELELA MUNICIPALITY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R JANKIELSOHN (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, residents of Phumelela
Municipality in the Free State province have been the victims of gross
mismanagement by the ANC-run council. This situation caused protests and
resulted in the municipality being placed under administration.

The decision to redeploy the failed municipal manager from Phumelela and
appoint him as Director of Local Economic Development in Maluti-a-Phofung
Municipality is an indication of how little the ANC government cares about
impoverished communities in rural areas.

Maluti-A-Phofung includes one of the most underdeveloped areas in the
country, namely Qwaqwa. Economic development in Qwaqwa is of extreme
importance to the almost 500 000 people living there, most of whom are
unemployed. Declaring Qwaqwa as presidential development node means nothing
if the municipality ignores the President.

It is unfortunate that the government cares more about one elite ANC cadre
than the economic upliftment of hundreds of thousands of unemployed and
impoverished rural people. Qwaqwa cannot afford to become a dumping ground
for failed ANC cadres by an uncaring ANC government.
[Applause.][Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Kwakwa!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order hon members! Qwaqwa is not a very easy word to
pronounce. [Laughter.][Interjections.]


            REHABILITATION OF OFFENDERS BY CORRECTIONAL SERVICES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu D M GUMEDE (ANC): Uhulumeni oholwa nguKhongolose uqinisekisile
ukuvuselelwa kwezimilo zabantu ababoshiwe. Lokhu kuhlanganisa ukufundisa
nokuthuthukisa ngolwazi lwemisebenzi ngenhloso yokubaphindisela
emiphakathini yangakubo bengabantu abaqotho emphakathini.

Ngo-1998 uMnu Vusi Dlangamandla waseMadadeni emaphakathi nesifunda
saKwaZulu-Natali waboshelwa ukweba izimoto wagwetshwa iminyaka emibili.
Kuthe lapho eboshiwe wakwazi ukufunda ngamakhono ahlukahlukene okunamuhla
uyawasebenzisa.

Uthe angakhululwa ejele uMnu Dlangamandla wakha iqembu elibizwa ngokuthi
yiMbumba Art Group ngenhloso yokusiza ukulwa nobugebengu emphakathini
wangakubo. Uthi wayengumuntu owenza okubi emphakathini wangakubo kodwa uthe
angaboshwa waqoka ukuguqula isimilo. Uthi umphakathi wakhe wamamukela
nakuba wayengumuntu owayewuphatha kabi. Njengamanje ungomunye wabahlungelwe
ukumela isifunda sakwaZulu ohlelweni lweSowetan Old Mutual and SABC
Community Builder of the Year ozobanjelwa eGoli mhla ziyi-10 kuNovemba.

Inhlangano kaKhongolose iwethulela isigqoko lo msebenzi omuhle owenziwa
ngumphathi weziko lamajele kanye nabanye abahlanganyele ekwakhiweni kabusha
kwezimilo zalabo ababoshiwe emajele. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
Zulu member’s statement follows.)

[Mr D M GUMEDE  (ANC):  The  ANC-led  government  has  created  correctional
opportunities for offenders. This includes training and development  through
work skills with the aim of releasing them back into  their  communities  as
responsible people.

In 1998 Mr Vusi Dlangamadla of Madadeni in  the  midlands  of  KwaZulu-Natal
was arrested for stealing cars. He was  sentenced  to  two  years  in  jail.
During his imprisonment he learned several skills that he uses today.

After being released from prison, Mr  Dlangamadla  founded  a  group  called
Imbumba Arts Group with the aim of fighting crime in his community. He  says
that he was a bad person in his community, but after being  incarcerated  he
decided to change. Furthermore, he says that the public  accepted  him  even
though he treated them badly before. He is one of the people who  have  been
nominated to represent  KwaZulu-Natal  for  the  Old  Mutual  and  the  SABC
Community Builder of the Year awards  that  are  going  to  be  held  on  10
November in Gauteng.

The ANC salutes the Minister of Correctional Services and others who are
working with him for the good job done to provide correctional
opportunities for those who are imprisoned. Thank you. [Applause.]]

            ALLEGATIONS OF ABUSE OF STATE FUNDS IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Minister’s Response)

UNGQONGOSHE WEZOLIMO NEZOMHLABA: Sekela Somlomo ngiyalibonga leli thuba
ngibonge nakumalungu eNdlu ngezincomo abazibekile ezindabeni abebezisho.

Mangithi  elungwini elihloniphekile uMnu u-Ellis ngizothatha nje isigaba
sokuqala sesincomo sakhe. Ngithi kuye angiqondi ukuthi uma sonke
sinesiqiniseko sokuxhashazwa kwezimali zikahulumeni ngabe asikwenzi ngani
okufanele ukuthi ubufakazi sibuzise lapho okufanele sibuzise khona. Ngisho
ngoba indlela asho ngayo yokuthi ekuqaleni athi buningi ubuso obubonakalayo
bukaNdunankulu wesifundazwe sakwaZulu-Natali, uMnu uNdebele namabhilibhodi,
kusho lokho ukuxhashazwa kwemali kumbe ukuzikhuphula isithunzi, ngokubona
kwakhe athi sengathi sehlile.

Ngingasho nje-ke ukuthi cha asikholwa ukuthi lokho akushoyo kuyiqiniso. Uma
kukhona ukuxhashazwa kwezimali kubalulekile ukuthi akulethe phambi
koMnyango kahulumeni ofanele. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu
Minister’s response follows.)

[The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you Deputy Speaker for
the opportunity, and I also thank members of the House for the
recommendations they have made where it is necessary.

Let me say to the hon member Mr Ellis that I will only deal with the first
portion of his concern. I want to say to him that I do not understand why,
if we all know about financial mismanagement, we don’t approach the
relevant structures and give evidence to that effect. I am saying so
because Mr Ellis said that there are many billboards with the face of Mr
Ndebele, the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal, that according to him is equal to
either financial mismanagement or to uplifting his image, which according
to Mr Ellis has been compromised.

I can say that we do not believe that what he is saying is true. If there
is any financial mismanagement, that should be reported to the relevant
government department. I thank you. [Applause.]]

                       RESTORATIVE JUSTICE IN RICHMOND

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, there are two things
that I want to respond to. Let me start first of all with the member’s
statement that has to do with the Richmond community.

I take my hat off to the Richmond community and to the Correctional
Services staff who organised the event at Richmond. What they organised
actually is something that we teach at our correctional centres, what we
call “restorative justice”. Some people might not know what that is. It’s
one of our rehabilitation programmes in terms of which you are taught to
acknowledge your wrongs as an offender and to reach out to the victims of
the crimes you have committed.

We would like to encourage families and communities therefore to influence
and persuade their relatives who are offenders to participate in these
kinds of rehabilitation programmes so that they can then return to their
communities, having been forgiven a little by the victims of the crimes,
and be able to be reintegrated into their communities. So I do take my hat
off to the people of Richmond and community services in KwaZulu-Natal.

The last member statement I would like to respond to is the one about . . .


 . . . uMnu Vusi Ndlangamandla waseMadadeni. Ndifuna ukumothulela umnqwazi
uVusi Ndlangamandla, uyindoda yamadoda. Uthe akubona ukuba wenze into
engalunganga wafunda phaya ejele, wabuyela ekhaya. Ndifuna ukuthi kuye ke
xa esiya kumela iKwaZulu-Natal kwi-SABC Community Builder of The Year,
akameli ela phondo kuphela, koko ukwamele neSebe leeNkonzo zoLuleko
kwakunye nabo bonke abophuli-mthetho kwilizwe lethu jikelele.

Sivuyisana kakhulu naye, ngoba siliSebe leeNkonzo zoLuleko sisebenzisana
kakuhle kakhulu neSebe lezoBugcisa neeNkcubeko. Sinenkqubo esinayo, kwaye
eli qela lezenkcubeko kuthiwa yiMbumba alisekileyo liyinxalenye yaloo
nkqubo. Ngoko ke sithi: Phambili ngeSebe lezoLuleko!; phambili ngeSebe
lezoBugcisa neeNkcubeko!; phambili ngoluntu olubamkelayo abantu bakuthi
ukuze bancedakale babheke phambili emsebenzini wabo! Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[ . . . Mr Vusi Ndlangamandla of Madadeni. I want to take off my hat to
Vusi Ndlangamandla. He is a real man among men. When he saw that he had
done something untoward, he acquired skills while in prison and came back
home. I want to say to him that he will not be representing the province of
KwaZulu Natal only at the SABC Community Builder of The Year, instead he
represents the Department of Correctional Services and all other
transgressors nationally.

We congratulate him because we as the Department of Correctional Services
co-operate very well with the Department of Arts and Culture. We have a
programme, and the cultural group called Mbumba which he established is
part of that programme. Therefore we say: Forward with the Department of
Correctional Services; forward with the Department of Arts and Culture;
forward with society, as it welcomes our people so that they can be
assisted and move forward with their work! Thank you. [Applause.]]

                        CORRUPTION IN THE DEPARTMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

UMPHATHISWA WEZOPHUHLISO LOLUNTU: Sekela-Somlomo, bendifuna ukulungisa laa
nkosi, leya ithetha izinto engazaziyo; ethi imali ityiwe okanye
isetyenziselwa ukuphakamisa isithunzi seNkulumbuso yaKwaZulu-Natal. Into
yokuqala, imizamo yokuphelisa urhwaphilizo oluqhubeka phaya yenzeka kuba
kuphethe i-ANC. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Ayiqali ngoku, kwaye iseza kuqhuba. Kuninzi
esisalindele ukuba sikuve kuphuma phaya. Asifuni ukuba i-DA ibe isixelela
ngezo zinto, kuba ayazi nto. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa
Minister’s response follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, I want to correct the
traditional leader who said that money had been used or misused to elevate
the KwaZulu-Natal Premier. Firstly, the efforts to eliminate corruption are
made possible by the ANC-led government. [Applause.] Secondly, the hard
work that the ANC-led government has done does not start and stop here but
continues. We are expecting a lot from that province. We do not want the DA
to tell us about issues it does not understand. [Applause.]]

                      SUPPRESSION OF AFRIKAANS LANGUAGE

                            (Minister’s Response)

UMPHATHISWA WEZOBUGCISA NENKCUBEKO: Sekela-Somlomo, ingxaki yethu inye,
yeyokuba inkoliso yabantu abathetha isiBhulu kweli lizwe asingobantu
abamhlophe; xa sithetha inyaniso, ngabantu bebala. Kodwa andikhe ndive
abantu bebala bekhalaza ngelithi isiBhulu siyaphela, siyalahleka, okanye
kukho abantu abasitshabalalisayo. Ngaba bamhlophe kuphela abamane besiza
neso sikhalazo. Ndizibuze ke ngoku ukuba yintoni ebangela loo nto kanye
kanye.

Phofu ke into oya kuyiphawula, xa ukhangela ukuba ngoobani na abanini
bamaphepha abhalwe ngesiBhulu, ukuba ngoobani na abanini beenkampani
ezishicilela ezo ncwadi, kwanokuba iidyunivesiti ezifundisa ngesiBhulu
ziphethwe ngoobani, kukuba asilulo uninzi lwaba bantu bathetha isiBhulu,
koko ngaba bamhlophe. Ngeqala alungise loo ndawo ke udad’ ethu lowa
uhloniphekileyo, ukuze simmamele kakuhle.

Ngendimva ukuba ebesithi kum njegokuba inkoliso yabantu abathetha isiBhulu
ingabebala, ngabo abaphethe le dyunivesiti athetha ngayo, i-Potchefstroom,
nale kuthiwa yi-Stellenbosch. Kambe zombini aziphethwanga ngabantu bebala,
ziphethwe ngabamhlophe; kukwanjalo nakumaphephandaba neencwadi zesiBhulu.
Makalungise loo ndawo ke kuqala. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation
of Xhosa Minister’s response follows.)

[The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Deputy Speaker, our main problem is that
the majority of Afrikaans-speaking people in this country are not white
people; to tell the truth, they are coloured people. But I seldom hear
coloured people complaining that Afrikaans is being marginalized, lost, or
that there are people who are destroying it. It is only the whites that
will from time to time come up with that complaint. And then I ask myself:
What is the real cause of that?

In fact, what you will notice when you look at who the owners of Afrikaans
newspapers are, who owns the companies that publish those books and also
who controls the Afrikaans-medium universities, is that it is not the
majority of Afrikaans-speaking people, but the whites. Our honourable
sister should first address that, for us to understand her correctly.
I would understand her if she said to me that since the majority of
Afrikaans-speaking people are coloureds, they are in control of the
universities she is talking about - Potchefstroom, and the one called
Stellenbosch. In actual fact, they are not controlled by coloured people,
but by whites. It is the same with Afrikaans newspapers and books. She
should address that first. I thank you. [Applause.]]


                          THE CIVIL ENGINEER CRISIS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, I just want to respond to Mr
Green, who raised a matter about civil engineers: Yes, we are working with
the SA Institution of Civil Engineers. We are aware of the report that he
has referred to. However, we are also working with other institutions, and
I do want to highlight the contribution made by the AHI, Afrikaanse Handels
Instituut. “My Afrikaans is swak.” [My Afrikaans is weak.]

We are working together with these organisations, but I want to say that
this is a priority of government. We are aware that we have a serious
shortage of engineers, which are much needed, especially at local
government level. So government has given attention to this matter. Thank
you. [Applause.]


                       WHY TOLERATE A ONE-WOMAN PARTY?


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, actually my response is in
the form of a question. I don’t think it is correct for this House to have
its time wasted by leaders of political parties who themselves have
confessed that they are running a one-woman party, when more than half of
the population of this country is made up of women?

Why do we have and tolerate a one-woman party, a self-confessed one? I
think it’s wrong, and I hope that the voters out there will ask her that
one question: Why is she running a one-woman party when there are so many
women? Even if we left men out of the equation, there are so many women in
this country. [Applause.]

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SOUTH AFRICAN DELEGATION TO THIRD ORDINARY
                      SESSION OF PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is with great
pleasure that I participate in this debate today because of the issues of
Africa, which are very close to my heart. I respect all cultures in Africa
as an African woman, and am not just someone who respects them, but loves
them as well.

The report tabled in the House today acknowledges the challenges that have
faced the continent since its independence in the 1960s. It also helps us
to shape the destiny of the continent, so that generations to come may have
a better life.

On Sunday, I watched with interest a programme on SABC 3 about animals. The
lions, with the hunting skills that they have, were fighting an elephant,
which they tried to bring down. There was a female lion that tried to kill
an elephant first, but it got a good hiding instead. Later, the lions
grouped themselves together and attacked this elephant. At one point, I saw
the elephant kneeling; four to five lions held its leg at the back. One of
the lions was on top of its head. There was desperation in the eyes of this
elephant. I thought it was the end of the elephant, but it stood up. When
it stood up, all the lions walked away.

Of course, we don’t want people to walk away from us; we want to walk with
them. That one lion, which had tried to attack earlier, was still sitting
there, licking its wounds and taking care of itself.

This reminded me of this continent, Africa. The colonialists descended like
vultures after the Berlin Conference. The vultures came, ate whatever they
could, and left when we got our independence. At one point, people thought
that this giant – Africa – would give up. [Interjections.]
An HON MEMBER: We have become the . . . [Interjections.]

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: O nyak’o bolla. [This person needs to be
disciplined.]

It is true; we have challenges as a continent. Our continent suffers from
famine and other natural disasters. But we have a blessing in that we have
rich soil. There is a need and request for our heavy and light industries
to support the effort of food security by producing user-friendly machines
that can enhance the work of women in the field.

We are also concerned about climate change. The rising of water levels
might hold in negative effects for Africa. There is a need for proper
planning so that we can curb this problem. We need to look at the
challenges with an open mind, create great latitude for us to commit our
mistakes, and also correct them without being copycats.

The ANC, at its Mafikeng Conference, adopted a resolution of working for
the creation of a better Africa and a better world. The Freedom Charter,
the ANC’s guiding document, also says: “There shall be peace and
friendship.” This is what the ANC-led government is working for, and how it
is going to achieve this goal. There is a prevailing spirit in South Africa
today, and all, if not most South Africans, do support this peace
initiative of the ANC-led government.

Ge re bala Beibele ka leleme la Sesotho e re: Samson o ile a lotha
Bafilisita a re: Sejo se tswile ho moji, mme se hlabosehang se tswile ho ya
matla. Bafilisita ka ho hloka nnete, ba ile ba mathela ho Delilah hobane e
ne ele moradi wa bona, hore a ba fumanele karabo. Yaba ba fetola Samson ba
re ho yena: Se fetisang dinotshi ka ho hlaboseha e ka ba eng? Se matla ho
feta ditau e ka ba eng?

Tsatsing lena ke rata hore Ntlo ena e shebisise Pan African le African
Union tsela eo di sebetsang ka yona. Ha ho sa hlokeha boDelila nakong ena
ya rona, hobane ntho tsohle tse etswang ke mokgahlo oo ke sa tswa o bolela,
di pepeneneng; ha di patwe hobane di tsamaya ka tsela e tshwanetseng.

Hape ke rata hore re shebe ntho ena ka leihlo le fapaneng, hore sejo ha se
tswile ho moji, e leng Afrika, e bile se hlabosa, se tshwanetse hore se
nkwe ke ya bohlale. Basotho bona ba re: “Phokojwe ho phela e diretsana”.
Jwale ena ke nako ya Afrika. Baetapele ba nnete bao re nang le bona jwale,
ba tla re thusa hore re se ke ra hlola re thetswa. (Translation of Sotho
paragraphs follows.)

[When we read the Bible in Sesotho, it says that Samson gave the following
riddle to the Philistines: “Out of the eater, something to eat; out of the
strong, something sweet.” The Philistines, because of their wickedness,
went to Delilah - because she was their daughter - to seek an answer. They
gave Samson the answer and said: “What is sweeter than honey? What is
stronger than a lion?”

Today I would like this House to assess the way the Pan-African Parliament
and the African Union operate. There is no need for Delilahs nowadays,
because everything that is done by the party that I mentioned, is done in a
transparent manner. Therefore, nothing is hidden.

I would also like us to view this critically, that if something to eat came
out of the eater, which is Africa, and it is sweet, it is supposed to be
taken by the clever one. The Basotho say: “It is the survival of the
fittest.” Now the time for Africa has arrived. The true leaders that we now
have, will help us so that we shall never be betrayed again.]

Sepedi se re: “Ditau tša hloka seboka di šitwa le ke nare e hlotša”. Se se
ra gore bana ba thari ye ntsho lehono ba kopane gomme ba ahlaahla ditaba
tša bona ka tsela yeo e swanetšego. Pan-African Parliament e tloge e
kgathile tema yeo e bonalago mo mošomong wa yona. Dienywa tša ntshe di tlo
tla di fepa bana le ditlogolwana tša rena.

Re a tseba gore ge kgomo e tswaletše mphorogohlong wa thaba, banna ba a
emelela ba katana gore kgomo yeo le namane ya yona di phele, di se ke tša
hwela ka kua mphorogohlong. Le rena bjale a re kataneng le go tšwetša
kontinente ye ya rena pele, ka ge bana ba rena ba swanetše go phela ba
hlomphša ke mašaba a mangwe.

Re a tseba gore botatagorena le bommagorena ba robetše ba kwele bohloko. Ba
be ba tlaišitšwe, ba gobošitšwe, ba nyenyefaditšwe ke mafela a mafela;
esego batho bao ba tšeago gabotse. Lehono seriti sa rena se boile. A re
laetšeng bana ba rena tsela ka gore re šetše re e butše.

Ge ke ruma polelo ya ka, ke rata go tsopola monna yo mongwe wa go ngwala
dipuku le direto. Ge a bolela ka polelo ya gabo ya Sefora o re “nos yeux
sont rouges mais nous ne sommes pas aveugles.”
Se ka boripana se ra gore: (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[In Sepedi there is a saying, “unity is power”. This means that African
people gathered together to discuss their issues in an acceptable manner.
The Pan-African Parliament played a huge role in its work. Its fruits will
be able to feed our children and our grandchildren.

We know that whenever a major problem arises, concerned people will always
strive to find a solution for that particular problem. We also have to
strive to take our continent forward in order that our children may gain
respect from other nations.
We are aware that our fathers and mothers were buried with those hurtful
feelings. They were tortured, disgraced and humiliated by those
nonentities, those people who are abnormal. Today we have regained our
dignity. Let us show our children the way since we’ve already made it.

In my conclusion I would like to quote a certain man who is an author and a
poet. Speaking in his French language, he says: “Nos yeux sont rouges mais
nous ne sommes pas aveugles.”

In short, this means that. . . .]

 . . . our eyes are only red, but we are not and we will never be blind.
These are the words of Olympe Bhêly-Quenum of Benin. Therefore, hon
members, let us look back without turning back.

Ka ge bohlale bo e tšwa lebading, lehono re hlalefile. Ke a leboga.
[Because experience is the best teacher, today we are wise. I thank you.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, in considering the Pan-
African Parliament report, we need to properly assess the role of the Pan-
African Parliament.

It is useful to reflect on how far this institution has come in fulfilling
the objectives it set for itself at the time of its formation. Amongst
other objectives, the Pan-African Parliament was formed to promote the
principles of human rights, transparency and democracy in Africa, and to
encourage good governance and accountability in member states, as well as
to promote peace, security and stability.

These are profoundly important objectives that, if properly implemented,
will go a long way to creating a brighter future for all Africans. The
spirit of the Pan-African Parliament is to be commended for embarking on a
number of initiatives, which will help make these noble objectives a
reality.

One of the most significant ways to uphold these principles is the African
Peer Review Mechanism, which, in theory at least, exposes member states to
vigorous scrutiny and allows for serious introspection on whether Africa is
living up to its commitments to good governance.

In this light, the Pan-African Parliament must be commended for signing its
adherence to the APRM. However, the Pan-African Parliament must now go
further and redouble its efforts to encourage those states that currently
have not endorsed the APRM process to do so, and thus allow themselves to
reap the benefit of this process.

In the same vein, the adoption of a resolution on the development of a
continental code of conduct must also be commended as this will hopefully
serve to ensure that African states adhere to the principles, which not
only strengthen good governance, but also ensure the spread of such values
into all corners of this great continent.

The Pan-African Parliament also has a critical role to play in helping to
deal with many conflicts that continue to exist on our continent. Therefore
the Pan-African Parliament must be congratulated for sending peace missions
to Côte d’Ivoire, the DRC and Sudan, as instability within these countries
constitutes a threat to peace, stability and security on the entire
continent.

In particular, the Pan-African Parliament’s recommendation that the mandate
of the African Union mission in Sudan should be expanded to include the
protection of the population in Darfur is a welcome move and one that, it
is hoped, will be adopted by the African Union in due course.

Another positive initiative for which the Pan-African Parliament must be
commended is its decision to establish a trust fund for humanitarian
assistance to populations in conflict areas in Africa.

Despite these noble and notable achievements, the Pan-African Parliament
has also failed in many key areas to live up to its own objectives.

The decision recommending that Africa demand two permanents seats with veto
rights on the UN Security Council ultimately did little to enhance Africa’s
prospects for representation in the UN Security Council. Indeed, it can be
argued that Africa’s unrealistic expectations on the issue served to
undermine the global efforts aimed at making the Security Council a more
representative body, which is a very necessary imperative.

Furthermore, the Pan-African Parliament has turned a blind eye to some of
the most serious issues facing this continent. The Pan-African Parliament’s
silence on the continuing human rights crisis in Swaziland is inexcusable.
The autocratic leadership of His Excellency King Mswati is a blight on the
continent’s collective commitment to achieving the objectives contained in
Nepad and the AU Constitutive Act, as well as the founding objectives of
the Pan-African Parliament itself.

The Pan-African Parliament has also, indefatigably, failed to speak out
against the deepening crisis in Zimbabwe. Despite the UN’s open criticism
of Operation Murambatsvina, which saw the displacement of about 700 000
Zimbabweans, in the height of a bitterly cold winter, the Pan-African
Parliament neither deemed it fit to endorse the UN’s report, nor even send
a mission to Zimbabwe.

The Pan-African Parliament has also not taken any action on the virtual
collapse of the democracy . . . [Time expired.][Applause.]
Ms S C VOS: Madam Deputy Speaker, colleagues, in commending this report to
you and having the honour to serve this Parliament in the Pan-African
Parliament, I would like briefly to make the following points.

The collective work reflected is, I propose, commendable considering the
restraints placed on the parliament and on the president and members during
the session covered by this report. The parliament was then in its very
real infancy; budgetary and other capacity issues, including the crucial
availability of interpreters and translators did impede some of the work of
the committee at that time.

Members were then also getting to know each other in their various
committees on which they served, and it was obvious then that we were all
on a sharp learning curve and resisting the temptations of trying to impose
our own parliamentary rules and procedures on that parliament when instead
we had to settle down to adopting the new rules and procedures of that new
parliament.

The various committee bearers, that is, the chairpersons, the vice-
chairpersons and rapporteurs of the Pan-African Parliament have just
completed many days of strategy meetings with the president and the vice
presidents of the Pan-African Parliament.

It is clear now that the PAP has, at last, found its feet – you can very
much discern it now that PAP is in its own home in the wonderful facilities
provided by the South African government and the people of South Africa at
Gallagher Estate in Midrand. We must thank government for its alacrity in
ensuring that this project has been completed with such thought and
efficiency; it really is a wonderful establishment.

It is important to note that the strategic plan 2006-10 for the Pan-African
Parliament is in its final drafting phase and it is from this that members
would soon see, we hope, the emergency of prioritised strategic issues of
relevance to our continent and its people.

The first draft already reflects the promise that the Pan-African
Parliament hopes to bring a wide range of strategies and activities in
accordance with its current oversight role of the AU, and its organs and,
of course, its responsibility to the people of Africa.

Finally, I would like to thank this Parliament’s PAP colleagues for the
exemplary way in which we have all supported each other as we’ve embarked
on this new and exciting endeavour. This is, of course, our parliament and
it belongs to us, to the people of this country and the people of the
Africa. And, we are all hoping – those of us who have the honour to
represent you – that MPs from this country, and indeed from throughout
Africa will soon begin, as we have started here today, to energetically
engage the Pan-African Parliament on its work as it develops. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, judging by the length
and content of the report of the third ordinary session of the Pan-African
Parliament, it seems evident that a great deal of work was done by that
institution. We welcome the fact that South Africa is taking the leading
role in this important institution.

Among many important discussions and decisions taken during this session of
the PAP, the recommendation on communication, information and transport
infrastructure is particularly relevant. The integration process and shared
destiny of Africa depend upon the ability of ordinary citizens of this
continent to reach out to and communicate with each other.

In essence, what happens with a small group of representatives meeting at
PAP sessions should be the first step towards a continent whose people
interact daily on all issues. This brighter future can only be achieved
with vastly improved communications and transport infrastructure to link
the people of Africa together.

We are also especially pleased by the fortitude shown by the PAP in facing
head-on the challenge of conflicts on the continent as reflected by the
decision to send a peace mission to Darfur. In addition to the policy
matters PAP has been engaged in, further progress has also been made in
cementing the procedural backbone of the institution. In all these matters
the PAP is admirably demonstrating its relevance to the people of Africa.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, winning the bid to host the Pan-African
Parliament provided a welcome indication of the level of confidence that
the continent places in South Africa. The ACDP congratulates the South
African delegation for their contributions towards the entrenchment of
democracy on the African continent.

It is our hope that crisis intervention and peacekeeping missions
undertaken by the PAP will go a long way towards forging African unity. The
ACDP prays that the Pan-African Parliament will act as a weapon against
widespread poverty, hunger and social ills on the African continent.

The ACDP urges the Pan-African Parliament to clarify, as soon as possible,
the discussion and outcomes with regard to the proposed review of the
Millennium Development Goals. This set of goals appears to the guiding
mechanism for African and global, strategy – based, poverty alleviation
initiatives and therefore plays a critical role.

The ACDP further calls for the Pan-African Parliament to clarify the
communication mechanisms that would be set in place in order to keep the
people in Africa who are facing the everyday realities of life informed of
its activities. I thank you.

Mr D J SITHOLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, let me add my voice to those who have
expressed their condolences both to President Obasanjo and the people of
Nigeria for the difficult period they are going through at this moment, the
President having first lost his wife and then 117 people through a plane
crash. I hope that Nigeria will see itself through these difficulties.

This debate affords us the opportunity to discuss the impact and the
growing expectations of the African masses to the not-so-old assembly of
the continent. Francis Deng spoke about this expectation. He said, and I
quote:

   Africans are recognising that the world does not care much about them and
   that they must take their destiny into their own hands.

The creation of the AU, and more specifically, of the Pan-African
Parliament, is the indication that Africans are taking their destiny into
their own hands. Africa has fought a bitter struggle against being owned
and used to enrich foreign powers that today find it difficult to accept
that Africa has the right to rule itself. Hence, when they saw how we
progressed against all difficulties, they sought to create division by
asking other African countries to act in opposition to the interests of the
continent in building peace in Côte d’Ivoire.

As we celebrate and pride ourselves on the achievement of our political
freedom, we need to struggle to free ourselves from the bondage of the
begging bowl that a number of our countries still carry. It is this begging
for resources that retards our development.

The absence in the debate of the UN reform and the outcome of the UN
General Assembly are issues that I think the coming sitting of the Pan-
African Parliament should reflect upon, and ask difficult questions to both
the AU heads of state as to the nature of the decisions they made just
before leaving for the UN. The question that remains to be answered is
whether the decision they made was the best decision to advance the
interests of the continent or whether there were other considerations that
led them to make such a decision. It is time that the continental body
expresses its view on the continued domination by the club of five powerful
international lawmakers who disregard any opinion when their interests are
at stake.

The next question that we must ask, as a legislature, is whether the time
has not come for the world to acknowledge the need for a parliament that
will add impetus to the oversight of the world body decisions. The Pan-
African Parliament must discuss, in my view, the resource constraints that
have made the economies of the continent poor and unable to provide a
better life for all our people. I am aware that the continent is full of
natural resources, but the question is: How do we make these resources
beneficial to all, not just a few on our continent and a few powerful
states in the developing countries?

The Pan-African Parliament should, and must, call on all African
governments to lead investors by first investing in their own countries
themselves. It is said that the pension funds of African public servants on
the continent would be able to fund some critical infrastructural
development, and therefore it is important for all the countries to make
sure that they themselves demonstrate by lead the investors by investing
the resources that they control in terms of the public servant pension
funds. Their confidence in their ability to govern in a manner that will
advance the good of the African people would be shown by their investment
in their own countries. They need to demonstrate that they have confidence
in the manner in which they manage the situation in their own countries.

If the Pan-African Parliament wants to remain relevant and carve out its
influence on the continent, it has to engage itself in contributing
solutions to these difficult questions.

The continent has done well, as the number of conflicts has been reduced.
There is a reduction in conflicts on the continent. It is said that the
continent has reduced its conflicts by almost 40%.

We must then move to the next stage where we create conditions that will
not reverse the work that has been done so far by making sure that we do
not create other conditions to enable those who want to perpetrate war to
continue doing so. In doing this work, we must not be under any illusion
that the colonial masters who have professed that they have a God-given
intelligence to understand Africans better than Africans do, will not do
anything to sabotage and reverse the peace we have achieved so far.

The Pan-African Parliament has to ensure that the continent is not again
held back in its quest to develop by fighting proxy wars that are imposed
on it by those who have made it their responsibility to govern our
countries from a distance.

I hope that the Pan-African Parliament will also find, in its work, the
opportunity to engage the African intelligentsia to ensure that it
contributes to the better management of our countries. In recent years we
have witnessed a number of democratic changes of governments, but the
challenge is to build among ourselves the spirit to accept the outcome of
elections, and not to allow the tendency to reject them and plunge our
countries into violence because we lost the elections.
As we praise the work that is being done in Burundi and the outcome of the
elections in Burundi, and the appointment of the new cabinet in Sudan, we
should not forget that Darfur is still a difficult area that we must not
take our eyes off. I am aware that the Pan-African Parliament has sent a
mission to Darfur. A report was submitted and the report is there for all
of us to read. However, it is my belief that if we spend our time reading
reports and not ensuring that peace is achieved in Darfur, we will continue
to have the situation in Sudan and the loss of life will continue unabated.

It is, however, also my belief that the Pan-African Parliament should not
only send missions to countries, but should stay focused and involved in
making sure that solutions are found in those countries.

I must commend the idea of having an annual address by the AU to the Pan-
African Parliament as outlined in the workshop that they held recently. The
AU has the responsibility of informing the continent as to what plans they
have put in place and to be able to review the year that would have been
completed at the time of the annual report. This will enable the continent
to know exactly what is taking place and what decisions are being made at
the level of the AU heads of state.

The other critical question relates to how the Pan-African Parliament
relates to the EU parliament. I raise this, because there are forums that
have been created as a result of the agreements that the EU and the ACP
countries have entered into. There is an assembly that the ACP countries
and the EU sit in. How does that assembly relate to the Pan-African
Parliament? In that assembly there are critical issues that have an impact
on our countries that are being discussed: for instance the registration,
evaluation and authorisation of chemicals that are considered by the EU.
This has very serious implications, particularly for our mining industry or
any industry that deals with chemicals and exports their goods to the EU.

It is my view that unless the Pan-African Parliament engages itself in such
considered legislation by its development partner, the EU, we will find
ourselves unable to deal with the issues and repercussions that will come
out of that particular process. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Agb Adjunkspeaker, ek het vanmiddag geluister na president
Festus Mogae van Botswana, en ek was beïndruk deur sy eerlikheid, sy
pragmatisme en die konkrete wyse waarop hy ook na die internasionale
politiek kyk, byvoorbeeld, die hele gedagte van die vetoreg en hoe mens dit
pragmaties moet hanteer. Dít gee mens ook hoop vir Afrika, vorentoe, en hoe
ons ons probleme gaan oplos.

Die VF Plus het deurgaans president Mbeki se Afrika-inisiatiewe gesteun
omdat ons absoluut besef dat Afrika se relevansie al hoe minder word soos
die wêreld aanbeweeg en probeer om Afrika te ignoreer. Daarom durf die
verskeie inisiatiewe nie misluk tot ons almal se nadeel nie.

Die Afrika-unie is in ‘n groot mate gebaseer op die Europese Unie. Ons het
wel kritiek aan die begin gehad deur te sê dat jy nie presies die parallel
kan trek nie. Die Europese unie het geleidelik gegroei uit lede wat
bymekaar kom, terwyl die Afrika-Unie met almal in totaal saam begin het.

Ek dink wel die Afrika-parlement kan op groot skaal begin, met almal saam,
en ‘n sukses wees, maar dan moet hy bewys dat dinge soos konflik
aangespreek kan word met missies, én gedebatteer kan word.

Die VF Plus steun die Afrika-parlement en hoop dat vorentoe daarvan werk
gemaak sal word, én dat dit suksesvol sal wees. Ek dank u. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Hon Deputy Speaker, this afternoon I listened to
President Festus Mogae from Botswana, and I was impressed by his honesty,
his pragmatism and the concrete way in which he also looks at international
politics, for example, the whole idea of the veto right and how one should
handle it pragmatically. This gives one hope for Africa, ahead, and how we
are going to solve our problems.

The FF Plus supported President Mbeki’s African initiatives throughout
because we absolutely realise that Africa’s relevance is becoming less and
less as the world moves on and tries to ignore Africa. Therefore the
various initiatives dare not fail, to the detriment of us all.

The African Union is based to a large extent on the European Union. We
expressed our criticism at the beginning by saying that one cannot draw
this parallel precisely. The European Union grew gradually from members who
gathered together, whereas the African Union started with everyone together
in total.

I do think that the African Parliament can start on a large scale, with
everyone together, and be a success, but then it has to prove that things
such as conflict can be dealt with by means of missions, and that they can
be debated.

The FF Plus supports the African Parliament and hopes that it will work in
the future, and that it will be successful. I thank you.]

Dr G G WOODS: Deputy Speaker, firstly, let me say how appropriate it is
that we discuss this and all future PAP reports. Unless we and all other
parliaments on the continent take the work of PAP seriously it will never
develop the authority necessary to realise the ambitious goals we have set
for it.

Regarding the report before us, we are encouraged by the work that
currently engages the PAP. Progress is evident in respect of institutional
and procedural matters, and, perhaps most importantly, in respect of
substantial business matters as well.

In particular we note the work undertaken by committees of the PAP,
especially in the areas of international relations, trade, transport,
industry and communication. This work is what could ultimately produce the
common agenda, the common African agenda, which in turn secures a new
prosperity for the continent.

Finally, Nadeco expresses its appreciation to our South African delegates
for their obvious contribution to the progress being made by the PAP. Thank
you.

Rre P H K DITSHETELO: Mmusakgotla, go a itumedisa go lemoga gore PAP e
tshwenngwa ke tlhabologo ya Aforika. Dintlha tsa botlhokwa tse di tswang mo
pegelong ya kopano ya ngwaga ya PAP; di a gomotsa le go solofetsa bokamoso
jo bo nang le ponelopele. (Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, it is a pleasure to note that the PAP
is concerned with Africa’s development. The important points from the PAP’s
annual report are encouraging; they reflect vision and give hope for the
future.]

For example, recommendations 5 and 7 touch on the basic needs of the
continent, as well as resolution 2, wherein the Pan-African Parliament
recommends to the AU that the establishment of a new database in the field
of telecommunication and transport be considered within the Nepad
framework.

It further recommends to the AU that the important projects within the
Nepad medium-term framework be brought forward in order to allow the
creation of a reliable and efficient African telecommunication and
transport system, able to speed up the physical integration of Africa;
eliminate problems relating to distance; facilitate mobility; promote
exchange; and legitimately support the lasting development of Africa. [Time
expired.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon S E M Pheko.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Who has one minute. [Laughter.]

The PAC supports the report on the PAP; it has interesting discussions on
topics such as transport, industry, communication, energy, science and
technology. It has good resolutions; it reflects a high standard of debate,
albeit that it was not all in Kiswahili.

The PAP is the creation of pan-Africanists. Pan-Africanism is the only way
Africa can shed its dependency on new forms of colonialism, where Africans
have the flag, national anthem and parliament, but their riches are
devoured by foreigners.

It is important that members of the PAP be people with a pan-African
vision, because only pan-Africanism can enable Africa’s people to preserve
a collective action and a common unified policy in facing the challenges of
African domination.

The PAP must promote peace and security on the continent. It must also
encourage Africa to stop exporting her raw materials and importing them
back as finished goods. Africa must avoid aid that recolonises her. The PAP
must always remember that Pan-Africanism is a consciousness of kind, and
this combines the consciousness of destiny and identity of interests. One
minute! Thank you. [Laughter.][Time expired.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was one and a half, actually.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the MF strongly supports the PAP’s
commitment to establishing a democratic Africa, conscious of human rights
and development in its participation.

Through a number of conferences, such as this one, greater awareness of the
African situation is established. A recommitment by countries to PAP, as
well as educating one another on different means to attaining our goals, is
established. From this the MF notes the progress, challenges and
development made in co-operation, international relations and conflict
resolution.

It appears that discussions lead to relating issues of importance. Here,
the great importance that Nepad plays in development of and in
international relations for Africa has been acknowledged. Key issues and
questions that emerged from these talks, and that play a crucial role in
determining the united commitment by the whole of Africa, are that
countries still maintain their individuality and have protection from any
in their interference internal and domestic matters.

In terms of co-operation, the MF sees a need for a greater in-depth
understanding of co-operation in Africa. As for international relations, we
agree that greater interaction needs to be maintained between parliaments
national and regional, as well as the UN and PAP. As for conflict
resolution, the MF finds that the observations made in terms of conflict
prevention, management and transformation needs to be taken seriously to
attain peace for Africa. The MF supports this PAP report and its
endeavours. Thank you very much.

Adv Z L MADASA: Deputy Speaker, during this, my first debate after
returning to the ANC, I would like to take this opportunity . . .
[Applause.][Interjections.] . . . to thank the leadership of the ANC and
all the hon members of the ANC in this House for the very warm welcome I
have received.
The ANC has welcomed me in the true spirit of the biblical prodigal son
who, after an unwise and wasteful sojourn in faraway places, returned home
after he came to his senses and was warmly welcomed by his father without
any enquiry as to where he had been. [Applause.] After returning to my home
after about six years of absence I feel free again to freely express my
true political opinions without fear of censure or repercussions.

Although I thought, in the beginning, that my faith would clash with the
ANC policies, the statement made by the great leader of the ANC, the late
Oliver Tambo, when speaking on the ANC and religion, was of great comfort
to me. He said, and I quote:

  The ANC has a long history of association with the church. Our founders
  were churchmen and women. Throughout our years that link has never been
  broken.

[Applause.]

The Christian founders that OR referred to had a vision; not only of
freedom in South Africa, but also to unite Africans, not only in South
Africa but all over the continent and in the diaspora. Today the unity of
African people within a framework of nonracialism and nonsexism still
remains one of the main strategic objectives of the ANC.

This central objective of the unity of Africans informed the ANC’s
participation in the OAU, and later the AU; the entering into negotiations
with the National Party for a political settlement; the leading of the
vision of an African Renaissance; the hosting of the Pan-African
Parliament; and the receiving of members of Parliament who crossed the
floor from any other party to the ANC.

Turning now to the cries by the DA of exclusion from participating in the
Pan-African Parliament: There has been an incessant and vehement protest
from the DA of an alleged deliberate exclusion of the party by the ANC from
participating in the Pan-African Parliament. There could be nothing further
from the truth.

Article 4 of the protocol establishing the Pan-African Parliament provides
that: firstly, each member state of the AU will have five members to the
PAP; secondly, at least one delegate must be a woman; and thirdly, that the
delegation must reflect the diversity of political opinion in the member
states. Our Parliament, by agreement of all parties, resolved to have three
delegates to the PAP that will come from the ANC and two from opposition
parties, and note, not from a specific opposition party. [Interjections.]
The ANC did this precisely to avoid controversy and becoming embroiled in
opposition politics, and suggested to opposition parties to come together
and agree on their two members.

When the ANC made this suggestion, which was accepted, it could not have
foreseen from which parties the two members would be selected, as this was
a matter entirely for the opposition to decide. The result was that the
opposition failed to reach an agreement acceptable to all opposition
parties. Consequently, the matter was brought to the House for a democratic
election of the two opposition delegates, and they were elected
accordingly. The procedure of the House electing delegates in cases of
vacancies has since been followed, and it accords with the protocol
establishing the PAP.

The leader of the DA, hon A J Leon, in a letter of protest to the former
Speaker of Parliament, Dr Frene Ginwala, dated 5 February 2004, made an
extraordinary assertion that a delegation of South Africa to PAP, then,
firstly, only included political parties that were in government –
referring to the IFP and NNP at that time. Secondly, he said that the
delegation excluded all so-called opposition parties proper. The hon Tony
Leon clearly did not then have a problem with members from other opposition
parties being elected to the PAP, as long as they were not co-operating
with the ANC.

The protocol establishing the PAP does not exclude political parties from
delegations that have diverse political opinions, but which have co-
operation agreements. If it did, this would go against the spirit of
African unity, which the PAP, as an organ of the AU, is obliged to promote.
Hon members, let it be known from today and forever that the DA has
excluded itself from the delegation to the PAP by its disrespect for other
opposition parties in this House. In any event, the DA with its policy of
the need to maintain hostility between the ruling party and the opposition
would have found it difficult to promote African unity. The ANC has never
blocked the DA; however, members from other opposition parties other than
the DA have been democratically elected by this House. [Interjections.]
Indeed, if the DA had good relationships with the rest of the opposition,
and shown leadership in the context of multiparty democracy, it would have
been represented in the PAP.

The role of the PAP, as mentioned in article 17 of the Constitutive Act of
the AU states that the PAP was established in order to ensure the full
participation of the African peoples in the development and economic
integration of the continent. The establishment of the PAP was a major step
in ensuring inclusive governance on the continent. This important step was
agreed to by an organisation, that in the past, in the form of the OAU, was
only an intergovernmental body. There is therefore no reason for people to
doubt the AU’s commitment to popular participation in its affairs for a
better Africa.

The hon President Mbeki correctly remarked at the opening ceremony of the
second ordinary session of the PAP on 16 September 2004 that the peoples of
Africa know what their problems are, and they no longer need any reminder.
He said that the African people are looking for solutions to their
difficulties.

Let me briefly examine the extent to which the PAP is ready, after three
sessions of only three weeks each, to discharge its mandate to represent
the African people in the affairs of the AU. After dithering a little in
the beginning the PAP established all the committees required by its rules.
All members have been allocated to committees. All committees have done
their business plans. Given the challenge of funding for meetings where
members come from all over the continent, a resolution was made to
establish a trust fund.

The only caveat in this regard is that care should be taken to ensure that
trustees are people of integrity in order to avoid donor manipulation of
the parliament. Many committees have met, though travelling on the
continent remains a big challenge for lack of direct flights from one
country to another.

Considering that the parliament during its first term, which is five years,
does not have legislative powers, but only advisory and consultative ones,
a lot has been done already. For example, a mission was sent to observe
presidential elections in Togo, another was sent to Côte d’Ivoire, another
to the DRC and one to the past elections in Zimbabwe.

Last year an investigation mission, of which I was part, was sent to Darfur
in Sudan. Only two weeks ago the AU sent another mission to observe the 11
October elections in Liberia, of which I was also part. In fact, all AU
missions to member countries now are predominately composed of PAP members
and civil society representatives. All PAP members have diplomatic
passports and do not require visas to enter any member state of the AU – a
development that is very important for these missions. [Applause.]

There still are challenges for the PAP, for instance, to have its own
permanent staff instead of using temporary people. Our parliament must
still find ways to engage in the PAP, taking advantage of the fact that it
is permanently hosted here. Awareness in South Africa of the PAP, what it
is and what it does is still an outstanding issue. Civil society in South
Africa has yet to use the PAP to initiate debates through our parliamentary
representatives.

The relationship between the PAP representatives and their political
parties is still uncertain. All in all, a lot of movement has occurred in
the PAP and a lot still needs to be done.

Africa is fast moving forward towards unity, development and integration,
and PAP is playing its crucial role, for example, when we were on our
mission in Sudan, which was not about investigating crimes – because we did
not have the capacity to do so – we had an opportunity to advise rebel
movements. When we arrived there we found the government forces in one
province preparing for a major offensive against the rebel positions.

After discussions with a liwali, who is the equivalent of a Premier here
and who is the commander of the armed forces at provincial level, we learnt
that a rebel leader in London issued a statement suspending the ceasefire.
We mediated the matter by speaking to the rebel representatives there. We
found that there was poor communication between the rebel soldiers on the
ground and the leadership in exile. We told the liwali that the statement
suspending the ceasefire was not a popular position and the war was
averted.

This is an example which shows that African problems need solutions, not
judgmentalism. The challenge of integrating members from different
parliaments with different colonial traditions has not been easy. There was
an attempt by some regions to impose their traditions on the rest, but this
has been correctly resisted in favour of a new African tradition, which is
still developing. The usage of regional languages also remains a challenge.
Only Kiswahili is being used at the moment as one of the official
languages.

The South African representatives in the PAP have played significant roles
varying according to different responsibilities and requests. Our Speaker
has played a central role in helping the administration of PAP. The
Chairperson of the NCOP has worked hard in the rules committee. We have all
participated collectively in many missions. Among us, by now, we must have
done more than 20 debates.

I am grateful to the House for the experience I have gathered from the PAP.
I will miss my friendships, which I have made with other members from all
over the continent. I also want to congratulate Mr Nefolovhodwe on his
election to succeed me in the PAP. [Applause.]

The motto of the PAP is: “One Africa, one voice.” The ANC commends the
report to the House. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move:

  That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 16:26.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bill returned to Executive

(1)   On 25 October 2005 the Acting Speaker and the Chairperson, after
      consultation, referred the Diamonds Amendment Bill [B 27 – 2005],
      introduced in the National Assembly as a section 75 Bill on 30 August
      2005, back to the Minister of Minerals and Energy, as it contains both
      section 75 and section 76 provisions.

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

(1)   The JTM on 25 October 2005 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3), classified
      the following Bill as a section 74 Bill:


      (i)   Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2005] (National
           Assembly – sec 74)

(2)   The JTM on 25 October 2005 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3), classified
      the following Bills as section 75 Bills:


      (i)   Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment
             Bill [B 32 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)


      (ii)  Genetically Modified Organisms Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2005]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


      (iii) Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill [B 36 – 2005]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


3.    Introduction of Bill


      (1)   The Minister of Finance


           (i)   Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 37 – 2005] (National
                  Assembly – sec 77)

      Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of the
      National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
      (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 25 October
      2005.


      In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of the
      Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within
      three parliamentary working days.

4.    Reintroduction of Bill
      (1)   The Minister of Minerals and Energy

           Diamonds Amendment Bill [B 27 – 2005 (Reintroduced)] (National
           Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
           of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 27929 of
           19 August 2005.]

      Reintroduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and
      Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
      Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160,
      on 26 October 2005.

      In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of the
      Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within
      three parliamentary working days.


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
        a) Group Annual Financial Statements of the National Empowerment
           Fund for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.



National Assembly


1.    The Speaker

      (a)   Letter from the Minister of Education dated 25 October 2005 to
          the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
          65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
          1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report
          of the Education Labour Relations Council for 2004-2005:

          Late Tabling of the Education Labour Relation Council’s Annual
          Report for 2004/05

          The Annual Report of the ELRC for the 2004-05 financial year has
          not been tabled in Parliament by 30 September 2005, as required
          in terms of section 65 of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
          (PFMA).

          The reason for the delay in submitting the Annual report, as
          indicated in the attached letter, was due to corrections that had
          to be effected in the financial statements of the ELRC.
          Furthermore, the printers appointed by the ELRC experienced a
          problem of their computer crashing and they had to redo the
          ELRC’s Annual Report. This made it impossible for the ELRC to
          submit its report on time, and it is currently still in print.

          I will table it as soon as it is finalised and submitted to my
          office.


          With my best wishes


          Yours sincerely


          GNM Pandor, MP
          Minister of Education

      (b)   Letter from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
          Development dated 6 October 2005 to the Speaker of the National
          Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance
          Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in
          the tabling of the Annual Report of the Commission on Gender
          Equality for 2004-2005:

          LATE SUBMISSION OF COMMISSION ON GENDER EQUALITY ANNUAL REPORT
          FOR 2004-05

          I write to furnish reasons in terms of Section 65(2)(a) of the
          Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) for the delay in the tabling
          of the Commission on Gender Equality (CGE) Annual Report to
          Parliament. In terms of Section 65(1) of the PFMA, all Executive
          Authorities are required to table their Annual Reports and those
          of the entities under their responsibility, financial statements
          and the Auditor-General’s report on the financial statements by
          30th September.

          The Commission did not meet the requirement to submit their
          Annual Financial Statements to the office of the Auditor-General
          by 31 May 2005. The delay in the presentation of the CGE
          Financial Statements was caused by the fact that the CGE Chief
          Financial Officer resigned from the employment of the CGE with
          effect from 1st March 2005 and the newly appointed Chief
          Financial Officer only commenced duty on 1st June 2005. The
          Financial Statements were only submitted to the office of the
          Auditor-General in July 2005.


          The Audited Financial Statements which were adopted by CGE on the
          28th September 2005 are now ready to be incorporated into the CGE
          Annual Report that will be going to the printers soon. It is
          anticipated that the Annual Report of the CGE will be ready for
          tabling in the week starting on 17 October 2005.


          I thank you in advance for your co-operation.


          Kind regards,


          B S Mabandla
          Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development



COMMITTEE REPORTS




National Assembly



1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
      Precious Metals Bill [B 30 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated
      26 October 2005:


          The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered
          the subject of the Precious Metals Bill [B 30 – 2005] (National
          Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint
          Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, presents the Precious
          Metals Bill [B30B – 2005].

      Report to be considered.

