---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 November 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-11-15
---

TUESDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICE OF MOTION


Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I give notice that I
shall move:

   That the House debates –

     1) the increasing threat of avian flu and its potential impact on
        South Africa, with reference to reports that the Spanish flu
        epidemic that killed more than 40 million people in 1918 and 1919
        is believed to have originated as a bird virus, and reports in
        recent weeks that the HN51 strain of bird flu that has jumped to
        humans in Asia has been found in birds in Turkey; and


   (2)      whether or not South Africa is adequately prepared.


Thank you.

                 CONGRATULATIONS TO DR ELLEN JOHNSON-SIRLEAF

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION PARTY: Madam Speaker, I hereby move:

   That the House –


     1) congratulates Dr Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf on her election as the
        President of Liberia;

     2) acknowledges that the election is a great personal compliment to
        her and makes her the first woman to be elected Head of State in
        Africa;

     3) notes that Liberia has had an enormously troubled and difficult
        period, which included a civil war in which hundreds of thousands
        of people lost their lives; and
     4) therefore wishes President Elect Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and the
        people of Liberia a successful period of peace, progress and
        prosperity.

Agreed to.


          NINE GOLD MEDALS WON BY SOUTH AFRICAN SWIMMERS IN DURBAN


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, Madam. I move without
notice:

   That the House –


      1) notes that –

        (a)      South African swimmers won a total of nine gold medals in
              the first leg of the FINA World Cup series, which was held in
              Durban the past week; and


           b) Olympic gold medalist Ryk Neethling won all six races he
              entered and George du Rand and Suzaan van Biljon also claimed
              a gold medal each;


   (2)      extends its congratulations to these and all other participating
        athletes for placing South Africa in the number one position on the
        medals table; and


    (3)     urges the South African swimming controlling body to intensify
        programmes, especially in historically disadvantaged communities,
        that will nurture future swimming champions.


Agreed to.

                  PRESENTATION TO HOST 2011 RUGBY WORLD CUP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move
without notice:

   That the House –
   (1)      notes that on Thursday, 17 November 2005, at 13h15, the group
         presenting South Africa's bid to host the 2011 Rugby World Cup
         will be making their presentation to the IRB in Dublin, Ireland;


   (2)      encourages all South Africans to support the bid with the same
         enthusiasm with which they supported the successful bid for the
         2010 Soccer World Cup; and


   (3)      wishes to assure the bid team that their success will be the
         country's success since it is through events like these that we
         can realise the vision of a united South Africa.

Halala, South Africa, Halala! [Interjections.]

Agreed to.

                         SUSPENSION OF RULE 253 (1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion printed on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip, as
follows:

    That Rule 253(1), which provides, inter alia, that the debate on the
    Second Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working
    days have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended
    for the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debates on the Revenue
    Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 41 -2005] (National Assembly – sec 75) and
    the Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29B – 2005 (Reintroduced)] (National
    Assembly – sec 75) today.

Agreed to.

                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDERS 11 AND 12

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

    That after consideration of Order 4 on the Order Paper, precedence be
    given to Orders 11 and 12 on the Order Paper, respectively.

Agreed to.

                             MEMBERS' STATEMENTS

          REPORTBACKS BY MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT TO THEIR COMMUNITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI (ANC): Madam Speaker, this week members of Parliament
will return to their constituencies to report back to their communities on
their work as duly elected public representatives.

The ANC has deployed all its members of Parliament to various offices
across the length and breadth of South Africa. The members of Parliament
can thus report to their communities that the ANC-led government has
reached 2,7 million children who are eligible for the Child Support Grant.

We have not yet reached the target set, and the ANC members of Parliament
deployed in the Eastern Cape, Free State and North West must assist
communities to access the Child Support Grant, since these are the areas
where targets have not been reached.

Members can also report that since April 2005, 401 schools have been
provided with water, 983 with sanitation facilities, and 167 with
electricity.

Members of Parliament will, in turn, bring to the attention of government
what the community needs and what their concerns are, and how these could
be addressed. Our country is still faced with many challenges, but there is
visible progress that we are indeed creating a better life for all. I thank
you. [Applause.]

              DECISION BY SPEAKER TO ATTEND TRIAL OF JACOB ZUMA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Speaker, the DA has noted, with dismay, the
decision by Madam Speaker to attend the trial of former Deputy President,
Jacob Zuma, along with other key ANC political leaders such as KwaZulu-
Natal Premier, Sbu Ndebele, and members of his executive.

It was completely inappropriate, and by doing so they conveyed the
unfortunate message that they dissociate themselves from the President’s
praiseworthy action in firing Jacob Zuma when he was found by the courts to
be involved in the Shaik corruption scandal.

The Speaker’s first duty is to Parliament, and not to factional interests
in the ANC. This is particularly so, in the case of the Zuma Trial, because
Jacob Zuma resigned from Parliament before he could appear before the
ethics committee. An investigation into his affairs may well have found
that he misled Parliament. The National Prosecuting Authority has indicated
that there may be further possible charges against him in this connection.

The decision by Madam Speaker and sections of the ANC leadership to align
themselves with Jacob Zuma, while at the same time claiming that government
is at the forefront in the fight against corruption, reveals, yet again,
the fatal ambivalence that defines the ANC, when it comes to the fight
against corruption, and protecting the independence of the judiciary.
[Applause.]

                  LESSON LEARNT BY SA DELEGATION IN BURUNDI

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE (IFP): Madam Speaker, the South African delegation
spent some days in Burundi last week. One lesson learnt is that those who
criticise South Africa for its continuous involvement in Africa should
think again.

Burundi is the poorest country in the world, and there are also other very
poor countries in Africa. It is therefore South Africa’s moral duty to
continue to assist our fellow human beings in Africa. We need to offer them
advice and assistance, as we are doing.

Many of us have houses and food and clothes. Yes, we also have poverty, but
the poverty in Africa is awesome. South Africa should continue to support
our impoverished neighbours. [Applause.]


                     RESPONSIBILITY TO MAKE ROADS SAFER


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B L MASHILE (ANC): Madam Speaker, every transport department of all
three spheres of government spend or use resources to raise awareness of
the importance of road safety to both drivers and pedestrians. Despite
this, every day an average of 36 lives are lost and around 100 people are
seriously injured due to road accidents. The estimated cost of traffic
accidents to individuals, commerce, communities and the country is in the
region of R38 billion annually.

Experience has taught us that, as we approach the big holiday season, the
incidence of fatalities and injuries due to road accidents increases. The
responsibility to make our roads safer rests with all of us. All spheres of
government, as well as the private sector, should allocate the necessary
resources to ensure that road safety becomes a way of life for all South
Africans throughout the year.

Road users also have to adopt a positive change in attitude to road safety.
The ANC calls on all our citizens to be responsible and ensure that we all
arrive alive. I thank you. [Applause.]


               IMPACT OF PORNOGRAPHY ON BEHAVIOUR OF CHILDREN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Speaker, the ACDP is appalled, shocked and
saddened by the reports from the National Childline director who says
children as young as three are practising sex acts on one another because
of the pornography they’ve seen on cellphones and the Internet.

Childline staff say that when they ask the children what makes them do such
ugly things to other children, 90% of them say that they are just copying
pornographic images they saw on cellphones. What members of the public want
to know is what emergency steps government is taking to protect their
children from pornography promoted via cellphones.
The ACDP also welcomes the attention this matter received today in the Home
Affairs portfolio committee, as well as the undertaking given by network
providers to attend to this critical matter.

About two weeks ago there was a newspaper report of an 11-year-old girl who
was raped in class in full view of other children by 10 and 11-year-old
boys. What was even more shocking was the report that some of the boys held
the girl’s arms and legs while the rape was taking place. This is totally
unacceptable.

The ACDP still maintains that pornography is the theory and rape is the
action. We believe the right of children to innocence and security must not
only be protected by government, but must also take precedence over the so-
called rights of adults with an insatiable lust for pornography to watch
whatever material they want to. I thank you.


                         PROTECTING PUBLIC INVESTORS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W D SPIES (VF Plus): Agb Speaker, instellings soos die Raad op
Finansiële Dienste, die Registrateur van Maatskappye, die Reserwebank en
die Polisiediens het almal een gemeenskaplike doel, en dit is om die
publiek te dien en te beskerm.
Deur die jare is miljarde rande al deur niksvermoedende, oningeligte lede
van die publiek belê in sogenaamde piramideskemas en twyfelagtige
beleggingskemas. Verskeie publieke maatskappye in die naam Oude Molen is
onlangs in likwidasie geplaas. Veral senior burgers het in die onderskeie
skemas belê en aansienlike verliese gely uit die mislukte
eiendomsindikeringskemas.

Volgens inligting tot beskikking van die VF Plus het die sogenaamde Oude
Molen-groep maatskappye eiendomme, wat vir ‘n totale bedrag van slegs R3,8
miljoen aangekoop is, weer aan ‘n niksvermoedende publiek gesindikeer vir
R24,7 miljoen. Toe die skema in duie stort, moes die publiek agterkom dat
daar nie naastenby waarde was in die eiendomme waarin hulle ten duurste
belê het nie.

Dieselfde persone wat by die Oude Molen-skema betrokke was, is steeds
bedrywig in soortgelyke beleggingskemas wat reeds miljarde rande se
beleggings van die publiek gelok het. Waar was die Registrateur van
Maatskappye toe die Oude Molen-maatskappye nagelaat het om finansiële state
in te dien? Word daar tans, of is daar finansiële state en prospektusse vir
die publieke maatskappye wat met soortgelyke skemas besig is, by die
registrateur ingedien?

Het die Raad op Finansiële Dienste destyds betyds stappe gedoen om die
gebruik van beleggingstruststrukture, wat deur die maatskappy Sharemax
Investments bemark is, stop te sit? Het die Reserwebank stappe gedoen om
ondersoek in te stel na die moontlikheid dat die beleggings wat geneem
word, neerkom op die neem van deposito’s, soos verbied word deur die
Bankwet? Wat is die status van die bedrogklagte wat deur Prea Rhanduny,
Assistent Registrateur van Maatskappye, en Willem Pretorius teen menere
Willem Botha en Durand Botha gelê is?

Die VF Plus wil sien dat daardie instellings wat geskep is om die publiek
te beskerm en ekonomiese stabiliteit te verseker, toegelaat word om dit te
doen, al kos dit ook wat. Ons is dit aan die duisende niksvermoedende en
bejaarde beleggers in ons land verskuldig. (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES (FF Plus): Hon Speaker, institutions such as the Financial
Services Board, the Registrar of Companies, the Reserve Bank and the Police
Service all have one common goal, and that is to serve and protect the
public.

Through the years unsuspecting and uninformed members of the public have
invested billions of rands in so-called pyramid schemes and dubious
investment schemes. Recently several public companies in the name of Oude
Molen have been liquidated. Senior citizens in particular have invested in
the various schemes and suffered considerable losses resulting from the
unsuccessful property syndicate schemes.
According to information available to the FF Plus, the companies of the so-
called Oude Molen group have syndicated properties, which were bought for a
total amount of only R3,8 million, to an unsuspecting public for R24,7
million. When the scheme collapsed, the public became aware that the
properties were not worth anywhere near the money that they had invested in
them at great expense.

The same people who were involved in the Oude Molen scheme are still
operating similar investment schemes that have already attracted
investments worth billions of rands from the public. Where was the
Registrar of Companies when the Oude Molen companies failed to submit
financial statements? Are public companies operating similar schemes
currently submitting, or have they submitted, financial statements and
prospectuses to the registrar?

At that time, did the Financial Services Board act timeously to put a stop
to the use of investment trust structures that were being marketed by the
company Sharemax Investments? Did the Reserve Bank investigate the
possibility that the taking of investments was tantamount to the taking of
deposits, as prohibited by the Banks Act? What is the status of the fraud
charges laid against Mr Willem Botha and Mr Durand Botha by Prea Rhanduny,
Assistant Registrar of Companies, and Willem Pretorius?

The FF Plus would like to see those institutions that were created to
protect the public and ensure economic stability, being allowed to do so,
regardless of the cost. We owe it to the thousands of unsuspecting and
elderly investors in our country.]


                    USING WATER CONSERVATION IN CAPE TOWN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B M MKONGI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the recent decision by the ANC-led Cape
Town City Council to partially lift water restrictions after a spell of
good rain in the catchment areas in the Cape metropolitan area is welcomed.

This is an indication that the local government authorities had done much
in building a partnership with the communities they serve in communicating
the importance of water conservation. That communities heeded the council’s
call to conserve these precious natural resources is commendable.

Our communities should, however, note that we still have to be vigilant and
conserve as much water as is possible. The expected increase in water
consumption in Cape Town over the holiday period will place an added demand
on our water supply, and it will stand us in good stead to heed the lessons
of the past months.
We therefore call on all our communities, especially those who enjoy having
the most access to our water resources, to use it responsibly. Thank you.
[Applause.]


             PRIVATE SECURITY COMPANIES GUARDING POLICE STATIONS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P H K DITSHETELO (UCDP): Madam Speaker, if our police officers are
overstretched to fight crime in our neighbourhoods, why not employ and
train more officers to be effective in combating crime as opposed to the
current arrangement, where our, police stations which are regarded by
communities as a safe haven, are being guarded by private security
companies.Our stations regarded by communities as a safe haven. What
message are we sending if our own, trained policemen are not capable of
guarding our police stations?

Are we not exposing ourselves to dangerous situations by employing private
security companies, who are motivated by nothing else but profit? Besides
that, they deploy undertrained personnel. We are not even certain whether
they are locals. If so, are we not breaching our own national security
guidelines?

With a reported budget of R66,5 million a year being spent on private
forces we can certainly do better by recruiting young South Africans into
the Police Service. Surely, charity begins at home. Before we provide job
opportunities for foreigners, let us ensure that our own people are given
first preference. I thank you.


                 REGISTERING FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M MORKEL (PIM): Madam Speaker, the Progressive Independent Movement
notes that this weekend is the final opportunity to register at voting
stations for the forthcoming local government elections, but highlights
that voters who can’t do so this weekend may continue to register at local
municipal offices until the President announces the election date.

We urge those potential opposition voters who are sick and tired of
politics and the way matters are being conducted at present, especially
where this results in the type of racial polarisation that takes us back to
the old South Africa, to vote for an alternative opposition party so that
their voice can be heard without the need to scream and shout – as the DA
is doing at present – and without being compromised or co-opted - as other
opposition parties have done in the past - so that we can make a difference
together. I thank you. [Interjections.][Applause.]


             DECLINE IN LITERACY AND NUMERACY LEVELS IN SCHOOLS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): Madam Speaker, the state of education is the single
biggest crisis facing our country, and it will be the way in which the ANC
government responds to this crisis that ultimately will determine the
success of our democracy.

It is tragic that after 10 years of democracy our schools’ most important
exit exam, our matric certificate, is not seen as a qualification in which
employees and institutions can place their unreserved faith. It is for this
reason that numerous employers and institutions have been forced to develop
their own training-skills sources.

However, even these are not the solution. If adequate numeracy and literacy
skills are not being provided by our schools, if people cannot read and
write properly, they are effectively untrainable. We have to understand the
root cause of the problem. The popular explanation is the need for mother-
tongue education, but before we can fully understand the extent and nature
or the role of mother tongue education, we urgently need proper research to
find out what exactly is causing such a drastic decline in literacy and
numeracy levels in our schools.

However, by refusing to investigate and research the matter properly the
ANC government is continuing the politics of denial, which will have
drastic consequences for the country’s future. Thank you. [Applause.]


                INAUGURATION OF SOUTH AFRICAN LARGE TELESCOPE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr M SEFULARO (ANC): Madam Speaker, on Thursday, last week, the most
advanced large telescope in the world was inaugurated in Sutherland in the
Northern Cape.

Together with Namibia, which hosts the world’s most sensitive high-energy
gamma ray telescope, this event places Southern Africa at the forefront of
astronomical technology and research. The SA Large Telescope is a
collaboration of the ANC-led government with German, Polish, American,
British and New Zealand partners. Sixty per cent of the components were
manufactured in South Africa and 60% of the construction budget was spent
in the country.

The legacy of apartheid has resulted in an under-represented majority in
the sciences and we welcome the initiative that has resulted as a spin-off
of SALT. Amongst these is the Northern Cape education department, in
partnership with the relevant bodies, that has begun an intervention in
schools, targeting teachers and learners. This includes building science
laboratories establishing a maths and science academy in Sutherland, and
providing further training for teachers. The onus is now on the youth,
especially those who live in the areas in and around Sutherland, to be
inspired to broaden their horizons to include the study of maths and
science.

The Freedom Charter states that the doors of learning and culture shall be
opened. The creation of the SALT has opened these doors even wider. I thank
you. [Applause.]


           MASS GRAVES DISCOVERED NEAR SA MILITARY BASE IN NAMIBIA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M S BOOI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the discovery of two mass graves near an
apartheid era South African military base in Namibia is a grim reminder of
the price paid by many in the struggle for independence. All indications
are that the mass graves near Eenhana, the home base of the former SA
Defence Force 54th Battalion from 1966 to 1989, contain the remains of
Swapo combatants.

The ANC empathises with the people of Namibia and joins the call by
President Pohamaba for those who have knowledge of this and other such
incidents to reveal the truth. The Namibian government, like the ANC-led
government, has adopted a policy of national reconciliation, therefore
knowing the truth will assist the process. The need to know the truth is a
natural element in the healing process.

Namibia and South Africa have a sad history, both having successfully
overcome the same oppressive regime in the same decade. The Namibian people
have a right to pay tribute to those who were killed in a fitting and
dignified manner and families have a right to know what happened to their
loved ones.

The ANC has confidence that our government will assist the Namibian people
in resolving this very painful episode in our history. I thank you.
[Applause.]


       CHARGE OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT AGAINST POLOKWANE MUNICIPAL MANAGER


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mev D VAN DER WALT (DA): Agb Speaker, die ANC se rekord van swak dissipline
is baie duidelik sigbaar in die provinsie van Limpopo. In Polokwane is ’n
saak van seksuele teistering teen die ANC-aangestelde munisipale bestuurder
aanhangig gemaak.

Vroeër die jaar het die ANC uitvoerende burgemeester en sy raad ’n beleid
saamgestel en goedgekeur wat in werking gestel moet word in sodanige
gevalle. Tog het die ANC uitvoerende burgemeester en sy raad nie die moed
van hul oortuiging om hul eie beleid toe te pas wanneer hul eie
ondersteuners en aanstellings ter sprake is nie.

Die ongelooflikste aspek is dat die aangeklaagde munisipale bestuurder
intussen gesekondeer is na die provinsiale departement van provinsiale en
plaaslike regering om vir al die munisipaliteite in die provinsie leiding
te gee.

Dit het tyd geword dat die ANC-beheerde munisipaliteit in Polokwane op die
DA se herhaalde versoeke om die munisipale bestuurder te verhoor en te
dissiplineer reageer. Alleenlik groter dissipline van die ANC, wat al die
munisipaliteite in Limpopo beheer, sal dienslewering aan die mense
verbeter. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT (DA): Hon Speaker, the ANC’s record of poor discipline
is quite clear in the province of Limpopo. A charge of sexual harassment
has been laid against the ANC-appointed municipal manager in Polokwane.

A policy that should be implemented in such cases was drawn up and approved
earlier this year by the ANC executive mayor and his council. Yet the ANC
executive mayor and his council do not have the courage of their
convictions to apply their policy when it comes to their own supporters and
appointments.

The most unbelievable aspect of this is that the accused municipal manager
has in the meantime been seconded to the provincial department of
provincial and local government to provide leadership to all the
municipalities in the province.

The time has come for the ANC-controlled municipality in Polokwane to react
to the DA’s repeated requests that, the municipal manager be tried and
disciplined. Only greater discipline by the ANC, who control all
municipalities in Limpopo, will improve service delivery to the people.
[Applause.]]



               CHRIS HANI INSTITUTE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

                            (Member’s Statement)

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEQELA ELIKWISININZI: Somlomo, ndiphakamela ukuncoma
umsebenzi omhle weSebe lezoQhagamshemlwano. Kwiintsuku nje ezingephi
ukusuka ngoku kuza kube kuvulwa i-Chris Hani Institute of Science and
Technology ngenxa yemisebenzi yeli sebe. I-Universal Services Agencies iye
yasebenzisana noluntu lwase Kaladokhwe ukuze kusekwe eli ziko.

Yinto le eza kunceda kakhulu ukuze abantwana bethu kwakunye nabantu abadala
bafunde ubugcisa bekhompyutha, nto leyo kule mihla eyimfuneko enkulu.
Sinethenba lokuba lo msebenzi unje ngalo uya kunabela nakwezinye
iidolophana, ngakumbi ezisemaphandleni, ukuze abantu bakowethu baxhamle
ulwazi kwezobugcisa beekhompyutha kunye nezenzululwazi. Enkosi.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa member’s statement follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I stand to show my
appreciation to the Department of Communications for the work they have
done. The Chris Hani Institute of Science and Technology will be opening
soon as a result of the work of this department. The Universal Services
Agency worked hand in hand with the Cradock community to put this institute
in place.

This institute will help children and adult learners to acquire computer
literacy skills that are important. We hope that facilities like these will
be established in other towns, but more especially in the rural areas to
develop people’s skills in the areas of computers and science. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

The SPEAKER: In view of the IFP not having taken its slot, the ANC has
another slot. The ANC is not taking the slot. We, therefore, allow the DA
to take the slot.


                     AMBULANCE WORKERS’ LIVES ENDANGERED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): Madam Speaker, ambulance workers are an
endangered species. They have been hijacked, sexually assaulted, robbed at
gunpoint, threatened and had their vehicles stoned. There are too few
ambulances available to meet the demand for their services and now
ambulance staff have been told that they may refuse to attend to patients
in cases where they feel unsafe. It is the poorer communities who will
suffer. Without any alternative means to transport patients to hospital,
the poor also live in the most violent neighbourhoods, terrorised by gangs
and criminals.

We can’t blame the ambulance workers for feeling unsafe, but we can blame
the authorities for failing to provide proper policing in these areas.
Hundreds of policemen are a telephone call away when ANC bigwigs feel
threatened by their own party members, but when patients are dying and
ambulance workers are threatened they are alone in the face of rampant
criminality. Safety is a human right, so is access to health care. When is
the ANC government going to deliver? [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: We now come to Ministers’ responses. May I have an indication
of who would like to speak? The Minister of Finance, the Minister of
Education, the Minister of Science and Technology, the Minister of Safety
and Security and then the Deputy Minister of Defence.

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Agb Speaker, op ’n punt van orde: Hoekom wil die
Minister van Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering nie ook praat na aanleiding
van my ledeverklaring nie? [Tussenwerpsels.] [Hon Speaker, on a point of
order: Why does the Minister of Provincial and Local Government not also
want to speak in response to my member’s statement? [Interjections.]]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, really, that is not a point of order. It is the
Ministers who must indicate whether they want to respond. We can’t force
them to respond.


                            MINISTERS’ RESPONSES



                            FINANCIAL REGULATION


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, we should avoid hollow whinges, and
only respond to issues of substance.

I would like to respond to the issues raised by the hon member of the FF
Plus. All financial regulation is designed with a view to consumer
protection. So, whether you are talking about the Financial Services Board,
or the Reserve Bank and the bank supervision department within it in
particular, the object of the exercise is to protect the end user, the
consumer, from abuse.

But, the systems work because you are dealing with registered institutions
- institutions registered within the framework of the law. So, if somebody
sets up some bucket shop and they call it a bank and people go and invest
their money there, you can’t hold the Reserve Bank accountable for that.

Similarly, in respect of the Financial Services Board, for as long as it’s
a registered organisation, especially pension funds, long-term assurers and
short-term insurance funds, then I think people have a reasonable
expectation.

But, what we have seen in the last while is a flurry of activities, and
people take their hard-earned savings and invest them in these unregistered
institutions. Unless there is actually a formal charge laid, the Financial
Services Board or the Reserve Bank would not automatically know about it.

We have acted against a number of these institutions, but what we can’t do
realistically, is to act against the silliness of people who invest money
in an organisation that promises all kinds of returns, like the leader of
some party in this House, who couldn’t understand that Miracle 2000
wouldn’t be able to achieve the returns it had promised. You don’t have to
be a rocket scientist or an econometrician to understand that returns like
that are not possible in a rational world.

But people do this kind of thing. There is a man called Adriaan Nieuwoudt,
sitting up there in Garies. People will still give him money, like they
gave him money for sour milk 20 years ago. You can’t protect people against
their own stupidity, and that’s part of the difficulty of financial
regulation. But, on the issues you raised, the companies you raised,
Sharemax and Oude Molen and so on, send me a note, I will follow it up and
come back to you, hon member. Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Interjections.]


     CHILD SUPPORT GRANTS; BUILDING OF SCHOOL FACILITIES; MOTHER-TONGUE
                                  EDUCATION


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I’m amused at some of the little squeals that I
hear.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon members of Parliament for drawing
attention to progress with respect to the registration for child support
grant and its take-up by families and children in our country, and, in
particular, I welcome the commitment by members of Parliament to support my
colleague, Minister Skweyiya, in his ongoing drive to ensure that all the
children of our country who are deserving of this grant receive it.

We are also very glad to note members’ attention to the progress we are
making with respect to building more classrooms and schools for the
children of our country, and to ensuring that these schools have adequate
facilities. I would like to thank my colleague, the Minister of Public
Works, for the manner in which she has assisted the department and the
provincial public works and education departments to ensure that we
accelerate progress with respect to delivery of schools.

To return to the hon member who referred to mother tongue and its place in
education, let me begin by saying that to use the expression “unprecedented
crisis” with reference to education is to be guilty of a terminological
inexactitude. [Interjections.] I think that the hon member, Boinamo,
perhaps draws his information on research in language and education in
South Africa from media reports that has read in 2004.

We have, however, been reading research on language and its place in
education for many decades and, in fact, there is a very old South African
report which deals with the matter of language and education called the
McDonald Report. I would suggest that the hon member takes the opportunity
to read it. Clearly the issues of education cannot be solved solely by
attending to providing access to mother tongue education for the children
of our country. But it is an important component to success in learning.

If we utilise mother tongue, we need to ensure that it is utilised
effectively, but it is not the sole solution in addressing the challenges
in education. There are many other areas that must be attended to. So, hon
member, certainly mother tongue is not the sole response, there are many
areas that we certainly must address and which we are addressing.

To bewail the current problems in education and the immense challenges that
there are as something that is a residue of 10 years of democracy is really
to be further guilty of terminological inexactitude. The hon member would
know full well from his research, which I am sure he carries out, that the
funding from 1953, with the introduction of the Bantu Education Act, never
supported adequate provision for education of children of the disadvantaged
in this country. [Applause.]

The hon member sitting beside you may shake her head, but I suggest that
you sit together in a library of a faculty of education of a good
institution in this country and read research, get to understand your
facts, before you commit further inexactitudes. Thank you. [Applause.]

                INAUGURATION OF SOUTH AFRICAN LARGE TELESCOPE

                            (Minister’s Response)

TONA YA SAENSE LE THEKNOLOTŠI: Mohlomphegi Speaker, ke leboga mohlomphegi
Sefularo ka ga seo a se boletšego mabapi le SALT -Southern African Large
Telescope. Ke mo tiišeletša gape gore ka nnete baswa ba rena, esego fela
bao ba lego Sutherland, eupša bohle mo nageng ya rena ka moka, ba thabetše
thelesekopo yeo gomme ba na le kgahlego ya go ithuta mahlale a saense le
theknolotši gore ba tle ba tsebe go kgatha tema mešomong yeo e hlolwago ke
SALT.

Bao ba dulago Sutherland, kudu baMmasepala wa Karoo Hoogland le ba Lefapha
la Thuto Kapa-Leboa, ba šetše ba amogetše seo thelesekopo yeo e kgonago go
ba direla sona. SALT le SALT Foundation di ba swaragantšhitše le mafase a
go swana boNew Zeland, Poland, bjalobjalo go ruta baswa ba rena bao ba nago
le kgahlego mahlale a bonepadinaledi - astronomy. Ba šetše ba humane
barutiši ba dithuto tša saense le mathematics go tšwa dikolong tša kgauswi
Sutherland moo barutiši ba ba bjalo ba be ba se gona.

Gape go na le bao ba šetšego ba ithuta diyunibesithing gomme ba lefelelwa
ke SALT Foundation. Gape go na le bao re tlilego go ba romela mafaseng a
moše gore ba ye go ithuta ka ga mahlalehlale a dinaledi – astronomy - gore
ba tle ba kgone go holega le go hola lefase la rena.

Re a go leboga Ntate Sefularo ge o ile wa bona taba yeo gomme wa
hlohleletša bana ba rena gore ba ithute mahlale a swanago le ao. Ke tshepa
gore maloko ao a dutšego ka mo Ngwakong ka moka le tla iša bana ba lena
Sutherland gore ba ye ba ithute se sengwe ka gore ge e le lena tšeo ga le
sa di kgona. Ke a leboga, Mohlomphegi Speaker. [Legofsi.] (Translation of
Sepedi Minister’s response follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SCIENCE and TECHNOLOGY: Hon Madam Speaker, I appreciate
what hon Sefularo said regarding the South African Large Telescope (SALT).
I would like to emphasise that all the youth, and not only those who are in
Sutherland, are excited about the telescope and have a huge interest to
study Science and Technology so that they will be able to fill the posts
that will be created at the SALT.

The youth who live in Sutherland, especially those in the Karoo Hoogland
and the Northern Cape Department of Education, have already benefited from
the telescope. The SALT and the SALT Foundation have connected them to
overseas countries like New Zealand, Poland etc, to assist those who have
an interest in astronomy. They have already found Science and Mathematics
teachers from schools in the Sutherland area, whereas they were not there
before.

There are those who are already studying at the university sponsored by the
SALT Foundation. Others will get scholarships to study astronomy abroad so
that they will be of assistance to our country.

Mr Sefularo, we are grateful that you picked this up and motivated our
children to follow such studies. I hope that all the members present in
this House will take their children to Sutherland to learn these things, as
you cannot do these things anymore. Thank you, hon Madam Speaker.
[Applause.]]


   PRIVATE SECURITY COMPANIES GUARDING POLICE STATIONS; AMBULANCE WORKERS’
                              LIVES ENDANGERED





                            (Minister’s Response)


The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, the hon Ditshetelo has
made a statement, which has several elements. I hope I’ll be able to
address all of them. Firstly, he decries the fact that we are using private
security companies to protect the buildings and that those companies are
responsible for access control.

Issues that relate to the security of the property of policing those
buildings and the personal security of police officials are the
responsibility of the police themselves. We do not train police to look
after police stations; we train them to do policing. In other words, they
are responsible for the safety and security of the members of our
population. They do not guard those police stations.

Secondly, you have also raised the issue of the origin of some of the
members who work for these security companies. Well, we are the National
Assembly, which is responsible for defining and articulating laws.  If you
don’t want people who come from other countries to work in South Africa,
just place before this House a motion that will relate to that. Maybe even
an Act.

The fact of the matter is that you are talking about only the private
security companies. I’m sure the hon Groenewald will take you on this one.
What about the many farmers who are using people from Zimbabwe and other
neighbouring countries? What about businesses - and there are many of them
- who are using people from the four corners of the African continent? Are
you saying we should stop this from happening? It is not part of our law to
do that. And we are not going to do anything that is illegal.

Thirdly, you also raised the matter of the private security companies
themselves. Well, there is a law that relates to that question. If it is
your contention that we should not allow foreign-based companies to be
registered in South Africa, say so. When, in the beginning, as we were
formulating the Act, we wanted to do precisely that, there were objections
to this here in the House. If you believe we need to change now, come
forward and say so.

The hon Kohler-Barnard is doing something that, I believe, ought to be
regulated. She is dragging rumour into this House. Otherwise, how do we
understand what she is saying? Not unless I revert to my early days when I
was growing up. There were some areas which people were warned not to go
past. For instance, there was a hillock and people would say don’t go past
that hillock because there are some cannibals that will eat you up. Or
don’t cross that river because there are some mermaids there who will drag
you into the depths of that river.

How can anybody, a public representative for that matter, come here and
generally say ambulances are being stoned and what have you? Bring me
facts. Bring me cases here that are factual, and we will with that. You
can’t come here and spread rumours in this House. This House is not
designed for rumours. [Applause.]


           MASS GRAVES DISCOVERED NEAR SA MILITARY BASE IN NAMIBIA





                            (Minister’s Response)


The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank hon members
for their concerns about what is happening in our neighbouring countries.

I want to assure them that the Department of Defence will definitely co-
operate with the government of Namibia in finding out the truth about these
mass graves. The only evidence we have so far is that some of the people
mentioned are no longer with the Department of Defence. But we will assist
in whatever way is required of us.

I also want to assure this House and the people of South Africa that the
current Department of Defence will not engage in acts of barbarism. I thank
you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]


                        WATER CONSERVATION CAPE TOWN





                            (Minister’s Response)


UMPHATHISWA WEMICIMBI YAMANZI NAMAHLATHI: Enkosi Somlomo. Ndiphakamela
ukubulela ilungu likaKhongolozi elithe laphakama liqinisa umkhankaso
wokugcina amanzi. Yanga namanye amaqela angalixhasa eli phulo kuba kaloku
ukuba amanzi awakho akusoze kubekho wisiki okanye iwayini, kwaye akusoze
kubekho xesha laziyolo loluvala unyaka, ngoko ke akukho bomi. Mandilibulele
ibhunga lalapha ngokukhokela lo mkhankaso. Yanga nabanye oomasipala
bangazeka emzekweni. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraph
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Thank you, Speaker. I want to
express my gratitude to the member of the ANC who supported the campaign
for water conservation. We wish all other parties would do the same and
support this campaign because if there was no water there would be no
whisky and wine. There would be no end of year parties and there would be
no life. Let me praise the Cape Town City Council for leading this
campaign. I wish all the municipalities would do the same. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

The SPEAKER: Order! I will now take an extra Ministerial response because I
believe that hon members deserve to get answers to their statements.
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I wonder if you would, in the circumstances,
allow the DA to make an extra statement, because the Rules make it quite
clear that there should be six Ministerial replies, and we have had six
already.

The SPEAKER: Is that what you are rising on?

Mr M J ELLIS: Yes, I am rising on a point of order.

The SPEAKER: Are you rising on the issue that I shouldn’t allow the seventh
Minister to give a Ministerial response?

I thought members of Parliament would welcome the fact that there is a
Minister who is being allowed to give them more information. I always hear
members crying out for more information. Now, the Chair is being generous.
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, the truth of the matter is that we don’t
always get information from that Minister. That is the point!

The SPEAKER: But there is the Deputy Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development wanting to give you information.

Mr M J ELLIS:  It doesn’t matter, Madam Speaker. We don’t always get
information from the hon Deputy Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development. He stands up and says a lot of things that are very seldom
information.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, please allow me to exercise my prerogative and
allow the Deputy Minister to give this House whatever information he has.
[Applause.]


              DECISION BY SPEAKER TO ATTEND TRIAL OF JACOB ZUMA


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Madam Speaker, I think we need a response. There are lots of things I would
like to respond to. It being after lunch, hon Ellis is talking a lot again.
[Laughter.] One wonders what helped him. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order: I take exception
to the point he has just made. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Deputy Minister, please withdraw the remarks about it
being after lunch . . .

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam
Speaker, I withdraw that the hon Ellis is obviously very brave after lunch.
I withdraw that unconditionally! [Laughter.] Unconditionally! [Laughter.]

I would like to respond to another terminological inexactitude that was
perpetrated, I think in a very gratuitous and very cowardly manner, by the
hon Camerer, who attacked the Speaker whilst she was in the Chair and could
not respond. I think there is not much point in responding to most of her
politicking. But I think . . . [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, on a point of order . . .
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Please, hon Gibson, allow the hon member to finish.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, the point of order is that
the hon Deputy Minister has described the statement by the hon Mrs Camerer
as cowardly. That is unparliamentary, and I ask you to ask him to withdraw.

The SPEAKER: Hon Deputy Minister, please withdraw the word “cowardly”.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I withdraw
unconditionally, Madam Speaker. [Laughter.]

Now, the point that one has to make is this: Firstly . . . [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, may I ask the hon Minister a question? I would
like to ask him simply why is he being so brave after lunch.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, please let us proceed with more dignity.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I had some
water at lunchtime, Madam Speaker.

The attack on the Speaker is a very serious one. Firstly, the principle of
the presumption of innocence is entrenched in our Constitution. If there
are court cases that are taking place then, clearly, the people have not
yet been found guilty. Secondly, our law makes it clear that our courts are
open to the public and, in fact, we encourage people to attend those cases.
So, the law is very clearly against what Mrs Camerer is saying.

But, more important is this problem that she ends off with a flourish. The
flourish is that the attendance of the Speaker at an open court trial,
which has not yet begun, undermines the independence of the judiciary. Now,
I ask you with tears in my eye: How on earth can the attendance of anyone,
even the President, at a court trial of someone who is on trial undermine
the independence of the judiciary? [Interjections.]

So, Mrs Camerer, can I suggest something to you - the same that the
Minister of Education suggested? I think you should go with those members
at the back that are now going to read and study how to research things so
that they can give proper inputs in this House. Can I suggest you join
them, and not say the things that you have said? [Applause.]


                     CONSTITUTION TWELFTH AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam
Speaker, hon Ministers and members, comrades and friends, ladies and
gentlemen, on 27 April 1994, in terms of the interim Constitution . . .
[Interjections.] Look you can’t faze me, you can shout as much as you like,
it does not hassle me.

In terms of the interim Constitution of 1993, the Republic of South Africa
became a democratic, constitutional, sovereign state established on the
basis of three distinct but interrelated spheres of government, namely the
national, provincial and local spheres of government. [Interjections.] You
should listen then you don’t have to do that reading.

The provincial sphere of government was established as the present nine
provinces of the Republic out of the areas of the former Republic of South
Africa, the Bantustans of Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda, Ciskei and the
areas of the six self-governing territories. The geographical area
comprising each of the nine provinces is defined in Schedule 1 of the
interim Constitution. The areas of the respective provinces were and still
are defined with reference to specific magisterial districts created in
terms of the Magistrates’ Courts Act of 1944.

The above-described dispensation for the provincial sphere of government
was continued under the Constitution of 1996, which provides that “ the
boundaries of the provinces are those that existed when the Constitution
took effect”. In other words, they are as defined under the interim
Constitution, with the magisterial districts acting as building blocks of
each province.

On the other hand, section 151(1) of the Constitution provides that the
building blocks of our local sphere of government consist of municipalities
which must be established for the whole of the territory of the Republic,
and which differ significantly from magisterial districts.

Furthermore, in 1998, the Constitution was amended by the insertion of
section 155(6A) that regulate the establishment of the so-called “cross-
boundary municipalities”. Section 155(6A) provides, inter alia, that if the
criteria for the determination of municipal boundaries cannot be fulfilled
without a municipal boundary extending across a provincial boundary, that
municipal boundary may, subject to certain requirements, be determined
across the provincial boundary.

Sixteen cross-boundary municipalities, for example, Ekurhuleni, Tswane,
Bushbuckridge, Kgalagadi and numerous other district councils and other
local councils, were established in terms of this relevant statutory
provisions affecting five provinces in the Republic, namely Gauteng,
Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape and North West.

Consequently, provincial boundaries are still to this day determined with
reference to the boundaries of magisterial districts, rather than with
reference to municipal boundaries. These two concepts are totally different
in many respects. Magisterial districts are defined areas in which courts
exercise jurisdiction, whereas municipal boundaries are the geographical
areas designated by the Municipal Demarcation Board within which a
democratically elected legislative and executive authority exercise the
powers granted to such municipality in the Constitution and subsequent
laws.

This state of affairs has not only resulted in some legal and practical
difficulties, particularly in respect of service delivery, but also in
terms of the cross-boundary municipal dispensation. The Department of
Provincial and Local Government has done a profile of municipal
performance, and it was found that cross-boundary municipalities were
amongst those municipalities whose performance was sub-optimal.

There are many reasons for this sub-optimal performance, but the main
reason is the fact that various provinces often have different legislation
for similar functions applicable to such cross-border municipalities. When
the laws of more than one province need to be administered in a cross-
boundary municipality, this not only leads to legal and administrative
confusion, but it is also a costly exercise. It is difficult at any given
time to say who has ultimate responsibility over such municipalities.
Therefore, sometimes neither province takes responsibility, and they do not
budget accordingly.

Some of the other challenges that are being experienced include, inter
alia, in the area of health, different legislation and funding from the two
provinces; you find, in the area of housing, that the subsidisation of such
projects impacts negatively on the delivery of housing; in terms of
traffic, a cross-boundary municipality must administer the law of two
provinces, resulting in confusion for road users; and ambulance services,
which was raised just now, in one part of the cross-boundary municipality
service may be rendered by the district municipality and in another part by
the local municipality.

The experience of the last six years has shown that cross-boundary
municipalities present legal, financial and administrative challenges that
make it difficult for government to provide services to such communities in
an equitable and sustainable manner. Consequently, on 1 November 2002, the
Presidential Co-ordinating Council resolved, amongst others, that the
notion of cross-boundary municipalities be abolished, and that the
provincial boundaries be reviewed so that no municipality straddles two or
more provincial boundaries.

The decision of the Presidential Co-ordinating Council was influenced by
the above reality and the challenges experienced in the joint
administration by provinces of these cross-boundary municipalities. The
objective is therefore to obtain legal, financial, administrative and
functional certainty to enhance service delivery, providing that all
municipalities fall within a specific province.

During August and October 2005, the Municipal Demarcation Board published
maps in the Government Gazette reflecting proposals for boundary changes
received from the Minister for Provincial and Local Government. I will not
go into the detail of these proposals, as the Minister is better placed to
do so, except to say that the proposed boundaries are meant to assist the
state to provide services to communities in an equitable and sustainable
manner. They are also meant to promote social and economic development at
regional and local level, and to enable integrated and effective local
government.

In order to give effect to the resolution of the PCC, this constitutional
amendment before the House seeks to redetermine the geographical areas of
the provinces to avoid municipal boundaries stretching over provincial
boundaries. In addition, the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill
of 2005, which is presently before Parliament, seeks to repeal all the laws
providing for cross-boundary municipalities, to demarcate the new municipal
boundaries being proposed, and to deal with certain consequential
implications in respect of municipal boundaries.

Let me now turn to discuss each provision of this Constitution Twelfth
Amendment Bill. Clause 1 seeks to amend section 103 of the Constitution,
firstly, to list the respective provinces in alphabetical order; secondly,
to provide that the geographical areas of the respective provinces comprise
the sum of the indicated geographical areas reflected in the various maps
referred to in the Notice listed in the proposed new Schedule 1A; and,
thirdly, to provide that whenever the geographical area of a province is
redetermined by an amendment to the Constitution, an ordinary Act of
Parliament may provide for transitional measures to regulate the legal,
practical and any other consequences of the redetermination.

Such transitional measures will be provided for in the said Cross-Boundary
Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill, and will regulate matters such as the
transfer of provincial functions, assets, rights, obligations, duties or
liabilities from one province to the other.

Clauses 2 and 3 of the Bill seek to repeal sections 155(6A) and 157(4)(b)
of the Constitution that deal with cross-boundary municipalities, removing
the principle of cross-boundary municipalities from the Constitution.

Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Schedule 1A in the Constitution
that defines the areas of the provinces with reference to the geographical
areas that are reflected in municipal demarcation maps that are contained
in official notices as published by the Municipal Demarcation Board.

It needs to be pointed out that by using municipal demarcation maps, the
greatest common denominator of geographical area is used, namely, 6
metropolitan municipalities and 46 district municipalities. These
structures represent wall-to-wall municipalities, whereas local
municipalities do not cover the whole territory of the Republic.

Although there are no cross-boundary municipalities on the provincial
boundary between the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, a decision was taken
to resolve the challenges relating to that boundary in a manner that would
avoid going through a process of first establishing cross-boundary
municipalities. Those challenges are being addressed in the Cross-Boundary
Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill through proposed demarcations of
municipalities. Insofar as those proposed demarcations impact on district
municipalities, such proposals are reflected in the new Schedule 1A to be
inserted in the Constitution.

It is very important that a vital distinction be emphasised and understood
by this House. Although the maps being used are based on municipal
demarcations, the constitutional amendment passed today does not entrench
the boundaries of such municipalities. The boundaries of municipalities
still must be demarcated in terms of section 155(3) of the Constitution by
an independent authority, that is, the Municipal Demarcation Board.

We are merely using the sum total of these maps in Schedule 1A to denote
the collective area which will comprise a province. In other words, these
maps are used to define the outer boundary of each province, and not to
define the boundaries of the six metropolitan and 46 district
municipalities, which they reflect.

Or stated differently, the outer boundaries of these municipal demarcation
maps, which form the boundary of the province, are indeed also the boundary
of the province. This model seems to me not to be satisfactory. However, it
is what we have inherited from the past and what we continue with as the
same model in this constitutional amendment.
The building blocks of our provinces, including the provincial boundaries
in the interim Constitution and the Constitution of 1996, are magisterial
districts. The alternative we have now progressed to is to use municipal
boundaries as defined by the Municipal Demarcation Board. However, this
means that each time a magisterial district was amended in the past, or a
municipal boundary is amended in the future, we will have to amend the
Constitution.

That seems to be absurd. Is it not time that we actually obtain the
expertise of someone to technically define exactly what each provincial
boundary is?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order, Deputy Minister! Order, please! There are
too many meetings taking place in the House.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: For
example, the boundary of Limpopo province is the Limpopo River in the
north, the Kruger National Park in the east and the border with Botswana in
the west and so on.

I would propose that the viability of this proposal of defining the
specific provincial boundaries in the Constitution be examined and
implemented if found acceptable. It just makes sense. To use municipal
boundaries, the smallest governmental units which are the most likely to be
changed for a variety of reasons, or even worse, magisterial districts as
the building blocks of your provinces, including your provincial
boundaries, means you will have to amend the Constitution regularly and
unnecessarily. It leads to absurdities. The time has arrived, in my view,
to change this model, but that is for another occasion.

In conclusion, this constitutional amendment removes the principle of cross-
boundary municipalities from the Constitution and merely defines the
geographical area including, by implication, the provincial boundary of
each province in the new Schedule 1A of the Constitution, whereas it is the
Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill, which is presently being
processed,through which the exact new provincial boundaries under review
and as defined by the Municipal Demarcation Board will be legislated into
law.

Although their job is only half done, I would like to thank the
chairpersons and members of the Portfolio Committees on Justice and Local
Government and their equivalent committees in the NCOP for the time and
effort that they have put into finalising this rather technical
constitutional amendment within the short timeframe given to them.

We now await the finalisation, within the next week or two, of the Cross-
Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill. Upon its passing, the legislative
framework will be in place for the next local government elections to take
place by no later than 6 March 2006.

I commend the passing of the constitutional amendment to the House. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Madam Deputy Speaker, colleagues, the Constitution
Twelfth Amendment Bill is primarily aimed at reconfiguring the manner in
which geographical areas of the provinces in our country are defined. The
interim constitution had previously based the geographical areas of
provinces on magisterial districts, which essentially can be amended by
decree by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development. This
factor on its own makes magisterial districts less than suitable building
blocks for defining the geographical area of any province.

In this regard the Department of Provincial and Local Government proposed
that the building blocks to define the area of each province be district
and metro municipalities. This would hold two distinct advantages. The
first one is that these categories of municipalities cover every inch in
geographical terms of the Republic and therefore comply with the basic
requirement in any exercise to build provincial areas. The second advantage
is that any change to a municipality must be made through the processes
adopted by the Municipal Demarcation Board, which, because it is a more
intensive process involving public consultation, is less likely to change
too quickly, thus engendering more stability.

Having said this, of course, using municipal building blocks to build
provinces geographically, while better than magisterial districts, is not
ideal, and I do agree with the Deputy Minister. At some point it certainly
will become necessary for government to produce topographical maps to
delineate the various provincial boundaries. However, using municipalities
for this purpose lends itself very nicely to the eradication of cross-
boundary municipalities which, six years ago, seemed a plausible compromise
so typical of, and important to, our proud transition to democracy.

While in keeping with the spirit of compromise, cross-boundary
municipalities did precious little for administrative efficiencies and good
governance practices. This then is the second objective of the
constitutional amendment we have before us today.

It bears noting that while it is correct to say that we use municipalities
as building blocks, it is more correct in some instances to say that we use
concept municipalities, firstly, in order to locate previous cross-boundary
municipalities firmly into a single province, and, secondly, to ensure that
we can count on the support of the provinces who will ultimately decide on
this issue. But I will talk more about this later.
The Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill effectively eradicates the 16 cross-
boundary municipalities and, consequently, all municipalities fall squarely
within one province or another. It is important to note that while the
matter of provincial boundaries in some areas has met with devastatingly
emotional responses, I certainly have not seen a single submission in
favour of retaining cross-boundary municipalities.

Certain adjustments were also made to a few areas other than those
pertaining to CBMs, where, for example, enclaves or little islands of one
province existed in another province, as is the case in KwaZulu-Natal and
the Eastern Cape. Adjustments were also proposed in this regard. As we
speak, there is an area of 31 hectares of Matatiele that is part of the
KwaZulu-Natal province but situated in the Eastern Cape. The whole of the
Umzimkhulu District is also situated in KwaZulu-Natal but it belongs to the
province of the Eastern Cape.

We have, as the portfolio committee sitting together, been inundated with
petitions and submissions from individuals and organisations from these
areas, but the hon Nomhle Mahlawe will deal more specifically with these
areas in her input a little later on today. Suffice it to say we do not
expect to please everyone by our proposals today, but what weighed quite
heavily on us was the provision in the Constitution that gives the power of
veto to provinces. Section 74(3) of the Constitution reads as follows:

   Any other provision of the Constitution may be amended by a Bill passed
   by the National Assembly with a supporting vote of at least two-thirds of
   its members and also by the NCOP with a supporting vote of at least six
   provinces if that amendment relates, inter alia, to the altering of
   provincial boundaries, powers and functions of institutions.

In terms of section 74(8) of the Constitution, if the Bill concerns only a
specific province or provinces, the NCOP may not pass the Bill or the
relevant part thereof unless it has been approved by the legislature or the
legislatures concerned. The procedure in terms of 74(3)(b) read with
section 74(8) of the Constitution is as follows: Simply put, if the
National Assembly passes this Bill it must be referred to the NCOP for
consideration. The NCOP may not pass the Bill unless it has been approved
by the legislature or legislatures of the affected provinces themselves.

The Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill will therefore be referred to the
provincial legislatures by the NCOP and will serve before the NCOP only
once the provinces have processed it. The NCOP will then require the
support of at least six provinces to process this Bill. The Bill thereafter
will be referred to the President for assent.

In other words, this Bill does not return to this House at all if there is
agreement by the legislatures concerned and concurrence by at least six
provinces. In essence these provisions anticipated that both Houses would
pass the same version of the Bill. Where, for instance, only a part of the
Bill requires the approval of a specific provincial legislature, as is the
case here, and such portion is not approved by a province, only that part
of the Bill lapses but the rest of the Bill may be proceeded with, subject
to the necessary amendments needed to remove the affected part. This
effectively means that any province whose boundaries are amended in this
Bill is able to veto that part of the Bill and to cast this whole process
of delineating new boundaries for the seven affected provinces asunder.

As stated above, unless both Houses pass the same Bill, it will not be a
Bill passed in terms of section 74. If such a Bill has already been passed
by the National Assembly it must be referred back to it for reconsideration
and amendment in terms of the Assembly Rules. Therefore, if the NCOP has
passed an amended version of the Bill it must be referred back to the
Assembly, which means that members of this House will have to be recalled.
In this regard the committee was guided by the extensive discussions and
consultations between the Department of Provincial and Local Government and
the political leadership of the various affected provinces. The outcomes of
these consultations were incorporated into the final version of the
schedule to this Bill.

The extensive efforts of the Minister for Provincial and Local Government
to engage and consult with stakeholders therefore must be seen in light of
this constitutional process that gives the provinces the final say in the
matter of provincial boundaries. The Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill
paves the way for the forthcoming local government elections and once the
provincial boundaries are . . .

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member! I think for us to be able to deal
with this very important topic, we may request other members to leave the
Chamber and go and conduct their business outside.

We have never done that, but we are dealing with something that is very,
very important, and I do not think some people actually realise that we
need . . . Right now, the hon member is talking about recalling the
National Assembly and other things, yet members of the Assembly are not
even concentrating. Unfortunately, hon members, we will have to call you by
name and it is not only going to be us who will know that you have not been
behaving well but the country will also know that.

Hon member, please continue.

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Once the provincial outer boundaries are determined by
this legislation, the Municipal Demarcation Board, in the absence of the
concept of cross-boundary municipalities, will redetermine the municipal or
inner boundaries of the affected provinces.

Having said that, I must say that whilst some of the protests that we have
seen on television and in the newspapers have been based on a sense of
allegiance to one province or another - and in this regard not much can be
done to please everyone - the objections from certain quarters seem to
hinge on very real fears concerning the matter of service delivery.

It is important to note that adjustments to the provincial equitable share
allocations based on shifts in population of the provinces will have to be
effected. It is also important to note that, as we speak, provinces are
engaged in the quest to deal with the transitional matters so that in fact,
ultimately, there is no vacuum that is left in terms of service delivery.

Any provincial function performed in affected municipalities will require
transfer and a transitional clause in this Bill provides for provinces to
effect agreements even prior to the implementation of this law to enable a
smooth and uninterrupted passage of transfer. This is so because it is not
the intention of this legislature or this government to renege on service
delivery, housing, or other material commitments to our people. This has
not been the legacy of this government over this decade.

It is important to accept, however, that in regard to certain material
issues such as provincial monetary allocations or subsidised transport to
learners at schools, where severe disparities occur currently between
provinces, we do as members of Parliament need to be sensitive to this.
While the national education department is taking laudable steps to
standardise state funding allocations to learners, the provinces in which
these affected communities are now situated, need to be forthcoming and
sensitive to ensure that every effort is made to accommodate the particular
needs of those communities during this very volatile time.

Ongoing negotiations between affected provinces in this regard continue and
our people need to be assured that no physical walls will be erected to
prevent crossing of roads, no policemen, no nurse, no teacher, will lose
their job or stop being paid a salary. To the parent who expresses concern
over the fact that the school syllabus in the North-West province is
different from that of Gauteng, I wish to say this: Your child will go to
exactly the same school as before, will be taught by exactly the same
teachers as before. The syllabus will continue as before, as your school
governing body will not have changed. The teachers will get paid through a
different province but this will not affect the syllabus and the education
that any child receives.

Taxis that hold permits in one province will continue to operate those
routes despite operating in a differently named province. These guarantees
we have insured in the Bill associated with this amendment, the Cross-
Boundary Municipal Laws Repeal Bill, but more about that at a more
appropriate juncture. The point is that our provinces need and require to
be sensitive beyond their normal calling to ensure a better life for all.

Affected provinces must ensure maximum responsiveness, engagement and
accommodation of the needs of the people and this may now more honestly be
set in motion once this House has pronounced itself on this Bill. Hon
members, it bears reminding ourselves today that we are after all one
country, one people, South Africans all, regardless of whether we are now
in the Gauteng province or the North-West province. A decade ago we pledged
our allegiance to one constitution, not one province. This Constitution
reminds us that the whole of South Africa belongs to all of us who live in
it.

In conclusion, I want to take this opportunity in the last few seconds to
very heartily and sincerely thank the officials of the Department of
Provincial and Local Government. In particular, I would like to thank Dr
Petra Bauer, Adv Kholong, Mr Johan Labuschagne from the Department of
Justice and, of course, the hardworking members of my portfolio committee
and the members of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
Government, for their assistance. I would also like to thank, in
particular, the Minister for Provincial and Local Government for his
assistance and guidance during this period. I do thank you all for your
time.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L K JOUBERT: Deputy Speaker, as the title of this Bill indicates, this
is the 12th time that we are seeking to amend the 1996 Constitution. As
with previous amendments of as recently as August this year, we again fast-
tracked the process through the committee stage.

With the previous amendment to the Constitution, I voiced my concern about
the fast-tracking of the legislative process in matters that are not of
vital importance. Here we have to distinguish between urgency and
importance. As in the case of the previous amendment, we waited until a
relatively unimportant matter became urgent because of time factors, and
then pulled out all the stops and fast-tracked the process.

My question is: Is this how a responsible legislature should approach
amendments to its Constitution? Should amendments to the Constitution not
be considered in the most circumspect manner? When the matter of the motor
vehicle allowance for all magistrates served before the justice and
constitutional committee Treasury informed the committee that they could
only approve expenditure not budgeted for if it was unforeseen and
unavoidable.

Maybe we should take a cue from Treasury when it comes to fast-tracking
legislation, especially when it concerns amendments to the Constitution,
the highest law of the land. Would we have been able to fast-track this
piece of legislation if we had a rule stating that we can only fast-track
legislation if it was unforeseen and unavoidable?

The Deputy Minister mentioned that the Presidential Co-ordinating Council
recommended the elimination of cross boundary municipalities as far back as
November 2002 - three years ago. Why was nothing done until August this
year? Why put the justice and constitutional affairs committee under
pressure and risk our approving amendments to our Constitution to which we
have not fully applied our minds because of time constraints.

I suggest that we seriously consider putting a timeframe to amendments to
the Constitution to ensure that all amendments receive proper
consideration. With all due respect, when a piece of legislation is being
fast-tracked the risk of not applying our minds properly is just too great.
Perhaps we should go back to the old principle that law cannot be made, it
can only be found by the wise after careful consideration. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Deputy Speaker, colleagues, I’d like to say that although the
IFP is in agreement with the broad objectives of this Bill we can’t support
the text before us today.

Now, the Bill does seek to redefine provincial boundaries and it uses new
building blocks, the municipal building blocks instead of the previous
ones, the magisterial districts, and we agree with that. It also proposes
to get rid of cross-boundary municipalities and that too we fully agree
with, as well as the transitional measures that are put in place. And,
although not directly associated with the others, there is also the
resolution of the KwaZulu-Natal-Eastern Cape boundary. That we agree with
in principle – it needs to be done – but we do not agree with the way it is
being done with this Bill.
We believe that the process that characterises this Bill has been highly
problematic. The Minister’s proposal in respect of Umzimkhulu - that it be
excised from the Eastern Cape and be given to KwaZulu-Natal - is perfectly
logical because it’s an island in the middle of KwaZulu-Natal, and all
sides, in fact, agree on it and there were no submissions that we are aware
of that countered that.

However, the Bill further proposes to excise Matatiele from KwaZulu-Natal
and hand it over to the Eastern Cape. That is where we really have a
problem, because if this were a rational decision we would go along with
it, but in reality it is not a particularly rational decision and this is a
highly contested area too, in terms of submissions received from the local
community. Our problem is being compounded, really, because of the process
problems, partly alluded to by the previous speaker, since this has been on
the agenda for some three years.

Three years ago we were told that this was going to happen and yet for
three years we didn’t get a Bill. Every single year since then we have
raised this matter in the Budget debate, and we asked the Minister: “Where
is this Bill? When is it coming? Is it going to be addressed before the
next elections? Why are we having it later rather than sooner?”

And every year we are told that it is coming, it’s coming. And what has
actually happened has come right at the end of a process now, and it has
rendered the process so truncated that, in fact, it has limited the
possibility of consultation with the affected communities. That’s what is
really the problem; it is a problem of principle.

Local communities have not decided and have not had a meaningful input into
this Bill. What’s happened is that – as was explained by the chair of the
committee - because of the constitutional provision that the two provinces
concerned have to give their consent, effectively there has been an
executive deal between the provinces concerned – at a smoke-filled, back-
room level – with the local communities that are affected by it having no
say in this whatsoever. That is really what we are objecting to.

There were some amendments made during the committee stage - very, very few
- but the principle must be that consultation is not an add-on;
consultation is a fundamental issue. Regarding this Bill, there has been
inadequate consultation, and so we cannot, for that reason, give our
support to it. Thank you very much.

Mr J BICI: Deputy Speaker, the amendment of the Constitution is something
that we should never take lightly. The particular subject of this Bill
touches upon a highly sensitive matter for local municipalities. In fact,
it is so sensitive that people have protested violently. Therefore this
Bill should have been the subject of thorough and wide consultation.

It is our opinion that high standards of consultation have not been
applied. Some metropolitan and district municipalities are affected.
Literally millions of people would certainly like to comment on a matter
that directly affects them.

Without even considering the marriage of the proposed boundary changes that
the Bill seeks, we can declare that the drafting process is fatally flawed
and needs to be started de novo. Incidentally, we do not support the Bill.
Thank you.

Mr A HARDING: Madam Deputy Speaker, when the political parties and social
stakeholders of this country met to formulate a democratic constitution,
two of the points that won unanimous approval was that the Constitution had
to incorporate the concept of transparency and consultation.

Now, we all remember the chaos that resulted from the Bushbuckridge matter.
The government did not consult those people who were affected then, and it
is not consulting them now. The ID is not necessarily opposed to the
scrapping of senseless political mechanisms, but today we have heard over
and over about the wide-ranging effects that this amendment will have.

It is therefore only proper and right that these amendments are treated
with the necessary and vital importance that is needed in terms of
transparency and consultation, and as a result we do not support it. Thank
you.

Mr S N SWART: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP appreciates the problems experienced
in administering cross-boundary municipalities, and shares the view that
CBMs have become unworkable. However, we share the views and belief that
there’s been undue haste and very tight timeframes in tabling these
amendments, and that insufficient consultation has taken place with
affected communities.

Whilst the ACDP does not condone unlawful actions we can understand the
frustrations that have been expressed. The main concerns relate to the
critical issue of service delivery to the poor, as was pointed out by the
chairperson of the justice portfolio committee.

It is significant, for example, that the Eastern Cape receives the largest
provincial allocation, yet service delivery in that province remains
appalling. The Municipal Demarcation Board was accused, in the submissions,
of not embarking on an extensive consultative and participatory process in
order to investigate and make recommendations that would strengthen local
government and ensure affordable and sustainable service delivery. It is no
wonder that the residents of Matatiele have demonstrated against their
inclusion in the Eastern Cape.

It is significant that provincial legislatures have a veto over these
matters. Whilst an agreement was achieved regarding Westonaria remaining in
Gauteng, considerable dissatisfaction and civil unrest have accompanied the
relocation of the West Rand township of Khutsong into the North West
province. Residents are opposed to the relocation, again citing poor
service delivery and poor levels of education in the North West province as
reasons for their opposition.

It is clear that the political hotspots are being settled at a high
political level without, in our view, proper consideration of the express
wishes and concerns of the citizens involved. For the above reasons, whilst
we support the broad ambit of this Bill, we cannot support it. I thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Adjunkspeaker, alhoewel ons hier besig is met die
12de wysiging van die Grondwet van 1996, moet ons nooit in dié Huis vergeet
nie dat die 1996-Grondwet eintlik voortgespruit het uit die 1993-grondwet,
wat bereik is deur ooreenkomste en sekere grondwetlike beginsels wat
daargestel is.

Daarom moet ons ook vir mekaar sê die grense van provinsies is nie net uit
die lug gegryp nie. So is die grense van die Noord-Kaapprovinsie deur
onderhandeling gevestig om dit ‘n oorwegend Afrikaanssprekende provinsie te
stel. Hier kom ons met ‘n wysiging, en ek dink dié is ‘n tipiese voorbeeld
waar die ANC sy meerderheid van 73% in hierdie Huis wil gebruik om die
Grondwet te wysig om hulle te pas sonder dat daar behoorlike konsultasie of
‘n behoorlike proses was.

Ons kan nie toelaat dat ‘n Grondwet net na willekeur, wanneer dit die
behoefte is van die regerende party wat ‘n oorweldigende meerderheid het,
verander word nie. Ons moet behoorlik oorleg pleeg, en ons moet die
beginsels respekteer, en daarom sal die VF Plus nie die wysiging ondersteun
nie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Deputy Speaker, although we are dealing here with
the 12th amendment to the Constitution of 1996, we should never forget in
this House that the 1996 Constitution actually arose from the 1993
Constitution, which was achieved by agreements and the establishing of
certain constitutional principles.

Therefore we also have to say to one another that the boundaries of the
provinces were not merely sucked out of someone's thumb. In this way the
Northern Cape province was established through negotiations to set up a
predominantly Afrikaans-speaking province. Here we have an amendment, and I
think that this is a typical example of the ANC wishing to use its majority
of 73% in the House to amend the Constitution to suit them without there
being proper consultation or a proper process.

We cannot allow a Constitution simply to be amended when it suits the
ruling party which has an overwhelming majority. We have to consult
properly, and we have to respect the principles, and therefore the FF Plus
will not support this amendment.]

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Madam Deputy Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers and
Deputy Ministers and hon members of Parliament, I feel honoured to get an
opportunity to participate in this debate on the Constitution Twelfth
Amendment Bill. The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Constitution of
the Republic of South Africa, 1996, so as to effect a technical change to
redetermine the geographical areas of the nine provinces of the Republic of
South Africa and to provide for matters connected therewith, as stated in
the preamble to the Bill.

The Bill aims to redetermine the geographical areas of the provinces so as
to ensure that each municipality is placed under one province. The
principles and objectives of the Bill show that what is sought here is to
abolish cross-boundary municipalities and thereby close the chapter on this
type of municipality.

Since the majority of people who reside within cross-boundary
municipalities and who are largely affected by the redetermination process
speak several African languages as first languages, and not English or
Afrikaans, some parts of my speech will be in isiNdebele, Sepedi, isiZulu
but also English and Afrikaans.

When this Bill becomes law, there will not be even a single municipality
that will straddle a provincial boundary. Areas currently demarcated as
cross-boundary municipalities will remain integrated units but will fall
within one province.

Ukuphosela lami lobubodlhana ekulumenipikiswano le ngithanda ukuhlathulula
ngokunabileko ngenarha kamasipala oqaba umkhawulo wangemitsweding
onabomasipala ababili inukeng tsa diamani [the rivers of diamond]
neKungwini [the place of mist] endzindze nge Bronghonghoro
eBronkhorstspruit kwamarhinini iKungwini le ifaka inarha yangeKangala
koNobhalarhana. (Translation of Ndebele paragraph follows.)

[In contributing to this debate, I would like to reflect  in  depth  on  the
Cross-boundary Metsweding District Municipality that  consists  of  the  two
local municipalities of Nokeng Tsa  Taemane,  the  rivers  of  diamond,  and
Kungwini, the place of mist/fog,  that  are  situated  in  Bronkhorstspruit.
Kungwini includes Ekangala.]

Ekangala was established as a township in 1983 by the then East Rand
administration board. It was established as a residential area for the
people of KwaThema–Springs, Thembisa–Kempton Park, Wattville–Benoni,
Etwatwa–Daveyton, and later Mamelodi in Pretoria and Witbank. Influx to
Ekangala was strictly controlled through the then section 10 of the Black
Administration Act, Act 38 of 1927.

This legislation excluded people who were not qualified to reside in the
then urban areas, that is people from rural areas such as farms and
homelands. People were told that Ekangala was going to be a second Soweto
under the East Rand, and that the reason why it was built next to
Bronkhortspruit was that there was no longer any building space available
on the East Rand and that Ekangala would not be part of KwaNdebele.

In 1985 the then KwaNdebele homeland government opted for independence,
which it didn’t obtain. In terms of the consolidation of the homelands,
Ekangala was incorporated into KwaNdebele homeland by the previous
government without the consent and against the wishes of the residents of
Ekangala.

Abahlali bangeKangala baveza amazizo wabo wokungakhambisani nokobana  inarha
yeKangala  ifakwe   ngaphasi   kwesabelo   sakwaNdebele   ngekani.   kodwana
ukubhenyoga lokho kwaphadlwa begodu  kwapheliswa  mbuso  wesabelo  urhelejwa
mbuso  owagadungako   wekhethululo.   Umuntu   omutjha   uKenneth   Letlatla
wadunyuzwa wahlongakala lokha  isipholisa  nasiphadlhalaja  umbenyogo  loyo,
wokwala bonyana ikangala  ifakwe  ngaphasi  kwenarha  yakwaNdebele.  Igatjha
lika ANC ewodini ekhabe ihlala kiyo  ihloko  le  ithiyelelwe  ngezinyo  layo
ngokuvumelana nabazali  begodu  nomndeni  wakhe.  Abanye  abahlali  babaleka
bayisukela iKangala bayohlala eRethabiseng neSpruitview nge East Rand  lapho
kabe babuyakhona abanye bahlala begodu kwabagadesi. (Translation of  Ndebele
paragraph follows.)

[Ekangala residents voiced their objection to the incorporation of  Ekangala
into the kwaNdebele government, but the objection was violently  crushed  by
the homeland government assisted by  the  apartheid  regime.  A  young  man,
Kenneth Letlatla, was shot and killed by  the  police  in  a  protest  march
against the incorporation of Ekangala  into  the  kwaNdebele  government.  A
branch of the ANC in the ward where he resided during his lifetime has  been
named after him with the approval of his parents  and  family.  Some  people
fled the area, to reside at Rethabiseng and  Spruitview  on  the  East  Rand
from where they came. Others remained until today.]

Cross-boundary municipalities were established to ensure viable, integrated
and effective local government without shifting the existing provincial
boundaries. These arrangements caused problems instead of solutions. The
typical challenges that were experienced by other cross-boundary
municipalities were also experienced by Metsweding, especially Kungwini
which includes Ekangala.

Examples of this are that laws of more than one province need to be
administered by the Kungwini cross-boundary municipality; the municipality
needs both provinces to approve its integrated development planning; a
shortage of water in Ekangala, the Mpumalanga part of Kungwini, whilst
water has always been available in Rethabiseng and Zithobeni, the Gauteng
part of the municipality; the Kungwini municipality owns land in the
Gauteng portion but in the Mpumalanga portion the land is still owned by
the province, and in the latter portion, the municipality cannot allocate
land for houses, churches and business.

Isiqunto sokuphelisa abomasipala abaqaba  imikhawulo  namkha  inida  yemfuda
samukelwa  miphakathi  eminengi   ethintekako   khabe   kunethabo   elikhulu
esitjhabeni seKangala naseMetsweding lokha ibhodi yokutlama  imida  nayiveza
isiphakamiso  sokobana  iMetsweding   yoke   ifakwe   ngaphasi   kweGauteng.
Umphakathi  wangeMetsweding  abanye  babo  bakhona  la   ku-Public   Gallery
namhlanje wathaba  wathatha  godu  ithuba  lokwenza  imphakamiso.  Umrhatjho
womphakathi  wangeKangala  iKCRS  wazinikela   begodu   warhatjha   amahlelo
wokobana abalaleli badose imirhala ngomqopho  wokukhuthaza  ikulumopikiswano
malungana nemphakamiso hlangana nenkhulumi uDorhodera Vuyo Molokodi  weBhodi
etlama imikhawulo watjhumegwa imibuzo ngokunabileko  malungana  nabomasipala
abaqaba imikhawulo begodu  nangerherho  elilandelwako  nentlabagelo  zakhona
nakufakwa iimphakamiso nehlangano erhatjha ngomoya eSewula  ne  Afrika  yaba
namahlelo ngendaba le. (Translation of Ndebele paragraph follows.)

[The decision to discard cross-boundary municipalities was welcomed  by  the
majority of the affected communities. There  was  sporadic  jubilation  from
the Ekangala community and the majority of the  members  of  the  Metsweding
community on the Demarcation Board’s proposal  that  the  entire  Metsweding
district be incorporated into Gauteng. The  Metsweding  community  took  and
fully made  use  of  the  opportunity  to  make  submissions.  The  Ekangala
Community Radio Services (KCRS)  volunteered  and  conducted  some  phone-in
programmes to stimulate debate on the proposals. Dr Vuyo Mlokothi  from  the
Demarcation Board, among  others,  was  interviewed  extensively  on  cross-
boundary  municipalities  and  the  procedure  and  requirements  in  making
submissions. The SABC also broadcast programmes on this topic.]

Some residents’ concerns are based on fear of the unknown. These concerns
include, among others, the following issues. People refer to provincial
boundaries as borders. They fear that they may be restricted to working,
residing, buying, etc only in the province in which they reside. The
realignment concerns provincial boundaries, not borders that separate one
country from another. People will not be required to produce passports to
move from one province to another.

People should not fear that, if they are in a particular province, their
cultural rights will not be protected when they are in another province.
For instance, people who speak isiNdebele and still observe their customs
should not think that they need to be in the Mpumalanga province to speak
isiNdebele or send their sons to initiation schools.

This process will not take away people’s rights to speak their languages
and practise their culture. People feel strongly about ethnicity, while
those feelings are based on misinformation. Ethnicity should not be a
determining factor. People should pay allegiance to the Constitution and
state institutions that protect constitutional democracy, for example the
Human Rights Commission, Public Protector and so forth.

Human rights are protected at national level by the Constitution and not by
provincial laws. In South Africa, we no longer have homelands that were
established on an ethnic basis. Also, people should not fear that they will
lose their jobs if their area changes from one province to another. Because
my chairperson dealt with this issue regarding the continuation of rights,
I will not deal with it.

Ten slotte wil ek graag uit die Bergprediking in Die Bybel aanhaal. Dit
handel oor die sout van die aarde en die lig van die wêreld. Nadat Jesus
aan die skare gesê het dat hulle die sout vir die aarde is, gaan hy voort
en sê:

Maar as sout verslaan het, hoe kry ’n mens dit weer sout? Dit is niks meer
werd nie. Dit word buitekant weggegooi, en die mense vertrap dit.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[In conclusion, I would like to quote from the Bible, the Sermon on the
Mount, which deals with the salt of the earth and the light of the world.
After telling the crowd that they were the salt of the earth, Jesus went on
to say:

   But if the salt loses its saltiness, how can it be made salty again? It
   is no longer good for anything, except to be thrown out and trampled by
   men.]


Bjale ge letswai le tapa, le sa tlo nokwa ka eng?  Ga le sa hola selo ge e
se go lahlwa la gatwa ke batho. [When the salt loses its taste, what will
it be seasoned with? It is worthless and deserves to be thrown away and be
stepped on by people.]

Ek wil sê die konsep van oorgrensmunisipaliteite het net soos sout
verslaan. Dit word deur die Wetsontwerp op die Herroeping van Wette
Betreffende Oorgrensmunisipaliteite gehanteer. Dit is niks meer werd nie.
Dit moet in die argief gebêre word vir die akademici en ons nageslag sodat
hulle net kan weet daar was eens op ’n tyd oorgrensmunisipaliteite.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I want to state that the concept of cross-boundary municipalities has lost
its effectiveness just as the salt has lost its saltiness. It is covered by
the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill. It is of no use. It has
to be archived for academics and posterity so that they will be aware that
there once were cross-boundary municipalities.]

Uma sesiwuphasisile lo Mthethosivivinywa, sizokuba nezifunda
eziyisishiyagalolunye. Ngeke kube khona ngisho nowodwa uhulumeni wasekhaya
ozovundla phezu komngcele wesifunda. Ngakho-ke thina, singuKhongolose,
siyawusekela lo Mthethosivivinywa. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
Zulu paragraph follows.)

[After passing this Bill, we are going to have nine provinces. There will
be no local municipality that will straddle the boundaries of provinces.
Therefore, the ANC supports this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Madam Deputy Speaker, siwu-Nadeco sithi: a Constitution,
uMgaqosiseko, uMthethesisekelo [as Nadeco we say: a Constitution] is a
guide and determinant of what is possible. It should ensure stability and
not affect self-determination or co-existence.

Singu-Nadeco sithi [As Nadeco we say]: The people want a neat service
delivery, efficiency and stability. Amending the Constitution does not
always ensure stability, progress and smooth running of things. The
amendment of the Constitution should not unsettle and should not bring
uncertainties. It needs to be smooth and be done timeously so that it does
not destabilise, and it does not need to be rushed. It should enhance
social cohesion and peace.

Having stated our concern as Nadeco, we want to concede and say we accept
the amendments, even though they are a bit late. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Deputy Speaker and hon members, it is unfortunate that a
Bill like this and the other one that goes with it have to be considered at
the last moment and, above all, in turmoil, as is the case on the West
Rand, because government, through the Presidential Co-ordinating Council,
identified the need for doing away with cross-boundary municipalities in
February 2002, and approved that in November the same year.

We in the UCDP call on the government to heed Mr Micawber’s advice and
never do tomorrow what you can do today, because justice delayed is as good
as justice denied. The UCDP supports the new alphabetical listing to
accommodate Limpopo province. Even this could have been done with the name
change of the province.

While we are not hard-put to accede to the reconfiguration of the
provincial boundaries, we accept that, regarding the unrest of Khutsong, we
are bound by the decisions of most of our members who have voluntarily
agreed to be incorporated into the Northern Cape and Gauteng provinces.
Failure to support the amendment would be a slap in their face as they did
this kwa ntle ga tshollo yamadi [without bloodshed]. The UCDP will support
this Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Deputy Speaker, the PAC supports the Constitution Twelfth
Amendment Bill. It is a logical, well-considered and long-overdue
amendment. It’s purpose is to effect technical changes, to redetermine the
geographical areas of the nine provinces of the country and, of course, to
provide for matters connected therewith. The boundaries are now, according
to the Bill, those which existed when this Constitution came into effect.

The memorandum on the objects of the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill
gives a clear and comprehensive explanation of why this amendment to the
Constitution is necessary. The PAC hopes that this unitary state will not
have any more boundary disputes which are characteristic of a federal
state. The historical background must always, however, be considered when
drawing boundaries. Colonial boundaries which separate people who speak one
language must be avoided. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, when the boundaries of provinces were
drawn in 1993, many problems emerged with the cross-boundary
municipalities. This Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill is introduced to
give effect to the Presidential Co-ordinating Council resolution of 2002 to
scrap cross-boundary municipalities by ensuring that the provincial
boundaries fall within one or another province.

While some of us may see the benefit of this, there appears to be some
dissatisfaction expressed on the matter, especially by those communities
caught in the cross-boundary areas. For whatever reason, these people have
expressed a preference to belong to the areas to which they have always
been known to belong. The MF understands their plight and wonders why their
preference is not prioritised. We believe a vote should be taken regarding
these areas to which the majority should receive preference – we are a
democracy, after all.

The MF thus acknowledges that, if we carry out these plans, great
improvement would be attained in terms of delivery by municipalities,
especially in these cross-boundary areas. Many do not like change but this
change could prove to be very beneficial regarding upliftment of
communities and fulfilment of their needs by the new municipalities.

In light of that, the MF calls for communities to be open to this. At the
end of the day, we all still belong to a beautiful South Africa. No matter
where we are within these boundaries, your government is serving you in the
best interest, always. The MF supports the Constitution Twelfth Amendment
Bill. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, Azapo supports this Bill.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] Since its inception, Azapo has never supported
the idea of balkanising our country, because in Azapo’s terms to do so is
to weaken the unity of our people as well as the extent to which central
government can exercise its power. It is for this reason that Azapo has,
time and again, called for the abolition of provincial governments, as
presently constituted, and for them to be replaced with administrators who
can serve our people better.

Problems that emanated from cross-boundary municipalities as well as the
simmering discontent from residents whenever they are required to belong to
this or that province have reaffirmed our standpoint that the provinces
should be scrapped. To Azapo, a lot of resources could be saved if
provinces were abolished and many of the trained and tested cadres were
deployed for service delivery.

When all is said and done, and with all the arguments presented here today,
this just convinces Azapo that, at some stage, we will have to decide
whether we still want these provinces. Thank you. [Interjections.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Deputy Speaker, this amendment exposes the danger of a
ruling party that has a two-thirds majority. [Interjections.] It allows the
governing party to recklessly abuse its numbers with no regard to the views
of others.

I say this because of the blatant disregard of the negotiation process that
took place prior to the 1994 elections. The principles that were decided on
during these negotiations were responsible for the peaceful transition of
our country. Government, through this amendment, is compromising the
principal achievements reached through due consideration of all people, and
not just one party.

The United Party of South Africa is of the opinion that this amendment’s
sole purpose is to strengthen the ANC’s grip on the Northern Cape and other
provinces. It has not given proper consideration to the effect this will
have on a province like the Northern Cape that is already struggling
regarding service delivery capacity. This is the result of insufficient
consultation with all role-players and more so the people directly affected
by this amendment. The United Party of South Africa, therefore, cannot
support this amendment. I thank you. [Interjections.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA cannot support this
constitutional amendment Bill. In principle the DA supports the need to do
away with municipalities that straddle provincial boundaries if dealing
with two provinces creates co-ordination problems, which could hamper
service delivery in the municipality, but not in this dictatorial, slap-
dash, ill-prepared way.

The ANC Head of the Presidency intoned last week that any formula that
comes out of cross-boundary proposals should be a process, which takes into
consideration the views of the people. Hello, Mr Ngonyama! Where has
Minister Mufamadi been? Why have we taken three years to get to this point,
where no proper consultation has taken place? Again the administrative
incompetence of this government has been exposed for all to see.

The DA believes that the only way to resolve the crises in Merafong Local
Municipality is for Minister Mufamadi to hold a referendum among the people
who live there, either before or after the elections. The DA believes that
neither political parties nor government should decide which province cross-
boundary municipalities should fall into. The people whose everyday lives
are affected must be consulted and allowed to decide for themselves. A
referendum need not stall the elections because the boundaries of the
municipality itself will not change; it will either go to one province or
another. The resolution of cross-boundary municipalities should therefore
not be an excuse by the government to postpone the elections.

By contrast, the DA has consulted with our structures and we would like to
place on record the following further specific objections. We object to the
incorporation of Kgalagadi District Municipality of the North West province
into the Northern Cape for the following reasons: This municipality comes
with up to 450 000 Setswana-speaking people to a geographically large
province with less than a million inhabitants. In other words, it increases
the population by 50%.

The Northern Cape is one of our poorest provinces with very little economic
growth and development, and this will place a tremendous burden on existing
resources. There appears to be no impact study that has been conducted and
there is nothing to indicate that the province will derive any benefit from
this addition.

We also object to the incorporation of Matatiele Municipality into the
Eastern Cape for the following reasons: There has been a betrayal of a
process of pubic consultation, as the wishes of the local inhabitants have
not been taken into account. This municipality has historic links with KZN
due to proximity, economic ties and ease of administration. We suspect that
the political motives of the ANC government have been involved in a trade-
off in this particular case. Therefore we cannot support this Bill.
[Applause.]

Ms N M MAHLAWE: Sethosi sa Seboleledi sa Palamente ...[Deputy Speaker and
hon members ...]

... malungu abekekileyo, ndiyafuna kwasekuqaleni okokuba ndivumelane
noSekela-Mphathiswa weSebe lezoBulungisa, uMnu De Lange, xa esithi
kuyafuneka ukuba kukhe kwenziwe uphando olululo ngalo mcimbi, ngakumbi
ngokubhekisele kwezi ndawo zichaphazelekayo zaseMpuma Koloni  naKwaZulu-
Natala. Imbali yezaa ndawo iyazidibanisa eza ndawo zonke, ukusuka
eMzimkhulu, ukuya kuQumbu, ukuya kuma ngeMatatiyela.

Laa ndawo yayisakubizwa ngokuba yi-“No man’s land” ngenxa yokuba
yayingaweli phantsi kwaphondo eliza kuyiphatha. Kodwa ke kwathi emveni
kokufika kuka Adam Kok, zadityaniswa eza ndawo zenza le nto eyaziwa njenge-
East Griqualand.

Yiyo le nto ke kufuneka okokuba kubekho umntu oza kuhlala phantsi enze
uphando olululo ngeza ndawo; hayi ngoku ke, njengoko uMphathiswa naye
etshilo, koko ngokuhamba kwexesha ukwenzela ukuba singamane sisiza apha
ukuza kuguqula uMgaqo-siseko.

Ndiyafuna ukuba ndihlomle nangalo mba ubekwe ngamalungu athile, wokuba
akukhange kubekho kubonisana. Abantu abazifundayo iincwadi nabenza uphando
baya kufumanisa ukuba ngonyaka-mali ka-1996-97 sasineKomishoni kaTrengrove
eyayizama ukuqwalasela umba wokuba ezi ndawo kufuneka zibe phantsi kwaliphi
na iphondo. Into eyabangela ukuba ezi nzame zingaphumeleli kukuba ngelo
xesha kwakuphethe omnye umbutho e-KZN, ngoko ke iMpuma Koloni zange ikwazi
ukuba idibane. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

...I want to, from the onset, say that I agree with the Deputy Minister for
Justice and Constitutional Development, Mr De Lange, when he says that
there needs to be an inquiry into this matter, paying particular attention
to the KwaZulu-Natal and Eastern Cape provinces. History tells us that the
areas such as Mzimkhulu, Qumbu, Matatiele and others should be under one
governance.

That area used to be referred to as “No man’s land” because it was not
governed by the province whose jurisdiction it was under. After Adam Kok’s
arrival, those areas were combined and became known as East Griqualand.

It is for that reason that a proper research has to be conducted in those
areas. Not now, of course, as the Minister has also said, but at some point
in time in order that we should not need to have to make amendments to our
Constitution.

I would like to respond to some members’ wrong claim that we did not
consult with the communities. People who read and those who conduct their
own research will find that during the 1996-97 financial year there was the
Trengrove Commission of Inquiry into the finalisation of boundaries between
the provinces of KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape. This action was not
successful because KwaZulu-Natal was under the control of a different party
at that time, therefore, the Eastern Cape remained in KwaZulu-Natal.]

Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, the objectives of the Constitution
Twelfth Amendment Bill and the background to the Bill have been adequately
addressed by the Deputy Minister and the Chairperson of the Portfolio
Committee on Justice. I will just concentrate on the affected areas in my
area of deployment, that is, in the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.

Hamba uye kwisichazi-magama ukuba awuyazi intsingiselo yelo gama. [Consult
a dictionary if you do not know the meaning of that word.]

Umzimkhulu is presently in the Eastern Cape. It is an island between the
towns of iXopo and Kokstad, which are in KZN. The boundary is distinct,
even on the N2 between Kokstad and Durban. [Interjections.]

Ewe ndiyayazi ukuba yiXopo. [I know that it is iXopo.]

You travel for 10 km from Kokstad in KwaZulu-Natal and after 10km you come
to the Eastern Cape on the same road, on the N2. On numerous occasions,
people have suffered when there were accidents in the area, because it had
to be determined, before the people were taken to hospital, whether they
had to be taken to Rietvlei in the Eastern Cape or to Kokstad hospital in
Kwazulu-Natal. The new proposal, therefore, to integrate Umzimkhulu with
KwaZulu-Natal will go a long way to change the lives of the communities of
Umzimkhulu.

The change will facilitate provision of services to communities in an
equitable and sustainable manner, as well as integrating social and
economic development, as the Deputy Minister has indicated. It’s not that
the Eastern Cape did not, or could not do that, but that there have been
practical realities in the affected areas.

This resulted in unhappiness and disgruntlement in some areas, not in all
areas, because the Eastern Cape has made some delivery in those areas.
Perhaps I can just mention a few of the constraints that were there.

Firstly, it takes six to seven hours to drive to Bisho from Umzimkhulu. A
lot of time is wasted on the road by all parties, not only the people of
Umzimkhulu but also the people from Bisho. There are also costs involved,
because if you have to go there you have to stay in Bisho and then pay for
the hotels. On the other hand, it takes one to two hours to drive to
Pietermaritzburg, KwaZulu-Natal headquarters, and far-flung areas that are
further in the north, only take 30 minutes to drive to Pietermaritzburg.

Secondly, the Department of Justice has already taken the lead in
addressing the travelling problem by passing a resolution to transfer the
High Court from Umtata to Pietermaritzburg for the area of Umzimkhulu as
well as Matatiele.

The situation in Matatiele is similar to that in Umzimkhulu in terms of
travelling to Bisho and proximity to business centres in Durban and
Pietermaritzburg, but the legacy of apartheid has left a very skewed
situation there. The rural areas of Matatiele have been excluded from the
town since 1976, and a small administrative centre was set up at Maluti.

However, the proposals of the Demarcation Board to integrate Maluti and the
town of Matatiele to form one municipality has been welcomed and there is
no contention in that area, the only contention being the incorporation of
Matatiele into the Eastern Cape.

In conclusion Madam Deputy Speaker, we need to learn lessons from this
process, that is . . .

 . . . amalungu ePalamente, kuqukwa namalungu eqela eliphikisayo, nawo
abhatalwa yile Palamente nyanga nenyanga, kufuneka afundise abantu ukuze
baqonde ukuba le mida yimida yethutyana, ngoba kaloku uMzantsi Afrika
lilizwe elimanyeneyo. Ibalulekile ke ngoko into yokuba sibafundise abantu
bethu, singabatheli nqa xa besenza itoyi-toyi. Nathi sisilele ukudlala
indima eyethu yokubafundisa, including you, on my left hand side. [kuqukwa
nawe, kwesokunxele sam.] Enye into ebalulekileyo kukususa la ngqondo
ebantwini bethu ethi la maphondo yiyona nto esiza kuphila ngayo kwaye
kufuneka ahlulwe ngokobuhlanga.

Ngoku sifikelele kwixesha apho kufuneka sihambe siye kwi-Afrika yonke
iphelele, nakwilizwe ngokubanzi. Ngale ntsasa, abantu abazimamelayo iindaba
nabanomdla kwizinto ezenzeka eMzantsi afrika, simvile uMphathiswa
wezaBasebenzi, uTata uMdladlana, ethetha eJiniva ngenjongo yobukho bakhe
phaya.

Uyabona ke, ukuba siza kubayeka abantu becinga apha kwabo, ngokuthi: “Mna
ndingowaKwaZulu-Natala; mna ndingowaseMpuma; mna ndingowaseGauteng; mna
ndingowaseMntla Koloni.” Ezo zinto kufuneka sizihlenxisile. Loo nto iya
kwenzeka ngokuthi sibafundise ngalo lonke ixesha abantu bethu. Enkosi.
[Laphela ixesha.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[ . . . members of Parliament, including those of the opposition, whose
salary this Parliament pays each and every month, should educate people
about cross-boundary municipalities as that is one of their delegated
functions, namely that they are temporary as South Africa is a united
country. It is important for us to teach our people, and we should not be
surprised when they engage in protest action. We are at fault for not
having played our role in educating them, and that includes you on my left.
We should also erase from people’s mind the idea that the provinces should
be divided along racial lines.

We have to realise that we need to engage with the rest of Africa and the
rest of the world. This morning, the news reported about Minister
Mdladlana’s visit and presentation in Geneva.

It would not be proper for us to allow people to claim to belong to certain
provinces, say, KwaZulu-Natal, the Eastern Cape, Gauteng and the Northern
Cape. People will know about the effects of that only if we teach them.
Thank you. [Time expired.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy
Speaker, may I start by thanking everyone for their participation and by
assuring you that all these views will be taken into consideration and
looked at afresh to see if there is something that has to be changed. I
would also like to thank particularly those parties who have supported
these constitutional amendments.

It is very difficult to understand the attitude of those parties who have
not supported these amendments. It really defies all understanding. As I
stand here now, everything you have said amounts to nothing. You might not
vote for it, but no objective in this Bill stands challenged. No principle
in this Bill has been rejected by your not voting for it.

On the other hand, the changes are reasonable. In fact, some of you have
said in your speeches that you supported them, that they were in the public
interest and that they promoted the ideals of coherency, effective co-
ordination and rational administrative arrangement.

It creates legal certainty to remove the double legal systems that apply in
these cross-boundary municipalities, and, therefore, the only conclusion
one can arrive at is that either they do not understand what they are
doing, or they are guided by opportunistic self-interest and not by the
public good.

Let me, for example, respond to the hon Mr Joubert. He has said that we
fast-tracked the Bill. Sir, you should go and look at the Rules. There’s a
specific fast-tracking mechanism in the Rules that has not been used on
this occasion.

Secondly, you have said that timeframes have not been met. You must go and
read section 74 of the Constitution. We had to amend the Constitution to
create procedural protection for constitutional amendments. They are in
section 74. Every single one of them has been complied with, and in good
time.
Regarding the issue of consultation, consultation is not an end in itself.
It is obviously an important mechanism in any democratic country, but at
some stage during a consultation process, government has to go ahead and
govern. It has to do so rationally, and it has to do so weighing up all the
facts.

Now, to suggest that the consultation process started some time in August
this year is ridiculous. The consultation process on all boundaries is work
in progress. We are a new democracy. We started long before 1994 with these
processes. We experimented with cross-boundary municipalities, six years
later we found out that they did not work, and that they were problematic.

So, one takes all that knowledge, gained over a long period of time - all
the consultation that our majority party and government have had in all
these areas - and at some stage you say this is where we think we have to
go. We will be judged by history whether we did the wrong thing or not. So,
consultation is vital, but consultation is not an end in itself.

Then again, all of you seem to forget that we don’t draft the municipal
boundaries. They are drafted by an independent authority, namely the
Demarcation Board, in terms of the Constitution. They have also consulted
these communities many a time, and will come to the conclusions they will
come to.
We also had the astounding proposition from two members that the
constitutional principles still remained binding on us and that if these
constitutional principles were undermined, somehow the negotiation process
had gone up in flames.

I would like to remind members that the constitutional principles were part
of the interim Constitution, and the Constitutional Assembly was part of
the interim Constitution. The Constitutional Assembly had to draft a
constitution that complied with those principles. The interim Constitution
was then replaced by the final Constitution. In the final Constitution
there is no Constitutional Assembly and there are no constitutional
principles. The constitutional principles have not, either by implication
or expressly, been included in the present Constitution.

The only matter that we deal with that creates principles against which we
judge constitutional amendments is section 1 in the Constitution. If this
amendment is somehow inimical to any principle in section 1 of the
Constitution then you can say that we are undermining that principle, but
you can’t take something in the interim Constitution, which has long gone
in the past, and suggest that somehow a process exists here. Even if that
applied, I would reject any idea that we are undermining any principle in
the negotiating process.

Let me just say, once again, that this is not a simple issue. There are a
lot of emotions involved and a lot of political involvement, and so on, and
we are very serious in trying to make sure that we do this properly. But
not one of you mentioned it; some of you even said that we had a lot of
time to look at this thing.

The Constitution tells us we must have had an election by 6 March. What are
you proposing? Must we amend the Constitution and move that date on somehow
to allow you to go on with this process? [Interjections.] No, none of you
would say so. So, please, when you make suggestions make them as rational
beings and make them as people that are reasonable so that there are things
that we can listen to. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! The results of the division are as
follows:

   AYES - 266: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
   E; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Benjamin, J;
   Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B; Bloem, D V;
   Blose, H M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W;
   Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
   Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S
   C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T;
   Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlali, D M;
   Dodovu, T S; Du Toit, D C ; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs , J L;
   Gabela, L S; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A;
   Gillwald, C E ; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T;
   Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A;
   Hangana, N E; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P A C; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S
   P; Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P;
   Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kati, Z J; Kekana, C D;
   Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khumalo, M S;
   Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers,
   L T; Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T;
   Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N; Mabe, L; Mabena, D C; Mabuyakhulu,
   D V; Madella, A F; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M;
   Magau, K R; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L;
   Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M
   W; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D
   K; Manana, M N S; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D;
   Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T
   M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela,
   M J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbete, B; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlose, M
   M; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Mfundisi, IS; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S;
   Mkongi, B M; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B
   A; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O
   M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Molefe, C T;
   Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
   Morkel, C M; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G;
   Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M B; Mshudulu, S A;
   Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndou, R S;
   Ndzanga, R A; Nefolovhodwe, P J; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W
   S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V
   J; Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngwenya, M L; Ngwenya, W; Njikelana, S J;
   Njobe, M A A; Nkem-Abonta, E; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nonkonyana, M;
   Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S
   B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P
   M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Pahad, A G H; Pandor,
   G N M; Phadagi, M G; Phala, M J; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E;
   Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S ; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin,
   M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M;
   Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Schippers, J; Schoeman, E A;
   Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C C; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P;
   Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S ; Sigcau, S N; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N;
   Skhosana, W M; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith , V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G;
   Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V;
   Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I;
   Van der Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Schalkwyk, M C J; Van Wyk,
   A; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Woods, G G; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zita, L;
   Zulu, B Z.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: In terms of section 53(2)(b) of the Constitution, I, as
presiding officer, have a deliberative vote. I cast my vote in favour of
the question. [Applause.]

Question accordingly agreed to.

Bill read a second time.

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, won’t it be in order for the ANC to
thank the NNP for their six votes? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I can’t answer that for the ANC.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, you never told us how many members
voted No. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it is in order to mention that. The ayes were
266 and the noes 65, and there were no abstentions. Thank you for that
correction.

   NOES-65: Bhengu, M J; Bici, J; Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, C-S;
   Camerer, S M; Chang, E S; Coetzee, R; Cupido, H B ; Davidson, I O;
   Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S
   B; Gibson, D H M; Groenewald, P J; Harding, A; Jankielsohn, L; Joubert, L
   K; Kalyan, S V; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T D; Lowe, C M;
   Lucas, E J; Madikiza, G T; Mars, I; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Morgan , G
   R; Mpontshane, A M; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Ndlovu, V B; Nel, A H;
   Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Roopnarain, U; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H
   C; Seaton, S A; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau , Sylvia N;
   Simmons, S; Skosana, M B; Smith, P F; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Stephens, M;
   Steyn, A C; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van der
   Merwe, J H; Van der Walt, D; van Dyk, S M; Vezi, T E; Waters, M; Weber,
   H; Zulu, N E.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: I had a foot in
the door, and there is a member who saw me. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I beg your pardon!

Dr R RABINOWITZ: I had my foot in the door.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The foot?

Dr R RABINOWITZ: My foot in the door. And it was slammed in my face.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, hon Rabinowitz is raising a very
important point here. The point is that she only had her foot in the
Chamber when we needed the whole Rabinowitz in the Chamber. [Laughter.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Can I establish, Madam Deputy
Speaker? I almost misheard her. I thought she was saying she was suffering
from foot-and-mouth. [Laughter.]


                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL


                           (First Reading debate)

Mr N M NENE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President and hon members . .
. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mr N M NENE: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is this issue of the foot in the
door.

Let me start by saying that with regard to the Adjustments Appropriation
Bill we are about to debate, a list of errata has been distributed to
members to rectify certain errors that appear in the adjusted Estimates of
National Expenditure, 2005. I would imagine that the House would have no
problem in accepting that.

All it does is that it allocates the funds correctly, because in this red
book – the Estimates of National Expenditure, 2005 - it is not properly
captured, but in the Bill that we are about to debate it is properly
captured. Those funds are the ones that are in Programme 7 of Vote 5, where
the figure is written as R4,276 million. They have been split as they
appear in the Bill. Also, as regards the shifting of funds – and not finds
- in Programme 4, that is, Systems and Capacity-Building, it is written as
R26 million having been sent to Water Affairs. In actual fact, it is
R13 million to Water Affairs and R13 million from Foreign Affairs.

Section 30(2) of the Public Finance Management Act of 1999 outlines clearly
what national adjustments may provide for. These may range from, among
others, unforeseeable and unavoidable expenditure, emergency situations,
expenditure announced in the Budget Speech but not appropriated to the
Vote, to the shifting of funds between Votes and the roll-over of unspent
funds from the preceding financial year. It is therefore in accordance with
this legislation that we consider this Adjustments Appropriation Bill
today.

This process is further affirmation of the ANC government’s commitment to
clean and transparent governance. We will recall that when the Budget was
tabled in February 2005, in addition to appropriations of R415,3 billion in
the main Budget, provision was also made for a contingency reserve of R2
billion and other allocated funds of R0,5 billion.

Considering that we have approved roll-overs of R1,4 billion, additional
allocations for unforeseeable and unavoidable expenditure of R1,1 billion,
infrastructure investment of R1,1 billion and self-financing expenditure of
R0,7 billion, we end up with an expenditure revised downwards. This allows
government an opportunity to address the needs of the country from a much
more comfortable position. It all amounts to a government that is committed
to the contract that we signed with the people of fighting poverty and
creating work.

Each of these adjustments is clearly explained for members of this House in
their adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure I was referring to that
was tabled together with the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement.

I would want to believe that in their oversight task, members would have
read this document as it provides answers to some of the questions with
regard to expenditure that might not necessarily be explained in the normal
processes. I trust that having done so, members of this House will also
hold departments to account for these adjustments in relation to their
mandates of delivering services to the people of South Africa.

I do not want to bore this House with individual Votes, as there is a
process that will follow this one where wise questions will be asked, and
if silly questions are asked, there will be no need for answers.

The committee was satisfied with these adjustments and implores this House
to adopt them in the interest of the public. We are, however, of the view
that adjustments would be better dealt with by the Joint Budget Committee,
as they fit into its mandate and in terms of monitoring and expenditure. We
therefore submit that the process of allocating functions between the
Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Joint Budget Committee be addressed
as a matter of expediency. The ANC supports the Adjustments Appropriation
Bill. I thank you, Deputy Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Mr Chairman, the total estimated expenditure of government
tabled in the February Budget was R417,8 billion.

The Bill provides for an extra R4,2 billion to be allocated to the various
Votes, but as a result of a reduced debt cost of R1,3 billion, a R2, 5
billion reduction in the contingency reserve and projected savings and
underspending of R2,5 billion, there is a net decrease in the Appropriation
Bill of R2,1 billion, resulting in the overall budget being reduced from
R417,8 billion to R415,7 billion.

While the DA supports the Bill overall, as there is no further strain on
the fiscus, and therefore ultimately in the long-term, on the taxpayer,
serious questions and various comments are going to be raised on the
individual Votes when the House considers each of the Votes and the
Schedule.

Let me add that the DA is not happy with the process for the introduction
of the Adjustments Appropriation Bill. Adjustments are allowed in
circumstances set out in terms of section 30(2) of the Public Finance
Management Act. But the process does not allow either the Finance Committee
or the relevant individual portfolio committees to adequately interrogate
either the savings and underspending or indeed the adjustments and
reallocations proposed in this Bill.

Yes, of course, a document is tabled, but very often the descriptions there
are cryptic and what is needed is a thorough interrogation if we are going
to oversee our mandate correctly. We will be calling in the long-term in
the Portfolio Committee on Finance for a review of the process and, if need
be, an amendment to the Public Finance Management Act. Thank you.

Mr T E VEZI: Deputy Chairperson, the Adjustments Appropriation Bill
provides for various kinds of changes to spending plans detailed in section
30(2) of the Public Finance Management Act.

The IFP notes that the total adjustments from national departments amount
to R2,9 billion that adjustments are offset against contingency reserve,
unallocated amounts, declared savings and projected underspending, and that
adjustments resulted in a decrease in expenditure from R418 billion to R416
billion.

The IFP supports the Adjustments Appropriation Bill and hopes that its
concerns raised in various departments will be addressed. I thank you,
Deputy Chairperson.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP welcomes the fact that after projected
in-year savings, lower interest costs, the contingency reserve and other
unallocated amounts, total spending is anticipated to be R2,1 billion less
than the budget estimate, or R415,8 billion.

We support various recommendations of the National Treasury Committee, for
example the R311 million proposed to contribute water supplies in
municipalities affected by drought, R40,7 million for emergency
infrastructure repairs in the Western Cape, as well as R32 million going to
the Disaster Relief Fund.

Clearly, the R140 million proposed as a contribution to the World Food
Programme is without doubt necessary, as well as the R120 million going to
Agriculture for farmers affected by drought.

The supplementary amount of R200 million recommended for the Primary School
Nutrition Programme is of course very necessary and critical to support
children that have dietary deficiencies.

The ACDP will support this Bill. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the PAC supports this Adjustments
Appropriation Bill. When the Minister of Finance first tabled this Bill in
the House, he was delighted that our countrymen have answered the call to
submit their tax returns and that has brought positive spin-offs for the
country.

The PAC extends this call to all other people in the country and the
business community who may make a big contribution to the economic
development of the country to abide by the revenue laws.

The PAC further calls on the government of our country to be vigilant and
proactive to prevent misuse and maladministration of scarce state revenue.
The PAC supports the Bill. Thank you, Chairperson.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, in terms of the Adjustments Appropriation Bill,
the MF finds the adjustment made to the central government administration
reasonable. However, concern is expressed on the large decrease in capital
payment of Home Affairs, noting the need in the sector for improvement in
software and other physical assets.

All adjustments made to the financial and administrative services are found
to be appropriate and thus supported. However, concern is expressed when we
look at the social services as, in the light of the notable worry of
unemployment and the major decrease in Labour’s total Vote, transfers and
capital payments made are not understood.

Further noting the important need for infrastructure development, the
decrease in capital payment to education is a concern. We further
acknowledge a decrease in the funding of infrastructure and maintenance of
hospitals and are concerned about whether this does not indicate a
shortfall of delivery in this sector.

Adjustments made to Justice and protection services are supported and the
adjustment appropriation made the economic services and infrastructure
development appears to be in order. The MF hopes that all adjustments made
shall suffice to increase service delivery and the attainment of our goals
for this financial year.

The MF supports the Adjustments Appropriation Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, I think the point to make about this
particular adjustments estimate is that, as confirmed by a number of
speakers, it’s proof that the Public Finance Management Act is working,
though there are elements, hon Davidson, where my submission would be that
Parliament is not equal to the task.

We publish, on a monthly basis, actual expenditure reports that would allow
Parliament at any time to engage here with the trends of spending; what
savings are likely, what the spending and infrastructure are and whether
there is a risk of overexpenditure. This is done in the letter and spirit
of the Public Finance Management Act but, more importantly, in the context
of empowering Parliament.

The hon Nene spoke about the fact that we need to sort out the work between
the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Joint Budget Committee. I want
to support that because we have a capability to do so. We have the actual
information and some of it would be in the Joint Budget Committee
collectively, while some of it ought to be referred to particular portfolio
committees, but Parliament is not doing that.

What we have here is, in many respects, unprecedented. If one looks at what
happens in fiscal management around the world, for a country, firstly, to
have a single adjustments estimate within a fiscal year and, secondly, to
do what we are doing here to reduce the amount that we are spending from
R417,8 billion to R415,7 billion, is quite unprecedented.

Also, if we look at the amount allocated in this adjustments estimate for
unforeseen and unavoidable expenditure, it’s around R1 billion or 0,4% of
the total national expenditure of R225 billion – it’s a miniscule amount.
It must say to this House that the Public Finance Management Act is working
and that it needs to be supported.

If that is working, the very next stage that we must engage with is the
quality of spending. Here, I want to echo what the hon Rajbally said:
Spending on infrastructure is exceedingly important. If we fail at that, we
will fail in providing quality of life to people. It’s not a money problem,
it’s a quality problem. And I believe that the oversight role of this
Parliament is accentuated by what we have before us, a broadly supported
adjustments estimate. I trust that in the questions, line by line, we will
support the Adjustments Appropriation.
Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.


                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL


                    (Consideration of Votes and Schedule)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON(Mr K O BAPELA): The proceedings will initially take
the form of a question and answer session. I shall put each Vote in turn,
whereupon members will have the opportunity to put questions to the
relevant Ministers. Members must please press the request-to-speak button
if they wish to ask a question. Hon members should please wait until I
recognise them before putting their question.

Vote No 1 – Presidency – put and agreed to.

Vote No 2 – Parliament – put and agreed to.

Vote No 3 – Foreign Affairs – put and agreed to.

Vote No 4 – Home Affairs – put and agreed to.

Vote No 5 – Provincial and Local Government put:

Mr W P DOMAN: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Minister Mufumadi, under
programme 7 of the adjusted estimates it is reflected, as we have just
heard, that R1,26 million has been transferred to the Municipal Demarcation
Board to address the problem of cross-boundary municipalities.

Given that you have known since 2002 that cross-boundary municipalities
would be abolished, why did you not get your department to budget timeously
for this, and in so doing avert the present crisis in Khutsong, Matatiele
and other cross-boundary municipalities?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, the hon
member is conflating his own prejudices with a legitimate question. There
is no crisis anywhere in the country. There are people who have got
preferences in terms of where they want to go, which province they want to
belong to and they are entitled to express those preferences.

What we have done in the process of consultations, including with the
people of Khutsong, was to explain to them what mechanisms and processes
are available to them and it is the processes that were crafted by hon
members of this House, some of whom have conveniently forgotten that there
are such processes. All of a sudden they talk about referenda and other
such things, which are not provided for in the legislation.

So, you can imagine if there is such an overwhelming level of ignorance at
the level of your party in particular, then there is a need for the sort of
consultations that we have been undertaking. So, there have been intense
consultations with communities. It is just that your own party has been
conspicuous by its absence in the areas where such consultations were
taking place.

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, has the hon Minister implemented any measures to
address the poor levels of service delivery that came about due to the
appointment of incompetent public servants at provincial and local
government level?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I don’t why
know the hon member has such a proclivity for irrelevancy. What does this
has to do with issues under my Vote?

Mr H B CUPIDO: In view of the drastic skills shortage at local government
level, does the Medium-Term Budget adequately address the situation which
negatively impacts on service delivery and the lives of all South Africans?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, we are
discussing the adjusted estimates, not the MTEF. Please, shall we stick to
what is before the House?

Agreed to.

Vote No 6 – Public Works – put and agreed to.

Vote No 8 – National Treasury – put and agreed to.

Vote No 9 – Public Enterprises:

Prof E S CHANG: Chairperson and hon Minister, we are all deeply concerned
about Denel. Apart from it not finishing its annual report on time, does
the hon Minister think that Denel is a viable enterprise, especially in the
light of its funding crisis?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, yes, we do think that
Denel is a viable enterprise in terms of the comprehensive restructuring
proposals that we have put forward. Obviously, we are in a position at the
moment of considerable financial difficulty. We intend changing that and we
have had the assurance of the Treasury that they’ll support us under very
strict conditions. So, if we can satisfy the Treasury, I am sure we can
satisfy you.

Agreed to.

Vote No 10 – Public Service and Administration – put and agreed to.

Vote No 11 – Public Service Commission – put and agreed to.

Vote No 13 – Statistics South Africa – put and agreed to.

Vote No 14 – Arts and Culture – put and agreed to.

Vote No 15 – Education put:

Ms H ZILLE: Chairperson, the DA supports the R200 million increase in the
baseline allocation to feed children in schools. While millions are being
added to the feeding scheme, constant cutbacks on food are regularly
reported because of an alleged funding shortage.

We would like to ask the Minister what she is doing, apart from spending
over R1 billion on vehicles to monitor the scheme, to ensure that the
endemic corruption and mismanagement of the scheme comes to an end?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I would welcome the hon member
providing me with the exact figures that indicate that
R1 billion has been spent on vehicles. So, if she could provide me with
that information I would certainly investigate the matter and I would
return to the House and make a statement. I would welcome that information
with respect.

I think the hon member should be aware, and probably is, that the programme
agreed to with respect to the national school-feeding programme does not
provide for feeding of children in our schools for the entire number of
school days in a calendar year. Therefore, you often had the situation
where provinces have chosen particular periods in which they feed.

The additional allocation will allow particularly the poorest province, the
Eastern Cape, which feeds the largest number of poor schools, to continue
its feeding programme and not stop, as had been the likely prognosis had we
not received this support.

We also, with the R200 million, will be able to assist other schools. The
hon member also, being a member of the committee, will be fully aware
through reports we have provided to the committee, that we have improved
our monitoring processes with respect to the national school-feeding
programme and that a large number of schools now have projects and are
actually initiating their own additional feeding for children as well as
support to communities.

So, we will continue with the monitoring and evaluation and ensuring that
as many of our schools as possible have school gardens as part of the
infrastructure, water and sanitation process. All of this is of course part
of what we intend to do to ensure that our children are healthy and
learning in our schools.

I thank the hon member for the support for the rest of the programmes.

Agreed to.

Vote No 16 – Health - put:

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Chairperson, this Adjustments Appropriation is a
reflection of the utter chaos the Department of Health wallows in as it
once again received a qualified audit report reflecting zero control over
revenue received, lack of planning, unclaimed benefits and the renting of
unutilised buildings.

Despite the HIV/Aids pandemic killing 1 000 a day, R10 million was spent on
condoms that didn’t arrive. There was the return of R78 million from KZN,
reflecting the failure of the Hospital Revitalisation Programme because, of
course, Public Works doesn’t do its work. Tenders were mishandled and
unqualified staff simply forgot to purchase software programmes and
conditional grants were withheld from two negligent provinces, North West
and Mpumalanga, for failing to provide business plans.

Will the    Minister, at the very least, assure this House that as with
global business best practice there were substantial penalties relating to,
for example, the nondelivery of R10 million worth of condoms and inform us
that this delay will not push the crippling HIV infection rate in this
country still higher?

The DA has no option but to vote for this enormous unutilised amount of
R120 million, because the people need it, even if the Department of Health
is incapable of handling it.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, part of hon Barnard’s problem is that
she follows the kinds of stories that the hon Nqakula referred to earlier.
They are not based on fact at all. Here I have the document before me. The
issues that she is raising are not in the adjusted estimates.

In respect of the Hospital Revitalisation Programme, if the hon Barnard
bothered or had the capability to familiarise herself with the Division of
Revenue Act, she would know that an adjustment was effected in the way in
which the Act is structured with effect from this year. In the past some
provinces were doing better at Hospital Revitalisation than others. We
introduced a mechanism in the Act this year that allows for movement of
resources between one province and the next, depending on the speed of roll-
out of the revitalisation programme.

But I do not know why I’m going into the facts. She is not interested in
the facts. She’ll never allow the facts to get in the way of a good story.
She is a bad journalist and always has been. The facts won’t get in the way
of a good story and I don’t think any purpose can be served in trying to
convince her of what the published facts are.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, I wonder if the Minister could tell us what
the hold is of the cellphone industry, - Vodacom, MTN and Cell C - over the
Minister of Health that has resulted in her reneging on her responsibility
to regulate the industry as from November 2003. As a result, no labels are
placed on cellphones indicating the amount of radiation emitted.

Cellphone masts are being planted anywhere and everywhere at any height and
any level, close to schools and close to densely populated areas. Now, this
is a result of the cellphone industry putting in a complaint against the
way they were being regulated under the Hazardous Substances Act. Since
that time, the Minister has cancelled all licences and instead of
regulating the industry, offers advice according to the World Health
Organisation guidelines.

Well, has the Minister read that the WHO warns that children suffer brain
damage from overuse of cellphones and that there is no proof that
cellphones do cause damage or that they don’t? Are the interests of the
industry more important than the interests of the vulnerable public who are
becoming addicted to cellphones?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, I hope that the hon Rabinowitz has
not been subjected to too much cellphone radiation, because I think that
the question belongs under Vote 26, which is the Communications Vote.

Recently this Parliament approved the Telecommunications Convergence Act,
and in the Act, the positioning, including environmental impact assessments
of the placement of cellphone repeaters, etc, are all covered in the Act.

So, the industry is regulated by the Minister of Communications, nay, by
Icasa, as hon Smuts would insist we correctly record, but the Convergence
Act deals with all of these matters. So, may I suggest in humility that the
question is misplaced?

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, as the hon Minister is aware, new HIV infections
in South Africa continue to occur at an estimated 400 000 a year with more
than 1 000 people being infected every day. South Africa probably has more
people living with HIV than any other country, with estimates of up to
6,3 million. In addition, as many as 800 000 people now have Aids and
therefore require highly active antiretroviral treatment without which
nearly all will die within a few years.

Presently, only an estimated 130 000 people are said to be receiving ART.
This leaves over 600 000 people without treatment. Does this Adjustment
Budget provide for the necessary measures to address this shortfall?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, the 130 000 people on antiretroviral
treatment in a public facility is still the largest number in the world
today. There is nothing else that matches it, but I want the hon member to
understand that this is not the admission or the provision of aspirin and
paracetamol. These are antiretrovirals that require a sound health system,
including lab testing, counselling and a myriad of other elements. Now, if
you go back to the report released on provincial budgets a few months ago,
you will see the poor distribution of health professionals through the
provinces.

This is something you have to work at - if the professionals are not there
and you can’t have response times on lab testing facilities and you can’t
provide adequate counselling, to hope that you can spend your way out of
trouble because you have enriched pharmaceutical companies will not deal
with the problem.

Essentially, what we have to do . . . All of your numbers, with great
respect, are poppycock. Like the hon Barnard’s number of 1 000 deaths a day
is poppycock. Your numbers, hon member, are poppycock. What we need is a
situation that allows for a greater focus on education and therefore
prevention, because ARVs are not a cure, they merely extend the life of the
patient. But along with it, there are a series of other issues including
nutrition generally improved quality of life etc.

Now, stop focusing narrowly on what will enrich the pharmaceutical
companies and let’s hold hands together and decide how we will tackle this
scourge of HIV/Aids in society. [Applause.]

Agreed to.

Vote No 17 – Labour – put:

Mr C M LOWE: Chairperson, if one looks at Vote 17 one sees that R50 million
in savings has been made. Minister, I am looking at page 102 of the
booklet. It is not a lot of money but it is still R50 million.

Now, two areas where the department continues to fall down are the
Unemployment Insurance Fund and the Compensation Fund, specifically in
getting service to people and in getting moneys paid to people who need it.
Both departments have received qualified audit reports and both report
serious breakdowns in internal control accounting systems and one of them
has a forensic investigation under way. Both are of vital service to the
man and woman on the street.

Now, Minister, I see that the Minister of job losses and unemployment
creation is not here. I hope he hasn’t lost his job too. But perhaps you
could just ask why we can’t put more money towards providing better
services at the coalface and backing up the systems for those two
departments, because it seems continuously that there are problems in
getting service to people.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, regarding both the Unemployment
Insurance Fund and the Compensation Fund, the social insurance funds in the
Department of Labour are essentially self-financed. If you look at the
breakdown by programme of the department, the bulk of it is spent on
facilities like training, works and safety, inspectorates, etc.

The key issue in respect of both the Compensation Fund and the UIF is that
they are running huge surpluses at the moment. So, there are issues to be
resolved in respect of general administration. The hon member would have
been part of a decision led by the labour committee and now incorporated
into the Unemployment Insurance Fund Act, that has changed the benefit
structure and part of the result of this is that we are building up this
surplus in the UIF. So, it’s partly an administration problem and partly a
situation that arises from certain amendments to the Act.

In respect of the Compensation Fund, it is work in progress. I think that
the changes in the leadership of both these institutions, stand alone
agencies as they are, will see improvements in general administration. But
in respect of the Compensation Fund, I am sure that, arising from the
forensic investigation, certain matters will come to light.

But it is not possible for the department to take savings on one Vote and
construct an environment, which would allow for additional funding, because
it’s not the amount of money in either of those large funds; it’s the
ability to get them through and sometimes the ability or quality of
applications for funding in respect of the two funds.

Agreed to.

Vote No 18 – Social Development – put and agreed to.

Vote No 19 – Sports and Recreation South Africa – put and agreed to.

Vote No 20 – Correctional Services put:
Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, in a recent presentation to the portfolio
committee, the civil society Prison Reform Initiative urged the department
to increase the budgetary allocation to Programme 6 - Aftercare, or Social
Reintegration, as it is now to be known.

This is to ensure that greater numbers of appropriate offenders could be
considered for alternative sentencing. This in turn would help to reduce
prison overcrowding. Unfortunately the budget allocation for this programme
has been reduced in real terms over the past three years.

Now, this adjustment seeks to shift a further R28,35 million away from
aftercare to Programme 3 - Corrections. I wondered whether the Minister
would give us the assurance that the process of reintegration of offenders
and alternative sentencing will be properly resourced in the future.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I definitely will give
that kind of confirmation. One of the areas we are looking at is to make
sure that the judiciary and the magistracy do have options when some of
these offenders end up in front of them.

I have just appointed a new person in Corrections because that is the whole
element that I want to overhaul and make sure that reintegration, care and
aftercare really take the bulk of the budget of correctional services,
because we believe that the best way of dealing with overcrowding is by
having the magistrates and judiciary have confidence in what they would do
when they divert them to aftercare or when parolees are released on
probation.

So, I do want to confirm that I am in the process of doing exactly that.
Thank you very much.

Agreed to.

Vote No 21 – Defence – put and agreed to.

Vote No 23 – Justice and Constitutional Development - put:

Mrs S M CAMERER: I am not sure which Minister is going to answer. I was
intending to ask the Minister about the R50 million additional expenditure
for the National Prosecuting Authority, and particularly the R20 million
that was put aside for high-profile court cases. Perhaps the Minister can
tell us which high-profile cases are referred to and how the money was
spent.

However, I would also like to ask the Minister about an item that is not in
this additional appropriation which surely should be; namely, the amount of
approximately R170 million that is needed for the salary increases and car
allowances for magistrates that was gazetted by the President on 22 August
this year, and it’s now November and they have still not been paid.
Presumably, the Minister of Finance could help us out there.

Apparently, the Minister claims that there is no money. The question is,
why? And in the meantime the magistrates trusted the President of our
country and the Government Gazette and bought cars because of the
allowances that would have been given to them and now have been left high
and dry. As a result, the magistrates are protesting vehemently at their
unfair treatment at the hands of this government. If the money for this has
not been allocated in this appropriation, when will it be? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: In respect of the first part of the question on
high-profile court cases, I hope the hon Camerer is not on any list because
it might be a high-profile court case if she appeared. I don’t know which
these are, but there is a general allocation. I don’t think that we need to
be specific about that.

In respect of the salary increases for the magistrates, the hon Camerer
would be aware that magistrates are no longer just public servants but they
are judicial officers and they are covered therefore by the same commission
on remuneration of judicial officers and public office bearers.

Mrs S M CAMERER: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: For that reason the salary increase of the hon
Camerer is not in here as an adjustment estimate. Individuals or classes of
contributors or recipients of emoluments covered by the commission are a
direct charge against the National Revenue Fund. So, that is a direct
charge. It’s not on the department’s Vote. It’s a direct charge against
revenue and will be funded in that way when all of the matters are
clarified. [Interjections.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: The question is when? That was my question.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE:  Well, all of these issues are clarified. The hon
member is a member of Parliament and I presume she doesn’t play truant when
she should be in the Portfolio Committee on Justice. [Interjections.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: We are not dealing with that! [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: If she is not playing truant, then I imagine that
before she rises this year to go on holiday next week, this matter would
have been resolved. Thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: I certainly respect the
Minister of Finance for his being prepared to answer questions across the
portfolios, but it’s quite clear from his first answer to the hon Mrs
Camerer that he didn’t really know because he is not the Minister of
Justice. Can I ask a simple question: Where is the Minister of Justice or
the Deputy Minister? Why are they not here to answer the questions?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O BAPELA): Hon member, there are apologies that
were tendered and the Leader of Government Business has written a letter
that indicates the questions that the Minister of Finance would be
responsible for. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairperson, may I ask, should not the opposition parties
have been given copies of those letters to indicate to us why these
Ministers are not available? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr B O BAPELA): Well, that is an outside arrangement
that you could really make with the Speaker’s Office.

Mr M J ELLIS: I am not aware of any arrangement, Mr Chairperson. From the
opposition’s side there is no arrangement. The Ministers just aren’t here
this afternoon.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O BAPELA): All right, we will take that as
noted and whatever arrangements you want, we can pursue them.

Vote No 24 – Safety and Security – put:

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Thank you, Chair. With the increase in armed robberies
across the country and the critical shortages of crime prevention personnel
in some provinces, such as Gauteng with its almost 50% vacancy rate of
crime prevention personnel, how do you justify the savings in visible
policing and adjustment of funds from visible policing to administration
and protection services? Surely, Minister, the safety of the public is more
important than the safety of politicians. Could you perhaps explain this?
Thank you, Chair.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: How I wish these hon members would
listen when we provide answers to the questions that they pose. He thinks
that the only thing that the protection and security services do is to
protect VIPs. That is not true. We protect the national key points, which
include the various airports – just last week I was responding to questions
that relate to that.

In any event, what he does not understand here is the fact that we shift
funds in order for us to respond to certain requirements and if he looked
at that page he would have seen that we have been shifting money around,
including shifting money that relates to the upkeep of mortuaries in this
country. So I don’t understand what he is trying to say here.

The fact of the matter is that visible policing is an important programme
insofar as we are concerned. That is why, in terms of the current
allocation, we have received more than R13 billion, which is the biggest
allocation relevant to the work that the police do. This is designed to
ensure that we stop crime from happening. So, I do not understand what he
is referring to and the facts are indicated in the booklet that he has.
Thank you.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo, ngicela ukubuza mhlonishwa ngalesi sitatimende
esithi ukukhushulwa kwemali kuzosiza ukuthi kuqashwe amaphoyisa amaningi.
Kuzobuye kusize futhi ukuthi izinhlaka zokusebenza zamaphoyisa zikwazi
ukuthi zikhokhelwe njengalabo abiziwa ngama ‘reservists’ nabanye. Kunemali
eningi kabi esiyikhokhela izinkampani zokuvikela. Ngicela ukubuza ukuthi
kungasiza yini lapho ukuthi sibe nabethu onogada abazogada lezi zinto
ezifakwayo (installations) ezigadwa izinkampani zokuvikela, ukuze sikwazi
ukonga imali ingayi ezinkampinini zokuvikela kodwa ilekelele amaphoyisa
ekwenzeni umsebenzi? (Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, I would like to ask the hon Minister a
question concerning his statement that, “The budget increment will help to
recruit more police. It will also help to pay salaries in other police
structures like those who are called reservists.” Large amounts of money
are being paid to security companies. I would like to know whether it would
help to have our security guards protect installations that are protected
by security companies, so that we will be able to save money and help the
police do their work?]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, we will never, at any stage, say
that the money that we receive is adequate. But let me indicate that our
allocation is quite commendable and with the allocation that we got during
this financial year, we are going to be able to provide resources of both a
human nature as well as a material nature in order for us to do our work.

But it should also be understood that we have laws in this country that
have created space, among other things, for private security companies to
operate in South Africa. I don’t know, maybe the hon member is picking up
on the last interactions we had around the statement - because there was an
issue that was raised by the hon Ditshetelo. If hon members believe that we
should review that Act which accommodates private security companies in
this country they should say so. The fact of the matter is that we cannot
wish them away and we cannot define them out of existence.

Therefore, we have the police who do their work and other role-players,
including private security companies, who also do their work. In terms of
the broader work of the police, I believe that this allocation is quite
commendable, apart from the fact that there was another allocation that we
gave to members of the SAPS to ensure that we rationalise their salaries,
and we believe therefore that what we have would assist us to do our work.
Of course, we are working side by side with other role-players, including
private security companies.

Agreed to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr B O BAPELA): Thank you. The Minister for Justice
and Constitutional Development has just arrived and I shall use my
discretion to check if the hon member from the DA would still like to
pursue the question. If so, you can do so, and if not then we can proceed.
[Interjections.] All right, you do want to make a follow-up question?

Mrs S M CAMERER: Yes, thank you for accommodating me, Chair, and better
late than never Minister, but I have got a question under your Budget Vote
– the Additional Appropriation. Do you want to give her a moment, Chair?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O BAPELA): OK, I will give her a moment.
Minister there was a question, which was raised earlier. So, I just want
the member to raise it but then you don’t have to respond immediately if
you want to just look at the question first.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I apologise for
being late, I was in the NCOP much earlier on. I will take a breath; then I
will hear your question and I’ll respond to it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (K O BAPELA): OK, I hope that would then be taken as
a consideration.

Vote No 25 – Agriculture – put and agreed to.

Vote No 26 – Communications – put and agreed to.

Vote No 27 – Environmental Affairs and Tourism – put and agreed to.

Vote No 28 – Housing – put:

Mr A C STEYN: Thank you, Chairperson. An adjustment of an additional
R74 million is made to the housing department in this Bill. In the bigger
scheme of things that may seem like a small amount. However, of this amount
almost 90%, R66 million, is to be transferred to one institution,
Thubelisha Homes; R50 million for emergency housing - which is probably too
little - and the balance of R36 million for a VAT adjustment - which is
probably too much.

In the previous financial year, Thubelisha Homes had a debtors and
underclaims book valued at R61 million, and a revenue underachievement of
R46 million. The auditors have also previously expressed doubt about the
company’s ability to continue as a growing concern. Hon Minister, can you
therefore, firstly, give this House an indication what emergency housing
this allocation is intended for? Secondly, a VAT allowance of R36 million
implies expenditure of almost R260 million.

From past balance sheets of this institution, it is clear that the
expenditure will not even be half the amount to justify the R36 million VAT
adjustment. Can the hon Minister therefore assure this House that this
adjustment is conditional and can therefore only be allocated against the
loss of unclaimed VAT and not for operational costs?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you, Chairperson. There are two points to
this question. One is the viability of Thubelisha Homes; the second one is,
what are the emergency houses that Thubelisha has been asked to deal with.
I will start with the last one. Hon member, it is my intention to make a
presentation to the committee on this matter because it’s a very important
matter for me.

On 12 October, we got permission from Cabinet to proceed with our
preparations for emergency housing. On a daily basis, we see shacks burning
down in the Western Cape and in the Eastern Cape, and I am certain that as
we sit here we are very concerned about it. We therefore requested Cabinet
to allow us to use the emergency instrument to provide proper houses where
there is obvious danger for people living in those areas - that is what we
are trying to do. This is the R30 million that we are giving to Thubelisha
to make sure that it is possible for it to assist us to build the capacity
that we need when we build the emergency housing.

Now, the VAT adjustment is necessary if we are going to use Thubelisha to
continue with the work that we want it to do. It is quite clear to me that
it is better for us to increase the in-house capacity that we have than to
try and outsource this work. I am certain that when we do our calculations,
you and I, we will find that the R36 million that we are giving to
Thubelisha for the VAT adjustment is money better spent than if we were to
outsource this to some project manager.

Having said that, I am very grateful that the hon member has made mention
of this because I did want to publicise this - that this government is very
concerned about the conditions that our people are living in and that we
are doing something about it, which is why we are grateful that we’ve been
given this opportunity to build some decent houses for these people. Thank
you.

Agreed to.

Vote No 29 – Land Affairs – put and agreed to.

Vote No 30 – Minerals and Energy – put:

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Hon Chair, in light of the roll-over of R20 million to
finance a project to build a new power plant by 2008 when South Africa will
require a new generation capacity, and particularly, in light of the major
electricity outage last week Friday, is South Africa’s planning on track to
prevent similar occurrences from happening more frequently in future? Thank
you, Mr Chair.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, Chairperson. Yes, indeed,
South Africa is well set for the electricity distribution industry in the
country. As you are aware, tonight we will be discussing one of the tools
whereby we are aiming at ensuring that the incidences you are talking
about, of blackouts and brownouts, don’t occur.

This is in part one of the strategies to actualise our energy policy
whereby it was recognised that somewhere in the future - 2007 or 2008 - we
will run out of capacity and as we run out of capacity Eskom will not have
the capacity, so we needed to plan for new generation whereby we bring in
independent power producers and look at renewable energy.

So, we have a strategy. We are well on course, and I can assure the member
that part of the regulations that will come from the Electricity Regulation
Bill will empower the Minister to set standards and norms to ensure that
there is effectiveness and efficiency in the electricity production to
ensure security of supply in the future.

Agreed to.

Vote No 31 – Science and Technology – put:

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Thank you, Chair. First, let me start by congratulating
the Minister of Science and Technology on a job well done in so far as
expenditure trends within the department are concerned, illustrating 100%
expenditure. Well done indeed, hon Minister.

However, I would like to know whether you could share with the House
whether the R37,9 million allocated for technology for poverty alleviation
and R47 million for technology for sustainable livelihoods need not be
increased to help extricate more people out of poverty, helping to create
work especially in the second economy. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Thank you, Chair. I can confirm for
the hon member that issues of poverty and poverty eradication do occupy our
minds, and we try our best from whatever platform and whatever mandate we
have to make a contribution towards the eradication of poverty.

In the case of our department, the instruments that he mentions -
technology for poverty alleviation and technology for sustainable
livelihoods - are the instruments we employ to try to contribute towards
that effort.

There are ongoing engagements which are very positive at all times to get
more resources so that we have greater capacity to make that contribution.
But, as the hon member knows, there are many competing worthy needs in our
country. We are quite certain that these engagements will yield positive
results. Thank you very much.

Agreed to.

Vote No 32 – Trade and Industry – put:

Mr L W GREYLING: Thank you, Chair. On the issue of the Trade and Industry
Vote, we question the fact that another R580 million has been allocated to
the pebble bed modular reactor, the PBMR. We questioned this last year as
well, when R500 million was allocated. In fact, it jumped to R600 million
in the budget. We question whether the government will be forced to
bankroll this project, which is run on very . . . In fact, Jaco Kriek, the
CEO, has even said that it is a very high-risk project. What guarantee can
the government or the Minister give us that we will not be forced to
bankroll this project ad infinitum? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chair, the work on the pebble bed
modular reactor is ongoing work and it is long-term work. Part of what is
going into that work are negotiations to ensure that we can get some of the
major nuclear production companies in the world to be part of this pebble
bed modular reactor, and that is ongoing work.

We are confident because the position that South Africa occupies in terms
of the extent to which it has developed this kind of technology gives us
confidence that we are going to be able to attract major investments to the
PBMR.

As government we are committing funds to it, because we have the confidence
that this is a technology of the future in which we must invest now. We
will therefore continue to give support whilst we are also doing the work
of attracting other investors to the project.

Agreed to.

Vote No 33 – Transport – put:

Mr S B FARROW: Thank you, Chair. I see the Minister of Transport and the
Minister of Finance here, so maybe I should try to find out which one of
them will answer this. This really relates to your announcement in your
speech, Minister of Finance, pertaining to the Gautrain and the R20 billion
that you have earmarked for it.

Where exactly is that money going to be channelled through? Is it going
through the Minister of Transport, or will it be part of an equitable share
delivered directly to the province of Gauteng? Maybe you can give me some
clarity, more than anything else. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chair, I think the hon member is jumping the gun.
The R20 billion is in the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. We are
dealing with the adjustments estimate at the moment.

What we are doing in respect of that is that the amount is earmarked.
Clearly, between now and 15 February, Budget Day, additional work will be
done, and I think the Portfolio Committee on Transport last week raised the
profile of a very necessary discussion on this matter.

Essentially, however, there is a change in the way in which we administer
these kinds of projects. The same applies in respect of Coega, because
hitherto the approach would have been one that required of provinces to
finance these major projects out of their equitable share, and they can
only do so if they sacrifice other services, especially social services.

What we are doing now - and this is the big change in the adjustments
estimate - is to actually move these kinds of projects, when they are
recognised as national projects, out of the sphere of provincial government
only, carry them on the national Budget and recognise that the impact of a
particular major infrastructure project may be specific to one province,
but that it is a national project. So, it will be on national and in the
adjustments estimate it will be part of a special kind of strategic
infrastructure fund. Both Coega and the Gautrain would be part of that.
Thanks.

Agreed to.

Vote No 34 - Water Affairs and Forestry – put:

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Thank you, Chair. Seeing that, contrary to the reply given
by the hon Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry in this House concerning
the water supply at the Sihlekiso Primary School, which is a voting
station, would the hon Minister be kind enough to allocate certain funds in
order to facilitate the smooth running of the local government elections?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I cannot help the
hon member in his campaign for the local government elections. The question
is irrelevant, Chair. [Laughter.]

Agreed to.


Vote No 23 – Justice and Constitutional Development – put:


Mrs S M CAMERER: I’m indebted to you, Chair.

I was intending to ask the Minister about the R50 million additional
expenditure for the National Prosecuting Authority and particularly the
R20 million put aside for high-profile court cases, and I was hoping she
could tell us which high-profile cases are referred to and how the money
was spent.

However, I would also like to ask the Minister – and this was what the
Minister of Finance attempted to answer in your absence - about the item
that is not in the additional appropriation but surely should be, namely
the amount of approximately R170 million needed for the salary increases
and car allowances for magistrates which were gazetted by the President on
22 August but which have still not been paid.

Apparently, the Minister has claimed there is no money. In the meantime,
magistrates trusted the President and what they read in the Gazette and
bought cars and have been left high and dry. The magistrates are protesting
vehemently at their unfair treatment at the hands of this government. The
question is: if the money for this has not been allocated in this
appropriation, when will it be?

The Minister of Finance tried to indicate that, as a member of the
portfolio committee, I should know and that we should be discussing this.
But actually, we have been told that we were not going to discuss it. There
has been absolutely no progress. This was reported to us yesterday by the
chair of the committee. So, perhaps the Minister could enlighten us on what
is going on. Thank you, Chairperson.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I think your last
question accompanied by the speech is irrelevant. I do not know whether you
are campaigning. I am not sure you are. It is irrelevant because it’s not
related to the . . . [Interjections.]

The R50 million relates to imperial holding, which is R30 million, and the
R20 million is for unforeseeable expenditure. You should understand that in
the area of investigations and forensics and specialised services, you have
to have something in reserve. So, largely, the NPA would have this kind of
cost in their books.

An HON MEMBER: And the high-profile cases? Which ones!

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, that’s
neither here nor there. [Interjections.]

Agreed to.

Schedule put and agreed to.


                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.




                       DIAMONDS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL


                  (Decision of Question on Second Reading)




There was no debate.


Bill read a second time (Democratic Alliance and African Christian
Democratic Party dissenting).




                     MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT


                                  (Debate)

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson and hon members, this Medium-term . . .

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: I thought that we were
giving preference this afternoon to items 11 and 12. Consequently, we
should now be on item number 12.




                 REPORT NO 30 OF PUBLIC PROTECTOR – PetroSA


   (Decision of Question on Report of Portfolio Committee on Minerals and
                                   Energy)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

   That the report be adopted.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 267: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya,  S
   E; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M  R;  Benjamin,  J;  Beukman,  F;
   Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu , M J; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B;  Bloem,  D
   V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha,  N  G
   W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers,  J;  Chang,  E  S;
   Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P;  Cwele,  S
   C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Diale, L  N;  Didiza,  A  T;
   Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M;  Dodovu,  T  S;  du
   Toit, D C ; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S;  Gaum,  A
   H; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gillwald, C E ; Godi,  N  T;
   Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T;  Greyling,  C  H  F;
   Gumede, D M; Gxowa,  N  B;  Hajaig,  F;  Hanekom,  D  A;  Hangana,  N  E;
   Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P A C; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P;  Huang,  S;
   Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H;  Johnson,  C  B;  Johnson,  M;  Jordan,  Z  P;
   Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kati, Z  J;  Kekana,  C  D;  Khoarai,  L  P;
   Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khumalo, M  S;  Khunou,  N  P;
   Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W;  Kota,  Z  A;  Kotwal,  Z;  Landers,  L  T;
   Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Likotsi, M T; Lishivha,  T  E;
   Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lucas, E J; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N; Mabandla, B
   S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Mabuyakhulu,  D  V;  Madella,  A  F;  Madlala-
   Routledge, N C; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magubane, N E  ;
   Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S;  Maine,
   M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M  J;  Maloney,  L;
   Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S; Manuel, T  A;
   Mapisa-Nqakula,  N  N;  Mars,  I;  Martins,  B  A  D;  Maserumule,  F  T;
   Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M;
   Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M J J ;  Maunye,
   M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V;  Mgabadeli,  H
   C; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlangeni, A; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni,  B  A;
   Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M;
   Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A  D;  Mokoto,  N  R;
   Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi,  S  D;
   Moonsamy, K; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W;  Mosala,  B  G;  Moss,  M  I;
   Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M  B;  Mshudulu,  S  A;  Mthembu,  B;
   Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlovu,  V  B;
   Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene,  N  M;  Newhoudt-Druchen,  W  S;
   Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L  V  J;
   Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, M L; Ngwenya, W; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkem-
   Abonta, E; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S
   H; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana,  T
   L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P M; Oliphant, G G;  Pahad,
   A G H; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G; Phala, M J; Phungula, J P;  Pieterse,
   R D; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T;  Rajbally,  S  ;  Ramakaba-
   Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D
   H; Rasmeni, S M; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Scheemann, G D; Schippers, J;
   Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C C;
   Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S  ;  Sibuyana,  M  W;
   Sigcau, S N; Sikakane, M R; Skhosana, W M; Skosana,  M  B;  Smith,  P  F;
   Smith , V G; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E;  Thomson,
   B; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L  J;  Tsenoli,  S  L;  Tshivhase,  T  J;
   Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van der Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H;
   Van der Merwe, S C; Van Schalkwyk, M C J; Van Wyk, A; Vezi, T E; Vundisa,
   S S; Wang, Y; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z ; Zulu, N E.


   NOES - 48: Bici, J; Blanché, J P I; Camerer, S M; Cupido, H B ; Davidson,
   I O; Ditshetelo, P H K; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J;
   Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Greyling, L W; Jankielsohn, L; Joubert, L K;
   Kalyan, S V; Kohler-Barnard, D; Lee, T D; Lowe, C M; Madikiza, G T;
   Masango, S J; Mfundisi, IS; Minnie, K J; Morgan , G R; Morkel, C M; Nel,
   A H; Ngema, M V; Opperman, S E; Pule, B E; Rabie, P J; Schmidt, H C;
   Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Sigcau , Sylvia N; Simmons, S; Smuts, M; Steyn, A
   C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van der
   Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Waters, M; Weber, H; Woods, G G; Zille, H.


   ABSTAIN - 1: Nefolovhodwe, P J.


Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                     MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT

                                  (Debate)

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson and hon members, this Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement builds on the progress made in the realisation of the objectives
of the 2004 statement, which focused on accelerated economic growth
underpinned by bridging the divide between the first and the second
economy.

Improved economic growth has been accompanied by a stable, moderate
inflation and a slight deficit in the current account of the balance of
payments, but offset by a healthy capital account surplus. Capital
formation by both the public and private sector has also shown a remarkable
growth with the prospect of even being boosted by some major construction
projects that are currently taking place and industrial investment over the
coming period.

Building a developmental state, as we all appreciate, is a huge task that
does not come without its challenges. While the informal sector has seen
some degree of growth as a result of some policies and programmes,
unemployment continues to be a major challenge. In the latest government
programme of action it is clear

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O BAPELA): Hon members, the House decorum is
affected by the level of noise. We can no longer hear the speaker. Could
you please allow the speaker to proceed uninterrupted.

Mr N M NENE: Thank you, Chairperson. There is one member with a big voice
on this side of the House. [Interjections.]

In the latest programme of action of the government it is clear that the
matter of economic inclusion of the formal sector is taken very seriously.

The committee held public hearings on this statement with stakeholders who
made varying comments on how they viewed it. Among the issues raised was
the fact that even though education expenditure as a percentage of GDP in
South Africa is higher than in many developing countries, this is not
realising the desired outcomes. The committee is aware that there are
medium to long-term strategies in place to address this problem. This is of
critical importance because lack of appropriate skills is one of the
constraints to sustainable economic growth.

Household consumption expenditure, as well as vigorous investment in
private residential buildings have also been identified as the principal
drivers of the current economic growth. Of notable significance was also
the rise of 27,4% in car sales and 10,2% in cement sales.

While some economists tended to overstate the growing number of workers
that are not economically active, the committee is of the view that the
decline in the unemployment rate should be balanced with a full
appreciation of the redistribution of income, which is at the heart of this
accelerated shared growth initiative that is led by the Deputy President.

The ANC government has remained steadfastly committed to the objective of a
better life for all and hence the consistency we see in the policies that
are pursued, dating as far back as the founding of this movement. Sharing
equally in the wealth of the country might have been a far-fetched dream in
1955, but what we see now is the progressive realisation thereof.

In order to support or augment this accelerated shared growth initiative,
we see a modest expansion in revenue as a percentage of the GDP,
approaching 26% as opposed to 25% in previous years. This is supported
further by the continued performance of the South African Revenue Services,
collecting well beyond projections. This over-collection has also resulted
in the reduction of the budget deficit going forward.

None of the extra revenue collected in 2005-06 is being used to finance
extra expenditure. The committee agrees with government on this aspect that
if extra funds cannot be used effectively, then these should be used to
reduce borrowing. This is consistent with the fiscal management principle
that suggests that government should seek to reduce deficits during the
upswing phase of the business cycle, so as to create space for borrowing
when the cycle enters the downswing phase. We are also experiencing debt
service costs falling as a percentage of GDP relative to the baseline
projected in the budget for 2005-06.

One of the important features of the statement is that it outlines the
projected growth in infrastructure spending which should be directed to
labour intensive projects and support development of SMMEs and Broad-Based
Black Economic Empowerment. In the quest for allocative efficiency, public-
private partnerships are, in the view of the committee, encouraged.

Social security funds also have some surpluses, with government savings
also expected to be positive by the end of the MTEF period. This simply
means one thing – that there is more money to spend on poverty alleviation
and creating sustainable livelihoods. This statement also outlines a
significant reduction in public enterprises’ borrowing requirements, which
are indicative of these enterprises either being able to finance their
projects or delaying them.

A number of taxation changes are also effected in this current year, as
will be dealt with when this House deals with the Revenue Laws Amendment
Bills later today. I wish to take this opportunity to commend the South
African Revenue Service on the launch of its general avoidance discussion
document in Cape Town on 3 November this year. This was a historic event
indeed and the committee looks forward to hearing public comments on this
initiative.

As the Minister of Finance always says, this statement gives Parliament and
the public at large an opportunity to engage with the outer years of the
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework and to raise issues for discussion while
government departments consolidate their spending plans that will be
submitted before this House as strategic plans and estimates of national
expenditure that will be tabled early next year.

The committee notes the phasing-out of the Regional Services Council levies
and trusts that the matter will be dealt with in a manner that does not
undermine accountability and provide municipalities with a stable source of
income that is supportive of local economic development.

The other chapters of this statement are going to be dealt with by the
Joint Budget Committee members whom I share a history with and I wish them
well in their deliberations. The Portfolio Committee on Finance is
satisfied with matters of its competence and the certainty brought about by
this tradition of multiyear budgeting. We support the Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statement, 2005. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The need to accelerate economic
growth to create jobs and reduce poverty is the single greatest imperative
facing South Africa.

The need is not just growth but, indeed, growth which will create jobs. The
policy statement confirms that there has been growth in the formal sector,
but also reveals a rapid increase in the number of workers that are not
economically active. It also reveals that the absolute number of people
without work in the age group 15 to 65 years continues to increase more
rapidly than the economy is able to create jobs.

The HSRC report indicates that in order for government to meet its target
of halving unemployment by 2014, the private sector alone needs to generate
500 000 jobs a year, which can only be done if the average growth rate of
6% is achieved on a sustainable basis for the next 10 years. GDP growth in
2005 was 4,4% and according to the report in front of us, it is expected to
slow to 4,2% this year and remain within the 4% range for the balance of
the period under review. This is well below, I must tell you, other
emerging markets and indeed the rest of Africa.

The key, therefore, in judging the policy statement is how it helps in
achieving that 6% growth. While the Deputy President’s initiative will
provide the details, the template is clear from this policy statement.
Instead of stimulating the supply side, government seems to have reverted
to the mainstream economic thought of three decades ago when the dominant
philosophy of Keynes prevailed, which emphasised government spending as the
best tool for growth. However, there are a couple of major problems.

Firstly, capacity constraints continue to impact negatively on the budgeted
figures. Current estimates suggest that 60% of government programmes are
delivered at local government level and it is here where the largest
capacity constraints exist. Further evidence of this is the R2 billion
which was underspent in the municipal infrastructure grant.

Secondly, and related to the above, is the whole question of the skills
crisis. Economist Iraj Abedian estimates vacancies in terms of skilled jobs
to be in the region of 500 000. This cuts to the core of government’s
problem. Even if funds for investment in the public sector are available,
the skilled people to build and work the enterprises are not.

It is for this reason that a proper analysis of the policy statement
reveals that government has opted to utilise the R30 billion revenue
overrun this year, not to drastically increase capital expenditure, but
rather to reduce the deficit even further. Likewise, a significant portion
of the anticipated extra revenue generated in the following two years will
also be used to keep the budget deficit well below the international norm
of 3%.

In it’s report the Finance Committee notes the fact that growth in
expenditure could well have been far stronger had government had the
capacity to manage the extra spending. So here is the problem: Increased
revenue flows, a strategy which says increase government infrastructural
spending to fuel growth, but an inability to spend because of lack of a
capacity and skills. So what do we do? Decrease the deficit. Hardly an
expansionary fiscal policy; hardly a recipe to ignite growth.

In any event, as economist Noelani Conradie observed, higher state
infrastructure spending - even with strong consumption demand, which we are
experiencing – cannot achieve 6% sustainable growth. Growth will slow
unless it is led by increased private sector fixed investment and a
powering-up of the production side of the economy, and it is here where we
believe government missed a golden opportunity to utilise the overruns to
incentivise the private sector to be part of it’s strategy for growth.

Although economic growth is multidimensional, private sector investment
remains the crucial factor in employment creation and growth. Yet where are
the incentives in this policy statement? Fixed investment needs to reach
25% of GDP for growth to lift off. Yet, despite new commitments from
government, the ratio still languishes at around 16%. We need to address
the lower levels of domestic savings in our country. We need to address the
extremely low levels of foreign direct investment other than portfolio
investments.

The relative cost of doing business has to be a major factor in the
decision-making process of whether to invest, and in this respect the level
of taxation is an important component. There are other factors, yes, no
less than two were mentioned by the Governor of the Reserve Bank when he
named the whole question of foreign exchange controls and the nature and
implementation of our labour laws.

As highlighted by Merrill Lynch, South African tax rates are high by
emerging market standards and very high when you add in the secondary tax
on companies. In a globalised world where international capital is highly
mobile we have to be more than competitive as an investment destination.
This does not mean, Minister Manuel, a race to the bottom, but a race to
make us more competitive.

Government policy to date has been to keep the tax burden as a percentage
of GDP below the 25% mark, yet this policy statement sees the total tax
burden rise to 26% and stay there during the course of this policy
statement. The level of our budget deficit is more than acceptable by
international standards. Instead of using revenue overruns to reduce it
further, government policy should have been more expansionary in its
stance, and used it to incentivise the supply side by way of corporate tax.

We called for government to commit itself to multiyear tax reductions to
bring the corporate tax rate closer to 25%. This, we believe, would have
sent a very powerful signal and fuelled the private sector as far as growth
was concerned. The Minister believed, however, that this would encourage
companies to arbitrage their income across years to take advantage of
future lower tax rates. I don’t accept this argument.

Firstly, companies are arbitraging this in any event. Secondly, we have a
highly efficient tax collection agency. Thirdly, rather let them arbitrage
in the short term and invest than have them seek investments in other
markets with low tax regimes.

We accept there is no silver bullet to investment growth and the creation
of jobs. Yes, infrastructural spending is important. Without it the private
sector cannot operate at optimum levels. It is not an either-or situation.
But the policy statement could have been genuinely stimulatory by
incentivising the private sector by way of tax cuts to make it part of
government’s growth strategy. Thank you.

Mr T E VEZI: Thank you, Deputy Chair. In 1999 –
2000, 22,2% of government expenditure was directed at interest payments.
This has since fallen to 12,5%. This means there is more money available.
The stronger than expected revenue growth is supported by robust economic
growth.

Spending more evenly distributes. Where previously the bulk of government
spending was directed at a small portion of South Africa’s population, it
is now more evenly distributed. South Africa does not have a lack of cash.
It has a lack of ability to spend.

We will not have the ability to spend the cash and create jobs, unless we
solve the skills mismatch problem. The IFP believes that immigrant skills
are only a short-term intervention. The long-term solution is further
education and skills training.

The IFP is, therefore, very concerned to note business headlines in the
Sunday Tribune, which read as follows: “Corruption mars training”. I quote:

   Business has a list of 32 employers and skills training providers, who
   are suspected of having submitted suspicious or inflated invoices to
   learnerships or skills programmes, involving about 4000 trainees, the
   invoices total more than R182 million.


One of the experts in our committee stated that it takes about six months
to fill a vacancy in the public service. We, in the committee, of course,
were not in a position to refute that allegation. The IFP supports the
statement, but the question of skills training has to be revisited. I thank
you.

Mr S L DITHEBE: Thank you, Chair. The Joint Budget Committee listened to
presentations by various departments, economists, non-profit and research
organisations, two days after the tabling of the MTBPS by the Minister of
Finance. This process alone ran for four working days.

I am mentioning this background because, more often than not, some within
our society take the very functioning of this democracy for granted.
Shouldn’t we therefore pause, marvel at and hail a democratic system that
functions so well that it allows as much voice of countervailing power as
is possible, to influence the public policy process? Indeed, I think we
should do so.

Several participants during the hearings made very interesting and incisive
interventions, which might not be implemented in the medium term, but are
examined in detail as we scrutinise every bit of the government’s programme
of action and the accelerated and shared growth initiative.

However, we must be mindful of the budget as an exercise of difficult trade-
offs. It is very critical, though, that whatever the trade-offs or reviews
of future budgets, government, Parliament, business, labour and civil
society should all set their eyes firmly on ensuring a widespread
improvement of the human condition, through a self-sustaining and shared
growth.

Whatever the merits or demerits of different methods of measuring poverty
and inequality, we must, at the end of the day, be able to say that we have
succeeded in facilitating public participation and involvement in these
hearings, and that we have acted boldly to scrutinise and oversee the
executive, with a view to allowing every sphere of government to contribute
to the 6% growth rate.

This, however, does not suggest that only the public sector can achieve
this goal. The private sector too has a role to play. This means, among
other things, that while tax avoidance may not be illegal, as opposed to
tax evasion, business must think of the benefits of a growing fiscus, and
how further government spending can benefit both households and firms, and
thus help grow the economy.

My contribution in this debate would be incomplete if I did not comment on
the propensity of some national and provincial departments to underspend.
It does not require the wisdom of the oracle of Delphi to know that if
departments do not spend, that tends to violate the ethos of Batho Pele, as
well as setting in motion the whole train of unintended consequences.

I am saying this, cognisant of the latitude given to departments in terms
of section 30(2) of the Public Finance Management Act. It is important to
mention upfront that we are not necessarily suggesting that if, for
example, R1 million of a R20,2 billion budget is not spent, then that is an
inherently bad situation. These matters will depend on the nature and
mandate of every department.

We must, therefore, remain vigilant against a narrow techno-fiscal approach
that may encourage fiscal dumping in an effort to avoid being seen to have
not spent money. Let me nonetheless give credit where it is due. It must go
to those departments that are prudent in their expenditure, and spend their
allocated funds.

Returning to the foreword of the MTBPS, we must not lose sight of the
objective of modernising the economy, improving its competitiveness, while
broadening participation and enhancing social inclusion. Based on this
commitment, the benefits of the MTBPS will take root in national
departments, provinces and local government, and other sectors of the
economy, but they will be felt long after it has passed.

We must ponder a future without social exclusion and yawning poverty gaps.
A society whose economy is built daily while it does not fail to meet the
basic needs of the population, and ensures human resource development,
strengthens its democratic institutions and the culture of human rights,
and builds the nation itself.
These events are already in time’s womb. We alone will determine what to
make of the future. Accordingly, Parliament is requested to give serious
consideration to the recommendations of the Joint Budget Committee. Allow
me to cite a few of these.

The committee, it says, should carry out oversight visits to developmental
nodes in particular. Parliament should play a central role in ensuring that
departments complement, rather than compete with each other, in terms of
their mandates in different clusters.
Parliament should ensure that the MTBPS process facilitates institutional
capacity, the human resource base as well as employment creation in order
to narrow the gap between the underdeveloped, marginalised and unskilled
section of the population on the one hand, and the advanced, global and
skilled section of the population on the other, commonly known as the first
and second economy.

But, perhaps, before I take my seat, let me deal with a few issues. It has
been suggested from this podium that government is not intent on increasing
the budget deficit, because it hides its ability and capacity to spend
funds where they exist.

I think it must be remembered by members of this House, that not so long
ago in the 1990s, the economy of this country was in the gutter. It took
courage and ability on the part of this people’s democratic government to
extricate it from that gutter. Through fiscal discipline we are where we
are today, and more fiscal space enables us to spend on the basic needs of
the people, and help in growing the economy. I thank you.

Mr A HARDING: Chairperson, the ID agrees that the MTBPS, in tandem with
government’s initiatives, should accelerate and share economic growth for
the benefit of all South Africans. We do have, however, one major but
overarching concern, which could be explained by way of a very simple
circular and paradoxical predicament.

The budgets allocated to various government departments are often
underspent, which has a negative effect on service delivery. This problem
is paradoxical in the sense that government keeps on overestimating the
budget deficit. This results in budget allocations that are not
expansionary enough for national departments to ultimately improve service
delivery.

This paradox presents a problem that this government needs to tackle
speedily and effectively if it wants to bridge the divides that exist in
the current South African society. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, we are most certainly hitting the sweet spot in
the economy, and for this we need to be thankful. Will someone please say
amen to that? The SA Revenue Service is to be commended for collecting R21
billion more than last year’s projected target.

The ACDP regrets, however, that corporate tax rates will, in all
likelihood, not be decreased, notwithstanding the finance committee’s
support of a rate cut. We trust, however, that personal tax relief will
result not only in additional spending, but in a higher level of domestic
saving. Certain other weaknesses do also exist.

The current boom is driven by strong consumer-led spending. Manufacturing
and export-led growth are lagging behind. We are also disappointed that
capital formation only reached 17% of GDP for the second quarter of 2005.

Economists accept that public and fixed investment need to reach 25% of GDP
for accelerated economic growth to achieve the projected 6% growth target.

Whilst there’s a huge demand for social security, government needs to shift
from welfare towards development in order to address poverty and
unemployment in the long term.

The challenges undoubtedly remain, not in finding the funds, but in finding
the engineers, project managers and technicians for the large
infrastructure projects. State capacity is undoubtedly the single most
important factor constraining growth.

The ACDP shares the views of an economist from Merrill Lynch who stated
that it was time for a combination of infrastructure, social spending and
lower tax rates. These would lower the costs of doing business and promote
job creation. A catch net would still be needed, so social spending was
necessary, but job creation was more important in the long run.

At the end of the day we will be judged as to what degree the economic boom
translates into more jobs to address the poverty being experienced in our
country – this is the ultimate challenge.

The ACDP supports the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. I thank you.

Mr B E PULE: Chairperson, the UCDP is appreciative of the 2005 Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement that is calculated to address the goals of South
Africa’s growth strategy, which strategy aims to modernise the economy and
improve its competitiveness while broadening participation and enhancing
social inclusion.

However, it is imperative that the UCDP makes the House aware of the
following challenges that merit serious attention. The current boom is
driven by strong consumer-led domestic spending, that is, consumers borrow
money to pay other loans, they skip payments on some accounts in order to
pay others, and eventually they cannot pay their bills at the end of the
month. Production and export-led growth is lacking.

It is therefore almost impractical to achieve a 6% sustainable growth on
the strength of consumer-led spending, even if it is supplemented by higher
state infrastructure spending, with all the challenges that go with
spending on infrastructure.

This is also despite the fact that the Micro Finance Regulatory Council, in
conjunction with the Department of Trade and Industry, is implementing a
debt-relief programme to assist overindebted consumers.

The other disturbing factor is the silence of the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement on how services of the HIV and Aids . . . [Time expired.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the PAC regards the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement as a barometer to check if the national cake is being equitably
shared and tailored to the needs of especially the country’s millions of
poor.

The overall objective of the national Budget must produce results that meet
the needs of society while making the best use of national resources the
country is endowed with. We must prioritise the development of our country
and its people. There must be total commitment to transform our economy in
the shortest time possible.

As leaders and hon members we must display the political will to address,
amongst other things, poverty, unemployment, affordable education -
especially at tertiary level - poor health and the housing backlog.

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement should be used as a yardstick for
best budgets to come in the near future. The PAC supports the statement.

Mr Y WANG: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, today I’m going to tell
you why we need to strengthen the capacity of the Department of Trade and
Industry, and why we should encourage export opportunities with a change of
mindset and how else we can empower our people.

In the state of the nation address in February this year, the President
identified the need to improve foreign capital flow. He also referred to
special efforts to finalise sector development strategies and programmes,
including especially business outsourcing and tourism, information and
communications technology, agroprocessing, and community and social
services.

In light of this directive, international trade plays a complex and
important role. As international trade is an exchange of goods and services
between countries, it is also the division and specialisation of
participating countries and a refection of their dependency on one another.
And with globalisation international trade now has even more influence over
the domestic economy and the average individual.

The budget allocated for international trade and economic development under
the Department of Trade and industry will play an important role in
achieving the President’s directive, namely, attracting more foreign direct
investments.

If you look at the complexity of international trade, trading is about
seeking better deals and often, as a result, we get cheaper and better
products. For exporting countries, the benefit is the huge external and
international opportunities translated into local job creation. Most
countries encourage their industries to focus on export markets, to create
more jobs and gain foreign exchange, and sometimes incentives are given.

To give an example, South Africa’s population cannot be compared to that of
China, India and Indonesia. The huge populations in those countries have
created a huge domestic demand and expanded their market there. Although
the domestic market is huge, China and India still support foreign
factories for their operations and importing countries benefit in terms of
cheaper and better products. But there are risks. The risk is the opposing
opinion that says cheaper rates might often damage the relevant industry
that is not competitive enough, but this can only probably be solved
through better education of our legal force in the long run.

International trade cannot be discussed on its own as other factors also
play an important role, especially the supporting infrastructure. Looking
at communication, information is key, but is worthless if it’s not
communicated and applied. We should not only empower our people
financially, but we should also empower them with knowledge.

Why is this important? If we look at this – this is not a proudly South
African thing, it’s a piece of knowledge in Physical Science that has
benefited us all through communication. Similarly, international trade will
provide us with the opportunity to enrich ourselves for the better and
through all forms of communication benefit our people. This is why I would
say international trade also includes an exchange of knowledge.

This year Sentech has been working hard to provide signal coverage for many
communities. With allocated budgets, we encourage them to do more for our
people and also with the liberalisation of the markets, we would also see
the cost of communication going down. This would not only relieve the cost
of communication for our people working far from home, but also reduce the
cost for business transactions locally and internationally and potentially
also be a stimulus for growth.

Now, if you look at our transport sector, enabling a smooth public
transportation network is of vital importance. Not only will the
infrastructure benefit international trade indirectly through logistics,
but it will also impact immensely on local business activities.

We thus welcome the increase in the budget for our national roads and
additional funding for strategic road infrastructure at the border post to
support the efficiency of SADC regional road networks. This will support
the Minister’s policy focal point as outlined in the MTBPS, which is
building regional and international partnerships for growth and
development.

That leads us to the effort on regional economic co-operation. If we look
at the short-term and long-term MTBPS, in the short term we should
integrate our neighbouring countries in SADC and in the medium term we
should be taken as a gateway to Africa, a financial centre and
transportation hub of Africa that integrates the African continent, and in
the long term we can then go to the East and connect to other countries.

Starting again with China as a new superpower -. China has already
identified South Africa as a gateway to Africa and they are really keen to
launch any trade negotiations, and specifically future trade agreements
amongst other countries. So we look forward for mutually benefits for trade
agreements with other countries in the near future.

In conclusion, I just want to summarise again and point out that there is a
need to strengthen the capacity of our enduring industry, and due to
limited local markets we should encourage more export opportunities which
are intended to generate more revenue to build our country further. This
requires a change of mindset, knowing what the risks are, managing the
risks and exploring other possibilities. And we should see China as a land
of opportunities, and not as a threat.

Finally, none of this is possible without empowering our people with
relevant information and knowledge. And that is exactly why we support the
MTBPS. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, the Minority Front welcomes the allocations in
the MTEF. The adjustments clearly show government determination to improve
living conditions, the standard of living, and developing South Africa into
a powerhouse that will uplift our country in a global market and retard
poverty in the long run.

The MF supports the strategies to encourage industrial development through
investment in major infrastructure projects in the energy, transport, water
and communications sectors. We support the allocations made to national and
provincial government but would have liked a bigger allocation than 2,5% to
local government. We applaud the greatly increased allocation to social
services and call for the efficient utilisation of funds to improve the
living conditions of our people and clamp down heavily on poverty.

With crime being such a serious problem in South Africa, the MF is glad of
the 12,2% increase to Justice, Police and Prisons. Thus, the economic
services of water, agriculture, forestry and fishing appear to be
adequately allocated and the transport and communication sectors appear to
have sufficient allocations.

We do appreciate the boost to municipalities that will enable free basic
services to poor households. The increase in social security grants is
appreciated, and we hope that our pensioners will this year receive a more
liveable allocation.

We would, however, like to express concern about why there is a slower rate
of increase over the next three years to health and welfare.
[Interjections.] The Minority Front supports the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement. [Time expired.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Deputy Chairperson, this year’s Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statement points in the direction of providing more resources to
programmes that are intended to improve the lives of the poor.

To this end, Azapo believes that the Treasury has discharged its
responsibility by making sure that every year the Budget is tilted towards
the plight of the marginalised. Having done this, it is now the
responsibility of those in charge of delivery to use the resources for the
intended purposes.

We all know now that this eludes some of the municipalities. The Medium-
Term Budget Policy Statement comes in an environment where interest rates
and inflation levels are not very high. The worrying factor though is that
all these favourable factors reside primarily within the first economy. The
projected economic growth is also related to the first economy.

Azapo has learned over the past years that growth in the first economy has
meant very little benefit to the second economy. To Azapo, the second
economy must also grow for the poor to benefit, for it is in the second
economy where the poor reside. This is indeed a challenge for the
government.

Azapo supports the Bill. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON(Mr K O BAPELA): Order! We will now interrupt the
debate as agreed by the Programming Committee. Proceedings will now be
suspended for a supper break. Supper will be provided to members at no cost
in the restaurant on the second floor of the New Wing Building and in the
area outside the E249 committee room.

Proceedings will resume in 30 minutes. The bells will be rung for the
resumption of the proceedings. Proceedings are now suspended. I thank you.

Debate interrupted.

Business suspended at 18:35 and resumed 19:10.

                     MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT
                           (Resumption of debate.)

Ms B N DAMBUZA: Chairperson, hon members, distinguished guests, my humble
greetings.

Sihlalo, amaqobo namaqobokazana sele eyihlahlile indlela, okwam nje kukuba
ndingene emxholweni. Okokuqala okubalulekileyo endiza kuthetha ngako
luphuhliso lwemimandla yasemaphandleni, uhlaziyo lwemimandla
yasezidolophini kwakunye neenkonzo zoluntu. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Chairperson, young men and women have paved the way for me. My task is to
get to the point. Firstly, I am going to talk about rural development,
urban renewal and service delivery.]

The main or key initiative is the provision of an infrastructure investment
that is labour-intensive through the Expanded Public Works Programme,
social and economic development infrastructure, institutional capacity-
building and provision of technical support.

It is important to highlight that the ANC-led government remains committed
to building a caring and people-centred society, particularly for those who
had been previously disadvantaged. Through interaction with various
departments in the past weeks, the ANC is fully convinced that the current
MTBPS is an attempt to achieve government priorities, which is a
developmental goal.

The Department of Provincial and Local Government presented their key
principles, which are to fight poverty and underdevelopment and build
economic growth in our communities through integrated sustainable rural
development and urban renewal to accelerate the eradication of backlogs,
for instance, with regard to water, roads, sanitation and electricity and,
also, to promote an increase of employment through the Expanded Public Work
Programmes and the provision of free basic services to those who are in
need. In addition, they are mainstreaming programmes of Project Consolidate
in nodal areas and, funding to implement financial management reforms.
The systems are in place to measure the success or the extent of Project
Consolidate.

The Department of Housing presented a new comprehensive strategy for
improved housing delivery to achieve integrated housing and sustainable
human settlement and also quality housing with social and economic
amenities. The policy seeks to address housing backlogs, alleviate poverty,
upgrade informal settlements and create jobs.

It also looks at ensuring property ownership and provision of rental
housing to the poor, and will address spatial patterns, and will also
encourage private sector participation, for instance, in housing loans.
Then, the land released for housing and accreditation of the municipalities
will also build capacity of the municipalities. For instance, the
municipalities will have a fully-fledged department, and then the
monitoring mechanisms are also in place for this department.

Regarding the Department of Education, the MTBPS is in line with the
national baseline and with the provincial equitable share. Their focus is
on early childhood development; recapitalisation of further education and
training colleges; modernisation of equipment and facilities; the school
nutrition programme; and school-based life skills education from Grades 1
to 9. It aims at improving the remuneration package for educators as part
of their ``attract and retain’’ strategy.

The core services for the Department of Home Affairs are civic and
immigration activities. They are looking at importing the scarce skills,
for instance engineering, to drive economic growth. We are talking about it
being at 6%. And then, there is staff recruitment and the provision of
smart cards by September 2006. This department works with other departments
to provide social services.

The Department of Health’s programmes are as follows: they are going to
upgrade and revitalise hospitals; focus on medical equipment provision and
information systems; and consolidate of primary health services. The
department’s strategy is to expand the middle level workers pool, for
instance, to increase the number of pharmacists, medical assistants and
medical aid for nursing work.

The department also aims at reviewing structures of training as a retention
strategy for nurses. The malaria reduction programme and the antiretroviral
roll-out are on track, and 56 sites have been established.

About the brain drain, this is a policy matter and it is under
consideration to address the nurses’ concerns. The other strategy is to
review the salary packages for health workers.

Regarding Social Development, their key role is to promote opportunities
for marginalised communities in economic activity, to improve the quality
of life of the poor and vulnerable groups in society.

Their programme incorporates the Child Support Grant for children up to the
age of 14. Social Assistance Administration Grants include the appointment
of social workers and an increased package system. The Food Emergency
Relief Grant includes the provision of appropriate social welfare services
and the distribution of mobile units. They also address staff recruitment
to address delays in processing applications.

The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry’s business is to address
social, economic and environmental challenges as well as managing the
economic assets of water resources and forestry. Their programmes include
water resource management, water services and forestry. This requires
ongoing rehabilitation and maintenance of dams. The bulk of funding will go
towards the investment and water resources infrastructure and will
strengthen regulatory functions.

Mandiyibeke icace gca, Sihlalo, into yokuba xa i-ANC ithetha ngezakhono
ezinqabileyo ayiphazami, isemgceni. [Laphela ixesha.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] [Let
me set the record straight, Chairperson, when the ANC speaks of scarcity of
skills it is not making a mistake, it is on the right track. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, it would be a brave soul indeed and, one has to
admit, a somewhat naïve one who would argue against the notion that wealth
creation in the business sector benefits all. And so it must have been
pleasant in the extreme for the hon Minister to announce an additional tax
income of R30 billion, albeit it courtesy of the Receiver’s
miscalculations.

We are all agreed on what is needed to ensure that this economy reaches its
long-term growth potential. But is there enough courage to take the
requisite steps when such measures clash with political agendas? There can
be little doubt as to the creativity and skills of our own homegrown
businessmen, but idealistic legislation and over-regulation exact a price.

The UK, one of the world’s largest economies, is now reaping the benefits
brought about by extremely competent SA businessmen active in that economy.
Why are those individuals and their businesses not applying the skills in
their own country where they are most needed? Certainly, it is not out of
choice. Idealistic politicking and severely restrictive regulations leave
them with none. Even homegrown corporations are eschewing JSE-listing for
London due to, amongst others, considerations of foreign exchange controls.

It is time to remove these hurdles and allow skilled South Africans to do
what they do best in their own country and reward them for their efforts.
Then we can all share in the resultant benefits. A highly developed sense
of social responsibility already abounds among South African business
leaders both here and abroad. It is essential that this is allowed to
manifest itself in the broader society.

The UDP of South Africa supports the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement.
[Time expired.]

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Madam Chairperson, hon members, comrades and friends, as
we build a peaceful and stable society, we continue to be informed by the
Freedom Charter which provides, among other things, that there shall be
peace and friendship. We believe that in conditions of peace and stability,
democracy grows to maturity.

We have to move forward with a common understanding that peace and
stability are prerequisites for a successful transformation of the country.
Because instability in any country of the world results from social,
economic and political conditions, promoting peace and stability in our
country requires us to adopt an approach which aims to effectively respond
to the socioeconomic needs of our people, which response would be
inadequate and incomplete if it fails to include funding of justice and
protection services’ initiatives and programmes.

This paradigm was introduced in our society by the democratic movement and
the ANC government. Responding to the economic needs of our people is a
paradigm which should guide us as and when we debate efforts of
implementing justice and protection programmes.

We must welcome and support all the progressive aspects of adjustments
which have been effected in the Budget for the departments in the Justice
and Protection Services cluster. We welcome additional funding which will
improve courts, policing, defence equipment and access to justice services,
which ought to transform the judiciary.

We are fully aware that some of the problems faced by some departments in
the Justice and Protection Services cluster will not be solved overnight,
such as overcrowding in prisons. We believe that budget adjustments in
respect of Correctional Services would seek to respond to the overcrowding
challenges and other priority challenges within the current budget cycle.
However, let me emphasise that addressing overcrowding goes beyond merely
reducing the number of inmates. We must be mindful of the fact that lasting
solutions reside in the correction of behaviour.

For this reason we must begin to redirect more resources to the initiatives
and efforts which seek to correct unacceptable behaviour. As criminal
activities continue to undermine our constitutional democracy, we need to
prioritise criminal justice system initiatives and efforts which aim to
intensify campaigns at all levels to reduce crime, especially the
proliferation of illegal weapons and drugs, corruption and fraudulent
activities, and the abuse of women, children and the elderly.

Hence priority is given to the capacitating and strengthening of the
investigating and prosecuting authorities, as well as consolidating and
strengthening our victim empowerment system. Coupled with this, the cluster
should ensure that there are adequate resources which enable it to
expeditiously implement the service charter for victims of crime.

It is our firm belief that South Africa would not be able to achieve
internal peace and stability in conditions of regional and continental
instability. This is precisely why the Freedom Charter requires our country
to strive to maintain world peace. Hence we continue to support the
deployment of adequate resources in our peacekeeping efforts, which efforts
seek to stabilise our continent and the world.

As Parliament we have to fulfil a continuous and effective oversight
function over the Budget through monthly and quarterly reports by different
departments, which portfolio committees have to ensure that they receive.
Parliament should further explore ways to influence co-operation and
complementarity rather than competition between departments, particularly
in respect of co-ordination of planning between departments in the same
cluster.

Our criminal justice system continues to achieve successes in stabilising
the levels of crime with decreases reported in respect of certain priority
crimes. By increasing the number of police, prosecutors and correctional
officials, and implementing an information system, government aims to
reduce the level of crime each year.

Together as government in partnership with agencies and communities, we’ll
bring peace, stability and friendship. Seeing that I still have a few
minutes left, I feel that maybe I should respond to some of the things that
were said from this podium.

Yebo, mhlonishwa u-Davidson, ikhona inkinga yokushoda kwabantu abanamakhono
emisebenzi. Kodwa-ke kuhle ukuthi ngelinye ilanga uthole ithuba uke uma
lapha esidlangalaleni utshele abantu baseNingizimu Afrika ukuthi i-DA yona
yasifaka kangakanani isandla ekutheni kube nokushoda okungaka kwabantu
abanamakhono emisebenzi eNingizimu Afrika. (Translation of Zulu paragraph
follows.)

[Indeed hon Davidson, there is a shortage of skilled people in the
workforce, but I think it would be a good thing if you stood here at the
podium and told the whole of South Africa what the DA’s role was with
regard to the skills shortage in the South African labour market.]

It is unfortunate when a person comes here . . .

 . . . akhulume ngokushoda kwabantu abanamakhono emisebenzi kube sengathi
yinto eqhamuka namuhla futhi yenziwe yilo hulumeni okhona. [ . . . and
talks about a skills shortage in the workforce as if it is something that
came with this government.]

Indeed you contributed and you made us all choose . . .

 . . . izinto ezithile ukuze singabe sisakwazi ukuthola ezinye izinto . . .
[ . . . certain things so that we could not get other things . . . ]

 . . . and that is why we have that one. Mr Davidson, again, it is very
true that we need to accelerate growth but, indeed, you need also to accept
the fact that economic growth in South Africa has been accelerated through
this current government.

Kuhle ukukusho lokhu nokubonga umsebenzi owenziwe yilo hulumeni we-ANC.
Futhi, kufanele senze amathuba emisebenzi nokuletha impilo engcono kubantu.
Kodwa noma ungakusho izikhathi eziyi-120 kule sisidlangalala, ngazi kahle
ukuthi abantu bayazi ukuthi uma ngingase ngikubuze ukuthi yini ubuphofu.
Uzocabanga incwadi ethize oke wayifunda noma unjingalwazi othile oke
wakuchazela yona. [Uhleko.] Ngiyabazi ubuphofu, angidingi incwadi . . .
(Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[It is good to say this and be grateful to the ANC government for the work
they have done. And we must also create employment opportunities and bring
a better life to people. Even if you say what you are saying 120 times in
public, I know very well that people out there know that if I ask you what
poverty is, you will only think about a certain book that you read or a
certain professor who once explained to you what poverty is. [Laughter.] I
know what it means to be poor. I don’t need a book . . . ]

 . . . because I’ve seen it, I’ve smelt it, I’ve heard it, I’ve touched it
and therefore I don’t need any book [Applause.] It is only the ANC that can
talk about poverty and bringing a better life to the people of South
Africa. That is why as you stand here, they will not hear you. Only the ANC
can bring a better life for the people of South Africa. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson, and let me
express my appreciation to all of the members who contributed to this very
rich debate.

What we are dealing with is of course the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement. It is that. It is a statement, a foretaste of what we will table
in the detailed Budget in February next year. Clearly, it starts from a
particular perspective, and what this document cannot do and what this
debate cannot do is to resolve some of the fundamental ideological
disagreements between parties in this House. They are ideological, call
them by any other name, but they are ideological, and the differences are
primarily about how you drive change and what is first.

There are those who would argue that all you need to do is leave money in
the hands of the wealthy and all change will emanate from that. There are
others who would argue that the state has a very specific role to play in
respect of this.

The poster child for the former group is of course what happens in the
United States of America. Now, since George W Bush became president a
number of very important decisions have been taken, including the fact that
tax rates should be dropped for wealthy individuals and for co-operations
in the country.

The net effect of that is that the country is incapable of financing social
services. More and more citizens of the USA cannot afford health care, and
fewer and fewer people can retire with any sense of security regarding the
future. [Interjections.] All of this was hidden and it took Katrina to make
us realise the extent of poverty and inequality that has been masked by
what we see in The Bold and the Beautiful, about life for poor African
Americans, poor Hispanic people and poor white people in the United States.
So we must make a choice about these things.

The other poster child has of course been Germany, and if you look at the
fragmentation of taxes in Germany, where so many of the company taxes were
devolved to local government- neither the federal government nor the
Länder, but in fact local government- the huge fiscal crisis that has been
building up is as a result of a tax policy that is manifested through a
number of different governments over a fairly long period of time.

Let us look at the issue of tax rates that the hon Davidson holds up.
[Interjections.] Let us look at corporate tax rates that the hon Davidson
held up here this afternoon. Let me ask you what the tax rate is in India
today, hon Davidson. It is 35,9%. Or you can look at China where it is 33%,
or Brazil where it is 34%, or Egypt where it is 40%. And then you ask
questions about the 29% corporate rate in South Africa, and I ask you what
the source of your comparisons is.

You are not comparing like with like. What you should avoid doing, hon
Davidson, is to take those who come before you with special pleadings on
behalf of capital and convert them into oracles of permanent wisdom.
Because, unfortunately, the many representatives of the banks who come
before the committee as economists suddenly assume this life beyond the
status that they are accustomed to, because they have spoken as economists.
But these are just the views of economists, at the end of the day, and
economists will always differ in respect of their views.

I am saying that the key issue - and what you must find in the policy
document - here is the tilt to Batho Pele. Do we put the people first? And,
if so, how do we set about doing that, because that for me is the key
challenge. [Interjections.]

The hon Davidson also, in the way in which he structures his argument . . .
[Interjections.] You see, now I want them to listen. The bloody problem is
that they never listen! [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

I withdraw that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Order, please members, order!
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: You, Mister, what is your name? Shaik?

HON MEMBERS: Shah! [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Why don’t you shut up for a while?
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Order! Hon Minister, you will address
the members through the Chair, please. [Interjections.]

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE: Let me deal with what the hon Davidson was saying.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Order please, members! You must allow
the member at the podium to speak.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Let me deal with what the hon Davidson was saying.
You see, he set up a straw man in the context of the arguments of Keynes.
Now, there is expansion, but this was a classical Keynesian expansionist
budget. It is not and you should not, hon Davidson, look only at the size
of the deficit. Look also at what is happening in respect of tax
collections and there are a variety of ways of arriving at exactly the same
objectives. We should not attach any glory to the size of the borrowing,
but having set up a straw man, you then attack the straw man.

You see, if the only issue is the size of the tax rate, then it’s a race to
the bottom, because if you look at the structure of our tax rate at 29%
corporate tax and a secondary tax in companies, and evaluate the secondary
tax in companies, it exists only as a tax on distributed income. It
suggests that we should trap this money inside companies so that they
invest. There are more than enough incentives for private capital to invest
in this country. Do they do so in sufficient quantity? The answer has to be
a resounding no.

So, you believe that if you cut the tax rate, suddenly they will invest.
What gives you that impression? I’m saying you can only arrive at that
impression because you’re a fundamentalist believer in the power of
capital. The hon Swart is similar, and I should caution you, my brother,
against Mammon. Beware the god of money. It doesn’t work! We have a
responsibility as the state to deal with poverty and underdevelopment.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, members, please, order!
[Interjections.] Order! [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: In respect of decisions already taken, we have
taken the decision in this country, in respect of a wage subsidy, to
support the employment of young South Africans. Are companies drawing on
the wage subsidy to employ people? Notwithstanding the fact that we believe
that the only thing we have to do is incentivise and business will take
this up, are we seeing the wage subsidy being drawn upon? Of course we
aren’t, because of the fact that there are a series of other issues, and
part of the evaluation that we’re undertaking is what the binding
constraints are. [Interjections.]

The binding constraints are not in the labour laws. If they were in the
labour laws business would raise this in the investment climate facility
study. If they were in the tax rates they would raise them in the
investment climate facility study. What business is concerned about is the
supply side of the labour market. It’s a fact that we have an education
system steeped in apartheid that does not produce sufficient people with
skills that allow them to be rapidly absorbed. [Interjections.]

That is the problem in South Africa: Last year we produced 5% of
matriculants with mathematics at the higher grade. That is a binding
constraint! If you want to fix it, don’t fix it in the labour laws, fix it
in the education system. And when the relics of apartheid, the dinosaurs on
my left, understand that, we will have a start in society.
[Interjections.][Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please! Order, members!

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: You see, the other issue in respect of what the
hon Davidson said – and I checked this out with the committee, and it’s not
in the report – namely that the absolute number of unemployed persons is
increasing. If this is the case, then pages 23 and 24 of the MTBPS must be
fundamentally wrong. There are issues . . .

Ms J A SEMPLE: How do you decide that?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: The Labour Force Survey tells us this, and the
Labour Force Survey and its methodology has been confirmed by the ILO just
last week.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Look at page 24 of your document!

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Yes, I’m saying look at page 24, and then you need
to understand the factor of sustainable livelihoods. It’s not about
employment, it’s not about income on page 24. Do you want to see it?
[Interjections.] You see, there were more than 500 000 jobs created last
year. The figures speak for themselves, so even the numbers produced by
Mike Schussler the other day come in way below what is actually happening
in this economy, and the moment the DA understands that we are successful
in the management of this economy they’ll lose their raison d’être and then
they may as well go home. The sooner they do that the better for democracy.
[Applause.]

Let’s come to what some other members were saying. Clearly, what we’ve
constructed over a long period is additional fiscal space. We have more
choice to be able to take the decisions. Thank you, hon Dithebe, for
reminding us of that.

The hon Harding is not in the House now, but the paradox that he raises is
quite an important one. It arises in a number of places. It arises because
we’re more efficient at what we do and so the deficit declines, and we have
to measure, in the way that I said earlier, the quality of the spending.
It’s something that I ask Parliament to engage with on an ongoing basis.
[Interjections.] You’re not on the radio, hon Kohler-Barnard!

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: That’s why I left! [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: The quality of the radio service has increased and
the average IQ of members of Parliament has decreased since the past
election! [Interjections.]

The hon Harding’s paradox is an important one that we must be able to come
back to. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, hon members, order, please!
[Interjections.] Minister, I am only calling the House to order, not you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you, Chairperson. [Interjections.]

The hon Wang’s points about infrastructure and the vision he sets out for
South Africa and the world, similarly, is a very important issue.

The hon Nefolovhodwe raised an important issue, and one that I think we
need to remind this House of. The question is: What happens when times are
good? When times are good more and more South African families get
themselves into debt. If we look at the increase in household indebtedness
ahead of the interest rate hikes of 1997, you saw the increase from a low
of 42% to a high of 62% in the ratio of household indebtedness to earnings,
and when the interest rates increased many, many families found themselves
on the wrong end of blacklisting, outside of their houses, without their
cars, etc.

The Governor has made the appeal and I want to make that appeal as well.
Times are good and it becomes necessary that we talk about the risks of
interest rate changes now.

If you look at the situation in the United States at the moment, the
commitment by the outgoing chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan,
is that the rates will continue. The incoming chairman, Ben Bernanke, has
indicated that that is a trend he will observe. Savings rates in the United
States are negative. Too many families find themselves deeply in debt and
too many families are going to end up on the wrong side of the interest
rate curve.

It is very important that we make this point repeatedly in South Africa so
that families could prevent the debt trap. We have now been in a very
benign interest rate environment. We have been in a very benign
inflationary environment as well, and people think that tomorrow does not
count.

The world’s interest rates have shifted. We have seen that in the UK and we
have seen it in Australia and New Zealand. It is likely that the European
Central Bank will increase its rates in the same way as the United States
has done. It is unlikely that we will remain behind the curve. It is very
important that this is repeated as a very, very, very important lesson.
Come December, people get bonuses; they think there is no tomorrow. It
feels like there is a lot of money around and the illusion of wealth is
probably going to be exceedingly costly in this environment.

In respect of the hon Simmons – is he still in the House? What we could
never ask of him is to understand that what this document does is to give
forecasts from the best possible information about the situation that will
obtain at the end of the fiscal year, 31 March 2008. It is a long period.
Clearly you will have a series of risks in those kinds of forecasts. We
need to understand that.

I also want to just point out that, in our revenue estimation, there are a
number of government departments involved. Stats SA do not do it alone –
the National Treasury participates, so does Sars, together with some
outside academics. It is the best shot that we have.

If you look at some of the unforeseen expenditure in this economy, and
again try and understand it, the fact is that the decisions that we take
sometimes don’t quite have the intended results. Amongst the decisions we
announced earlier was that we would set a ceiling of R350 000 for car
allowances. If somebody wants to buy a Maybach at R3,5 million, the only
benefit they would be entitled to is R350 000. Notwithstanding that, if you
look at the increases in car sales, coming in at 27,2% as reported in the
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement and you look at the high-end cars,
people are not responding to that. People continue to buy expensive cars
with debt as if there is no tomorrow. We are not seeing the changes.

Let me conclude by saying that these things don’t work through into our
lives and decision-making. But part of the big challenge we have is to
provide certainty so that people can understand that the decisions we take
have a profound impact on their lives going forward. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

              MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT (MTBPS) 2005

             (Consideration of Report of Joint Budget Committee)

There was no debate.

THE CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

Mr Y S BHAMJEE: Chairperson, hon members, my contribution to this debate
begins by referring to inputs of experts and practitioners, whose primary
task is to unpack the draft Revenue Laws Amendment Bill.

Business Unity South Africa’s workshop, representing a wide range of
business interest groups, has acknowledged during the hearings that the
draft amendments are technical in nature and reflect the complexity of the
Income Tax Act. The Banking Association of South Africa expressed a similar
view, namely that there is no doubt that taxation is an extremely complex
subject, with substantial resources devoted to its collection and
administration.

As the demands of the committee are increasing in dealing with technical
Bills, it is imperative that Parliament should give serious consideration
to securing dedicated in-house specialists on relevant fields in order for
the committee to pursue its oversight role to yet higher levels to ensure a
sound Act and to engage constructively in its deliberations on regulations.

The means for revenue collection are company tax, personal income tax and
value-added tax. The mandate to raise these funds is derived from the
Constitution and the appropriation of these funds is guided by the annual
budget speech that outlines government policy and priority objectives. This
requires the Revenue Laws Amendment Act of 2004 and relevant legislation to
be amended annually. In practice, tax law and revenue collection are work
in progress. They are guided by a series of Acts.

The aim of drafters and Sars is to address loopholes, secure in general the
support of taxpayers, introduce best practices and conform to international
norms and standards of economic globalisation. The draft Revenue Laws
Amendment Bill is a single draft Bill when it is subjected to public
hearings, but when it is officially tabled in Parliament, the Revenue Laws
Amendment Bill is divided into two Bills, the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill
and the Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill.

The Revenue Laws Amendment Bill, tagged a section 77 Bill, is a money Bill.
As such, it can only be deliberated on when it is a draft, as the Bill’s
objective is to present a legislative framework for the 2005 Budget, to
legalise its provisions by amending existing legislation and to regulate
for the provisions thereof. To this effect, amendments and/or regulations
to specific sections of a number of Acts are inserted, namely the Transfer
Duty Act of 1949, the Estate Duty Act of 1955, the Income Tax Act of 1962,
the Customs and Excise Act of 1964, the Stamp Duties Act of 1968, the Value-
Added Tax Act of 1991, the Uncertificated Securities Tax Act of 1998, the
Tax on Retirement Funds Act of 1996, the Road Accident Fund Act of 1996,
the Revenue Laws Amendment Act of 2003, the Second Revenue Laws Amendment
Act of 2004 and so on.

The Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill, tagged a section 75 Bill,
introduced amendments to the administrative provisions of most of the Acts
just mentioned. It is blatantly obvious then, that the two Bills are broad-
based. It is not an exact menu. It affects several specialist pieces of
legislation. It would be an exercise in futility for the Portfolio
Committee on Finance to propose such amendments in the absence of the very
necessary specialised knowledge required to appreciate and monitor the
impact of the proposed amendments.

In response to the portfolio committee’s query on where the Commissioner of
Sars gets his mandate to waive, write off or compromise any amount of tax,
duty, levy, charge or other amounts and on a need for tabling regulations,
the following positive response has been inserted as part of clause 15 of
the Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill. In fact, paragraph 1.16 of the
Bill’s memorandum offers a user-friendly explanation for its inclusion. It
is cited in some detail as it may impact on the work of other committees
that deal with public entities:

    . . . section 76(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, and
   consequently the regulations issued thereunder are not applicable to
   Sars. The . . . section . . . states that National Treasury must make
   regulations or issue instructions applicable to departments, thus
   excluding Sars which is defined in the Public Finance Management Act as a
   “public entity”, listed in Schedule 3A of the PFMA.


   It is proposed that enabling legislation be incorporated into the Income
   Tax Act to grant the Minister of Finance the power to prescribe by
   regulation the circumstances for waiver, write off or compromise of
   undisputed tax debts. A provision is also inserted to provide that the
   Minister must publish the draft regulations in the Gazette for public
   comment and that the regulations must be submitted to Parliament for
   parliamentary scrutiny at least 30 days before their promulgation.


Parliament must thus ensure that the tabling of regulations is referred to
relevant committees timeously in order to satisfy the constitutional
obligation of their oversight role. The finance committee must not be found
wanting. This can only serve to improve the quality of legislation and
advance the principle of good governance.

Regarding the issue of specialist researchers, it is conceded that it would
be an expensive exercise to enlist this resource. But it is respectfully
submitted that failure to do so would, in the long run, cost much more and
compromise our primary parliamentary obligation of playing a meaningful and
effective oversight role. The opportunity costs cannot be ignored.

This motivation in no way intends to undermine the role that the Treasury
and Sars in particular have played in guiding the committee. In fact, their
responses to our queries and suggestions have been highly professional and
empowering. However, it may be argued that the committee, at one level,
cannot claim that it was solely responsible for the amendments proposed.

Inputs from public hearings are largely left to the Treasury and Sars to
respond to. The process lacks the robust debate necessary that would have
ensued, had the committee had the resources of appropriate technical
specialists, bearing in mind that a money Bill cannot be amended. If the
status quo prevails, the objective of the committee may stand to be
compromised. In some instances, crucial clauses may pass unnoticed. This
empowerment is a challenge, not only for the finance committee to pursue
but for all committees of this hon House.

Regarding the issue of land restitution, its delay has plagued progress. As
a way forward, it is proposed that the so-called Land Bank valuation be
replaced with a valuation applicable to all other property, namely the
price that could be obtained between a willing buyer and a willing seller
dealing at arm’s length in an open market must be reduced by 30%.

To address the need concerning the shortage of skills, in particular to
attract foreign expatriates, it is proposed that, in keeping with
international practice, taxation on a nonresident’s foreign income and
capital gains, when physically present in the Republic, should be extended
from three years to five years.

In general, the Bills address the following: tax treatment of medical
schemes contributions, withholding tax on foreign entertainers and
sportspersons, controlled foreign company rules, visiting skilled
expatriates, changes to the tax treatment of public benefit organisations,
the extension of urban development zones initiatives, changes to the
collection of the road accident levy, a number of changes to the Value-
Added Tax Act, income tax exemptions, government grants, individual home
office grants, company car fringe benefits, travel expenses of family
members to visit an employee working away from home, pension provisions for
previous nonstatutory force members and so on. My comrade, the hon B A
Mnguni, will unpack these issues in his input.

In our driven commitment to create a better life for all, in contemplating
challenges of a dynamic economy on the one hand and increasing the revenue
base on the other, we need to constantly strive for equitable nonpunitive
revenue collection. The amendments proposed to the Acts, through the Bill,
progress towards this objective.

In conclusion, for the benefit of the industrious member of Parliament who
has the conviction to familiarise himself or herself with the memorandum
explaining the amendments, the document is about 90 pages in length.

The ANC supports the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Chairperson, before the Minister loses any more of
his hair – he has not got much left! – I’d like to tell him that we’re
supporting the Bill. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The Bill is an omnibus piece of legislation, which seeks to amend various
pieces of tax legislation currently in force. The amendments put forward
are results of the National Treasury and SA Revenue Service wishing to
broaden the tax base, implementing suggestions made in the process of the
budget review, closing tax loopholes in the current legislation and
generally introducing incentives or allowances which public policy may
dictate.

As pointed out by the previous speaker, it’s a large Bill of 92 pages, and
I certainly don’t intend going through anywhere near the content of it, but
I do want to single out a few things which were of interest from
presentations to the committee. I thought the contribution at the public
hearings of the Aids Law Project in respect of clauses dealing with medical
contributions and expenses was insightful.

The object of these clauses of the Bill is to increase access to private
health services through the provision of tax subsidies for medical
contributions and expenses of self-employed and formerly employed persons,
including their dependants. It also aims to remove the distinction between
on-site and off-site medical services.

I think one of the points made which I thought was very important was the
fact that benefits in this Bill applied in terms of this particular section
to those that fall above the tax threshold, namely those that earn more
than R2 971 per month. Those that fall below the threshold are obviously
exempt from paying tax, are not in the tax system and therefore do not
receive tax subsidies related to medical contributions and expenses. In a
sense, we don’t provide for it. This is a piece of tax legislation and it
is not in the purview of this legislation to deal with people that fall
below that threshold. It is something that we as legislators must apply our
mind to.

To the hon member who spoke earlier and attacked me because perhaps I
hadn’t been poor at an earlier stage, I must point out to her that she
knows nothing about my past and she makes one fundamentally wrong
assumption and that is that only black people can be poor. I must tell you
that poverty goes across all racial barriers and the member should listen
to that and remember that. [Interjections.]

A representation that I regret Treasury did not accept came from the
independent producers association. The amendment tabled seeks to stimulate
the film-making industry in South Africa by allowing for the deduction of
production and post-production costs if 75% of those costs are paid to
individuals or entities attracting tax in South Africa.

Accepting that the market for South African films, without some
international stars, is limited, they argued for a formula that would allow
for some deduction upfront of the costs of these stars. This argument
seemed to me to be of merit and would pave the way, I believe, for the
aggressive marketing of essentially South African-made films in markets
where these stars have high recognition.

Two further amendments that deserve a short mention are those, firstly in
respect of capital gains tax where the period of eligibility for capital
gains tax for foreign skilled persons temporarily working in South Africa,
is extended from three to five years. This is an excellent introduction,
particularly in the light of the skills shortage that we have. I should
hope that it acts as an extra incentive for people coming to work here for
short-term periods.

Secondly, I think a vital piece of legislation which, once again, is firmed
up in this Revenue Laws Amendment Bill, is the urban development zone
clause, with the benefit of accelerated depreciated allowances for
construction and development being extended to first-time buyers. This is
excellent and we approve of it. [Time expired.]

Mr T E VEZI: Chairperson, in the interest of time, I will not now start
tabulating the various amendments, which this Bill deals with. This is a
well put-together Bill with the majority of measures introduced,
understandable, justified and welcomed.

The IFP supports the accelerated allowances for small businesses, but same
should be accompanied by relaxing leasing restrictions. Restrictions of
leasing will restrict the ability of small businesses to invest. The IFP
supports a simplified tax system and in the circumstances substantial
resources should be applied to interpret and apply the tax rules. The IFP
advocates the adoption of international accounting standards to resolve the
ambiguity of derivatives. Tax amendments for policy objectives should be
supported by financial impact assessments.

The proposals contained in the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill will contribute
to broad-based empowerment by offering tax breaks for broad-based share
plans directed to lower-level employees. The IFP supports the Revenue Laws
Amendment Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, churches in South Africa form huge NGOs
providing vital mission assistance to communities. In providing these
benefits, they relieve the financial burden which otherwise falls on the
state. Tax benefits are designed to assist such PBOs with resources to
enable them to fulfil their responsibilities to the community and achieve
their objectives.

Certain proposals were made by the Methodist Church and the SA Council of
Churches. Some of them were accepted in full or in part, others were
rejected. For example, the concept of a rebate was withdrawn. In order to
assist PBOs, where trade and income unrelated to the objective of the PBO
constitutes a small part of the total income of that PBO, a de minimis
threshold is to be introduced. This we support.

The proposal of a uniform tax rate for PBOs was noted as a matter requiring
further research. The department also accepted proposals regarding capital
gains. Whilst there were various concerns that were not accommodated by the
department, the ACDP will support this Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, these amendments affect six of our revenue
laws. Our revenue laws are aimed at the collection of state annual income
from which the public expenses are met. The intention of these laws is good
but we must look into their impact on the nation.

The Estate Duty Act of 1955 refers to the determination of duty payable to
the property of the deceased. This leaves the dependants of the deceased
with a dispute of fighting over crumbs after a portion of the will is paid
as tax. The Value-Added Tax Act of 1991 has left most of our African
businesses bankrupt.

There has been a witch-hunt for businesses that operated prior to the new
dispensation for taxes not submitted in the old apartheid era. During the
scrapping of arrears for services in 1994, the businesses of Africans were
not included in the deal. Today they bear the brunt. The government must
protect African businesses. The PAC supports this Bill.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. The MF supports the authority given
to the Minister of Finance by amending the Transfer Duty Act of 1949.
Further amendments made in terms of succession law to the Estate Duty Act
of 1955 are found just and therefore supported. In terms of the amendment
made to the Income Tax Act of 1962, the MF finds clarity in provisions made
that shall clear subtle discrepancies in sectors such as tax credit,
rebates and foreign investments.

Clarity and provision are also provided for other business sectors and the
MF hopes that these shall be applied effectively to bring our economy in
line with global trends, make growth and development more accessible and
make investment easier and more attractive.

Further amendments made on the Value-Added Tax Act of 1991 provide greater
clarity and we agree that they bring the Act in line with the Customs and
Excise Act of 1964. The changes made in terms of VAT debts will persuade
our people to live within their means and spend on necessities for
survival. The MF supports the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr B A MNGUNI: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson, I would like to highlight
just a few things already mentioned by the hon Bhamjee. I will only mention
three or four of those issues.

Public benefit organisations have been taken care of, although, as the hon
member has said, some ideas still need proper investigation. For instance,
the PBOs such as churches can now exceed their income limits when engaged
in trading activities, which are not actually objectives of the church, but
they have the opportunity to raise funds. In that way, there are positive
externalities as the wealth of our communities increases. On the other
hand, there are also positive externalities as far as the tax is concerned
because they increase the tax base of the country for sustainable revenue.
In simple terms, these concessions help the PBOs to raise their tax
threshold from R25 000 to R50 000.
In recognition of the sacrifices made by individuals who were members of
the liberation movements, special pensions provisions were introduced for
such persons through the enactment of the Special Pensions Act, Act No 69
of 1996. The consequences for recipients of special pensions are not often
understood by the beneficiaries. Therefore, the beneficiaries must take
note that special pensioners will not pay tax on any funeral benefits,
payable in terms of the Special Pensions Act of 1996. The beneficiaries
must clearly understand that these tax exemption provisions only apply to
funeral benefits.

Generally, recipients of special pensions are liable for a tax if such
beneficiaries have a total income that exceeds R35 000 on 28 February 2006
and that should be the day of handing in your income tax return.

It is an accepted practice internationally for entertainers and
sportspersons to pay tax in countries in which they perform. Now the
problem arises where the state or the government is unable to collect that
tax due to the little time those sports personalities or entertainers spend
in the country. A provision is made here so that those entertainers do pay
tax by proposing that the organisers who are resident in South Africa must
be made liable for that tax due by the entertainer or the sports
personality. It will be 15% of the gross income paid to the entertainer.
The rate is applicable to all those people who come into the country to
entertain. SADC entertainers, the people from our neighbouring countries,
paid only 5%. Now there is a proposal that they should also pay the 15%
rate, because if they pay 5%, it is against the general agreement on trade
and tariffs. So, to comply with international standards, they will now also
pay 15%. However, that 15% is not tax deductible as it is paid to the
organisers, who retain it, or to the event management who organised the
party, so that the people who leave the country will pay their dues. It
won’t be tax deductible.

Earlier on there was a share scheme for companies that they got when they
gave shares to their employees. That share scheme gave the wrong impression
that people who leave the company before 5 years will not pay tax. This
Bill proposes that that perception be corrected and employees who leave the
company and who got those equitable shares, will be liable for tax.

It further proposes that if a company is taken over by another company or
if it is restructured, the new shares that are accrued to that particular
individual or employee should not have a limit. With this equitable share
scheme there was a limit of shares that the company could give to the
employee.

In short, these are the issues that I would like to bring to light for the
members and the public as such. There are a lot of issues that are
addressed by the Bill, of which the ideology behind the whole of this Bill
was debated in the Budget Speech as such. This Bill just effects
administratively all those proposals made by the Minister in his budget
speech. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I have been
given the task to filibuster until the next Order is ready to appear before
the House. [Interjections.] Let me deal with just a few issues,
Chairperson. I hope that the officials are running around to try and find
those involved in the next Order. [Interjections.] No, I didn’t have
dinner, unlike some members who may be tired and emotional at this stage.

One of the issues that I’d like to respond to is what the hon Davidson
raised about the film-making incentives. Around the world, the big, big
problem is that incentives have been horribly exploited. The stories in
South Africa are legion and there is a high level of aggressive marketing.
Clearly, film is going to be an important industry in this country. We must
recognise it and we must be able to structure the appropriate balances.

The previous allowances, of course, required some definition of a film as
being a South African export film. Now we have levelled the playing field,
so all films should be able to benefit. That is the key issue and I think
we must, with DTI, the IDC, from the perspective of Sars, must remain
engaged with this issue to examine how, in an orderly way, we can support
an industry like this. As a tribute to the hard work that the hon Davidson
put into preparing for today, I want to get him a ticket to go and see the
premiere of Mama Jack, one of the new South African films this weekend.

The second issue I’d like to deal with is the matter raised by the hon
Likotsi. We were very mindful of the position that affected a number of
black businesses pre-democracy and so, in very close proximity to each
other, we actually had two tax amnesties. I met with Nafcoc in virtually
every region in the country to ensure that all of their members understood
that those who were reasonably outside of the tax law, could benefit from
the amnesty and there could be a new beginning in the advent of democracy.

We reached many, but there were some who were so far outside the norms,
that we couldn’t. Those remained some difficult cases, but on a visit
earlier this year to Limpopo where I met with hundreds of small
businesspeople to discuss tax issues, I was astounded to see how many of
them were tax compliant and felt aggrieved that others were not tax
compliant. Frequently the grievance that small businesspeople express
against foreigners who have recently settled in the country, is that they
don’t contribute to the tax pool.
Businesses say that they would like to help Sars to ensure that everybody
becomes compliant. We are actually on a good wicket. The changes announced
earlier this year in respect of a very open window to small business, the
availability of software to help businesses to be compliant, the employment
of tax helpers by Sars, the opening of the Soweto tax office earlier, all
of that is part of the same strategy, which includes a very important
element of outreach.

The last point that I’d like to respond to, is the matter raised by the hon
Swart. The difficulty we have is: When is a church a church? When is a
church a business, which amongst other business activity, purveys biblical
tracts or something else? [Interjections.] It is a fundamental question. I
have been in discussion with the SACC about this matter, because there are
some churches that are actually way beyond the margins of decency in
respect of what they rake in from their congregations.

I think it would be a travesty to include the deeming provisions that
should apply to bona fide nonprofit PBOs, including those in the faith
community, to those kinds of businesses. We have a difficulty and I have
asked Dr Cele to help us see whether somewhere in the depths of theology,
there is some definition of what a church is but we are still waiting for
the answer to that.

There is one last issue, which I think is probably the best news,
Chairperson. One of the issues in this Bill and its amendments – and the
hon Koos van der Merwe would know this as a lawyer – in paragraph 10 of
Schedule 7 is a benefit that we had to build in for MPs. It relates to
travel privileges for people who work more than 250 km from where they
would normally reside.

There is one difficulty with it and that is that members must have been at
a place other than their normal place of residence for 183 days.
[Interjections.] No, I don’t think it is funny. [Interjections.] The
problem, Chairperson, and I want to address the Chief Whip’s Forum on this
matter, is that by tomorrow, Parliament would have sat for 178 days this
year. So you either find 5 more days or you pay the tax and for your
families’ travel privileges. [Laughter.] Thank you. [Applause.]

THE HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): If you’d kept on speaking as slowly
as you started off, we would have been here for another five days!
[Laughter.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.

                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

                     REVENUE LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.


                         ELECTRICITY REGULATION BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Chairperson, hon members, I
table before you the long-awaited Bill in the electricity sector, the
Electricity Regulation Bill. Allow me to remind you that South Africa is
well-endowed with energy resources, which, unfortunately, were historically
exploited for the benefit of a few and to the exclusion of the majority of
our people.
With the broad spectrum of our energy carriers, electricity is one that has
contributed, and will continue to contribute, to the sustainability of both
our economical and social lives.

Our White Paper on the Energy Policy, developed in 1998, was informed by
the realisation of the fact that the apartheid system had bequeathed to us
a legacy of an electricity industry that was characterised by a chaotic
regulatory regime, poor and fragmented service delivery, and a limitation
of access to the privileged minority.

As was stated in the said policy, various legal instruments would be needed
to give effect to a number of objectives outlined in the energy White
Paper. Subsequent to the promulgation of the energy White Paper, numerous
Cabinet decisions were taken as part and parcel of the tools to actualise
this policy, with due regard to the dynamic global environment which was
impacting upon the electricity industry in general.

The legislation that I table before you today is, amongst others, one of
those instruments designed to weave together the various aspects of the
plan to restructure the electricity industry, as contained in the said
Cabinet decisions.

We are also aware of the limitations of the existing electricity regulation
legislation, namely the Electricity Act of 1987, as amended. You will
recall that this Act, as amended, sought to establish the National
Electricity Regulator.

Madam Chairperson, hon members, allow me to illustrate the said limitations
by way of an example. It is a well-known fact that South Africa has been
enjoying the cheapest electricity prices in the world at the wholesale
level. It is also known that the domestic tariffs in most local government
cases do not reflect these low prices, for reasons that will be outlined
later.

If we are to address poverty and facilitate the improvement of the quality
of life of our communities, we need to be able to effectively regulate
electricity prices for the benefit of the end user.

This Bill, therefore, seeks to address the shortcomings in the existing
legal framework, by ensuring that our legislative framework is in line with
our constitutional framework and provisions of other prevailing subordinate
legislation. The Bill also seeks to empower the National Electricity
Regulator and its successor, the National Energy Regulator of South Africa,
to efficiently and effectively regulate this industry.

The Bill also seeks to regulate the total electricity value chain, from
generation through transmission to distribution and the trading of
electricity. In that context, the powers of the regulator to address such
concerns as the blackout pandemic that we have seen in our major cities
like Johannesburg, Tshwane, including the experience of Cape Town this past
week, and other municipal undertakings, are reinforced.

Also in line with the White Paper on the Energy Policy, in May 2001 a plan
was conceived to adapt the role of the regulatory system, which includes,
amongst other things, the reform of the legal framework defining the role
of the National Energy Regulator, the development of a new framework for
licensing, the adaptation of the price-setting regime, the creation of
capacity to monitor the effectiveness of the electricity industry, and
ensuring the security of supply.

With a view to giving effect to the above objectives, this Bill also
bestows on the regulator powers to license generation, transmission,
distribution and trading, to register unlicensed service providers, to
impose punitive measures in the event of breach of licence conditions, as
well as to set tariffs.

I would like to point out to you that this Bill empowers the regulator to
impose a penalty of R2 million per day or 10% of the annual turnover, to be
paid by the offending licensee, as imposed by the regulator.

What is presented here today is a section of the electricity regulatory
framework that complies with the provisions of section 75 of the
Constitution.

Issues pertaining to the electricity reticulation as an area of competence
of the local sphere of government have been excluded from this Bill and
will be the subject of another Bill, which will be introduced in due
course. Also to be introduced in due course will be the Electricity
Distribution Industry Restructuring Bill, which will enable us to reform
the EDI in a manner that attains the objectives of our energy policy.

The following are the substantive issues that were raised during the public
hearings and that were deliberated upon by the Portfolio Committee on
Minerals and Energy: First is the role clarification between the Minister
and the regulator. In terms of the governance framework, the Minister
remains the custodian of government policy and monitoring. The Minister
will also draft regulations.

On the other hand, the regulator will be responsible for those
administrative functions, which include the overseeing of adherence to
regulations. The regulator will also be responsible for execution of such
regulations, drafting the rules and procedures pursuant to such
regulations, as well as drafting directives provided for under the
regulations.

The second substantive issue that came up is facilitating renewable energy
and the independent power producers. Due to our increasing energy needs and
our anticipated economic growth, we expect large investments in the energy
sector. This also provides us with an opportunity to diversify our primary
energy sources, which at the moment are dominated by coal.

In order to be able to diversify our energy mix, including the introduction
of renewable energy sources, the Bill provides for non-discriminatory
access to electricity produced by the independent power producers in the
electricity networks. Moreover, in order to meet our projected energy
demand in the next twenty years, which will require an investment of
approximately R240 billion, participation of the independent power
producers has become necessary to ensure the security of supply.

The last substantive issue that I would like to deal with is legislation of
the key performance indicators. As alluded to earlier, the Bill will allow
government to address the current quality of supply problems of the
magnitude that has recently been experienced throughout the country. It
also empowers the Minister to formulate regulations relating to the norms
and standards regarding the following: one, the level of investment in
infrastructure relating to new assets; two, the level of maintenance
expenditure; three, the quality of supply, and other key performance
indicators, as well as penalties. This would significantly enhance our
ability to address the problem, which has significant socio-political as
well as economic impact.

In conclusion, by supporting this Bill, you will be creating an environment
conducive to effective and efficient service delivery to the end user at an
affordable price. Blackouts and brownouts will be effectively managed, and
the security of supply will be enhanced. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu E N MTHETHWA: Sihlalo, Ngqongqoshe, boNgqongqoshe abakhona nethimba
lezezimbiwa namandla, maqabane nesizwe sonke, umbutho wesizwe usaqhubeka
nokushaya imithetho ehambisana noMthethosisekelo, njengoba kufanele.
Isheduli 4, iNgxenye B, yoMthethosisekelo ibalula ukuthi amandla okuphaka
ugesi asesezandleni zikahulumeni wasekhaya.

Lo Mthethosivivinywa esiwubeka lapha phambi kwenu namhlanje uhlose ukufeza
iphupho eliqukethwe kwinqubo yethu yokwakha nokuvuselela ebizwa nge-RDP.
Lelo phupho lithi bonke abantu bayothola ugesi. Lo Mthethosivivinywa
uphinda uqede uMthetho kaGesi owashaywa ngonyaka ka-1987 ngesikhathi
kusadliwa ngendebe endala. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr E N MTHETHWA: Chairperson, hon Minister, Ministers present, the
Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, comrades and the nation at
large, the ANC continues to pass laws that are in line with the
Constitution, as a requirement. Schedule 4, Part B of the Constitution
provides for local government legislative competence on matters of
electricity and gas reticulation.

The Bill that we present before you today is intended to achieve the
objective of the RDP. That objective goes on to say all shall have water
and electricity. This Bill further repeals the Electricity Act of 1987
passed during the old order.]

Hon members, the Electricity Regulation Bill seeks to consolidate and
integrate the regulation of the energy industry. As the ANC, we believe
that the central regulation of the energy industry will ensure uniformity,
control and progress in the industry.

As some might be concerned about the future of the employees of different
energy regulators, it should be noted that the integration of different
energy regulators will not result in any job losses. This legislative
development strengthens and recognises the role of the National Energy
Regulator of South Africa, which we will refer to as Nersa.

In terms of the Bill, the regulator is mandated to be the enforcer of the
national electricity regulatory framework. The National Energy Regulator
will be responsible for the provision of licences and registration for
generation, transmission, distribution and import and export of
electricity. It is imperative to note that the Electricity Regulation Bill
focuses on the electricity component of energy.

This legislative development addresses itself to the economic regulation of
the electricity industry. The health and safety component of the regulation
is within the ambit of the Department of Labour.

The maintenance of quality service standards is central to this Bill. The
Bill strengthens the regulator’s ability to ensure high quality of service.
The underlying objective of this Bill is to stimulate and encourage foreign
direct investment. In this instance the Bill encourages the independent
power producer to invest in South Africa.

Logically, it is a known fact that government cannot afford to develop the
electricity infrastructure alone. The private sector has a significant role
to play in this regard. The Bill allows the Minister to introduce
independent power producers.

This is in the interest of contributing positively to the economic growth
of South Africa. The private sector will bring in new technologies in the
area of electricity distribution and infrastructure to improve quality of
service. As the ANC, we believe that communities should play a meaningful
role on issues of tariff setting, quality of service, etc.

It should be noted that the Electricity Act of 1987 did not encourage
community participation, and the Electricity Regulation Bill encourages
community participation through end user forums. The end user forums are a
direct expression of the Freedom Charter principle, which proclaims that
the people shall govern.

It is in this spirit that the ANC advocates popular participation for
people’s power and an active citizenry. Principles of the developmental
state are hinging upon the fundamentals of popular democracy, and the ANC,
as the voice of the masses of this country, will continue to advance their
interest.

This Bill addresses itself to requirements as contained in the Promotion of
Access to Information Act and the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act.
Furthermore, in the past big electricity utilities would default through
outages and other things and in return they would just write cheques to pay
whatever penalty was required.

This legislative development seeks to empower Nersa to have more authority.
The regulator will, for the first time, have teeth to bite. In enforcing
required service standards, the regulator can also sit as a tribunal to
impose penalties on offenders. In circumstances of outages, a fine of R2
million per day will be handed down, as the Minister has mentioned.

The Bill intends to curb outages that have been dogging our country. A
typical example would be the outages that happened recently in the
Johannesburg Metropolitan Municipality, under the auspices of City Power.

It should also be noted that the Bill intends to stimulate quality service,
and this will be in the interests of the masses who are end users. Our
socioeconomic and political consciousness ensures that we continue to
develop progressive legislation for the benefit of all South Africans.

As the Reconstruction and Development Programme pronounced that there
should be electricity for all, it is on that footing that the ANC commits
itself to this just cause for the betterment of the lives of the masses of
our people.

The promulgation of the Electricity Regulation Bill seeks to usher in long-
overdue transformations into the energy sector. As the ANC we support the
Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Chair, the contentious issues relating to the right
of municipalities to reticulate electricity has been acknowledged by this
Bill. The Constitution states that municipalities have the inherent power
to reticulate electricity, while this Bill attempts to regulate that right
of municipalities to ensure that the objectives of the electricity industry
are met.

The provision of electricity by municipalities has been erratic at the best
of time. This is an aspect which this Bill attempts to address by granting
the National Energy Regulator the power to consider and issue licences, set
up advisory forums as well as customer and end user forums in order to
ensure the development and operation of electricity supply infrastructure.

Furthermore, it seeks to ensure that the interests and needs of present and
future electricity customers are safeguarded, facilitate investment and
universal access to electricity as well as promote competitiveness and
customer choice, creating a fair balance between the interests of
customers, licences and investors in the electricity supply industry.

The restructuring of the distribution industry into regional electricity
distributors – REDS - is still to take place, with confusion as to whether
six REDS, with a seventh national RED encompassing those rural
municipalities which do not form part of the REDS, will in fact be
constituted. It is clear that the REDS are currently heading for a disaster
as RED 1, the so-called regional electricity distributor for the Western
Cape region, currently consists only of the city of Cape Town.

This matter is still to be addressed in a Bill yet to be introduced, the
contents of which initially formed part of this Bill, but had to be removed
due to extensive pressure by local government authorities due to their
unwillingness to surrender the income derived from electricity
reticulation.

As stated during the briefings to the portfolio committee, most countries
on the continent are moving towards independent regulation and have
unbundled the electricity supply chain into generation, transmission and
distribution, with the independent power producers playing an increasingly
important role.

Insofar as the Bill encourages competition in energy supply, it is
supported. It should furthermore encourage efficient use of electricity and
meet social objectives such as electrification by providing energy
requirements to the most needy section of our society. It is important to
note that the Bill provides for the establishment of privately owned
electricity generators.

In summary, this Bill regulates the powers and duties of the regulator,
determines which activities require licensing and which activities don’t,
sets the conditions for the application of licences and the advertising
thereof, the rules regarding the amendment and renewal of licences and the
contraventions thereto.

In short, these powers are extremely important as the base load of
electricity supply is clearly running out and new power stations are
urgently required in order to prevent a shortage of power supply leading to
the blackout which Cape Town experienced last Friday due to the Koeberg
Nuclear Power Station shutting down, inter alia, due to an overload of the
power requirements placed on the Koeberg power station. The DA will be
supporting this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, at times we take the value of an important
commodity such as electricity for granted, and we also forget how reliant
we are on it. [Interjections.] This past Friday afternoon, large parts of
the Western Cape were left . . . [Interjections.]

THE HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, members! Hon Lucas, one moment
please. Please, I cannot hear the speaker. Please continue, hon member.

Mr E J LUCAS: This past Friday afternoon, large parts of the Western Cape
were left without electricity when the Koeberg transmission network
apparently tripped. This blackout illustrated just how reliant we are on
electricity, and the importance of a reliable source of electricity.

The memorandum to this Bill states that the government’s intention is to
optimise the operation of the industry to maximise the potential for
adequate, reliable and low-cost electricity to serve the people and
industries of South Africa. It is imperative not only for economic
development, but also for community and social development that these
intentions are realised.

The main objective of the Bill is to set out the role for a national
electricity regulator in respect of the electricity industry, with regard
to licensing, setting tariffs and setting of norms and standards for the
operators of the electricity industry. Other important objectives of this
Bill are to provide the legal framework for the generation, transmission
and distribution of electricity to individuals, communities and the
business sector, as well as to provide for the establishment of privately
owned electricity generators.

We in the IFP are very concerned that an important part of the Bill, the
section dealing with municipalities, has been left out. In the objectives
of the Bill it is stated that the Bill recognises the rights of
municipalities, in terms of Schedule 4B to the Constitution, to reticulate
electricity and at the same time regulate the right in order to ensure that
municipalities meet the objectives of government in an electricity
industry. We have been told that this aspect will be dealt with in a
separate Bill that will come before the committee at a later stage. We hope
that it will come before the committee soon, as it is a very important
part.

I have been a member of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy for
many years, and that committee has always worked well. I was, however, very
disappointed at the procedures followed with the handling of this Bill. The
IFP supports the Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Chair and hon members, the sheer number of previous
amendments to the Electricity Act of 1987 has made it a clumsy and
increasingly redundant piece of legislation. The need to simplify the
legislative framework was sufficient to justify the introduction of this
Bill. In addition, government is pursuing certain policy changes. Chief
amongst these is the establishment of the National Energy Regulator, which
will replace the National Electricity Regulator.

The electricity industry is dominated by large and powerful entities with
huge bureaucracies, such as Eskom, large national and multinational
consumers, and government. In this mix, the average residential consumer is
a very small person facing gigantic interests with budgets of hundreds of
millions. The National Energy Regulator must prove its value by
demonstrating that collective and individual rights of residential
electricity consumers will be actively protected and promoted against the
narrow interests of other stakeholders in the industry.

The industry remains a complex monopoly prone to exploiting the residential
electricity consumer. Thank you, Madam Chair. The UDM supports the Bill.
[Time expired.]

Mnr J J COMBRINCK: Agb Voorsitter, Suid-Afrika behoort aan almal wat daarin
woon, en die rykdom van Suid-Afrika sal ook aan almal behoort wat daarin
woon. Dié is twee belangrike sinne in die Vryheidsmanifes.

Dit was vir hierdie droom dat duisende Suid-Afrikaners hul lewens moes
opoffer vóór 1994. Dis hierdie droom wat die ANC tot vandag toe die
gewildste organisasie in Suid-Afrika gemaak het, omdat die ANC ‘n
ooreenkoms en ‘n kontrak met alle Suid-Afrikaners gesluit het om ‘n beter
lewe vir almal te bewerkstellig.

Wie is jy en waarheen gaan jy, en het jy reeds eienaarskap van Suid-Afrika
onder die ANC-regering aanvaar? Want, as jy nog sukkel om dit te aanvaar,
moet jy dringend selfondersoek gaan doen. Dan moet daar iets met jou lewe
verkeerd wees. Die onvermoë van baie mense in Suid-Afrika, en veral onder
die groepe wat vóór 1994 redelik bevoordeel is, om die demokrasie te
verstaan laat ‘n mens die vraag vra: Hoe lank gaan dit nog neem om Suid-
Afrika ‘n land te maak wat werklik vry gaan wees van enige ongeregtigheid?

Met die terugkyk na die verlede is die doel geensins om skuldgevoelens aan
te wakker of selfs skuld toe te dig nie. Skuldgevoelens is ‘n negatiewe
energie en onaangespreek dien dit geen doel om iets positiefs by te dra tot
die toekoms nie.

Hoe elkeen van ons met die verlede handel, is ‘n persoonlike keuse. Die
tempo waarteen elkeen kies om dit te doen, is ook ‘n persoonlike keuse.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Mnr W D SPIES: Wat het dit met die wet te doen?
Mnr J J COMBRINCK: Die probleem is, julle gewetens pla julle, daarom sal
julle aanmekaar sit en praat daaroor. Tot en met 1994 het niemand ...
[Tussenwerpsels.] As jy luister dan sal jy hoor waarheen ek oppad is, maar
die probleem met julle is, julle vergeet waar baie van hierdie mense
vandaan kom. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Tot en met 1994 het niemand regtig geweet wat ‘n demokrasie . . .
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Mnr J P I BLANCHÉ: Op ‘n punt van orde, Voorsitter: Ons is nou met ‘n wet
besig, kan u net die spreker daaraan herinner sodat hy by die punt bly en
by die wet uitkom? [Tussenwerpsels.]

Mnr J J COMBRINCK: Die probleem met die DA is dat hulle nie wil luister
nie. Hulle vergeet ‘n mens maak ‘n punt om by die einde uit te kom.

Nou reeds 11 jaar in die nuwe Suid-Afrika het die demokrasie só deel geword
van elke dag se bestaan dat ons nie eens meer agterkom hoe gelukkig ons is
om saam te lewe sonder om eers toestemming te vra vir ‘n plekkie onder die
son nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ek wil u vra: plaas jouself in die skoene van ‘n ouerige dame van 60 jaar,
wat haar hele lewe nog net ’n bestaan gemaak het deur daagliks kilometers
ver te stap om haar hout te gaan haal om vuur te maak; om water te gaan
haal om haar kinders te was en skoon te maak. Vandag bly dieselfde persoon
in ‘n huis wat die ANC-regering aan haar verskaf het. Daar is lopende water
. . . [Tussenwerpsels.]

Mnr J P I BLANCHÉ: Voorsitter, op ’n punt van orde: Ek het vroeër ‘n punt
van orde gehad en u gevra om ‘n beslissing te doen, sal u asseblief daaroor
beslis? [Tussenwerpsels.]

DIE HUISVOORSITTER (Me C-S Botha): Agb lid, ek sal ‘n beslissing maak
wanneer ek dink dit is nodig, dankie.

Mnr J J COMBRINCK: Daar is derduisende gevalle soos hierdie in Suid-Afrika
waar kragstasies wat in die apartheidsjare gebou is, volslae mislukkings
is. Hulle is die meeste ontwikkel... [Tussenwerpsels.] Man, dit is omdat
julle nie geluister het nie! [Tussenwerpsels.] Mens moet ‘n ding vat om tot
‘n punt te kom. Meeste van hulle is vóór 1994 ontwikkel . . .
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Meeste van hulle is vóór 1994 ontwikkel met die uitsluitlike doel om aan
fabrieke en ‘n uitgesoekte groepie – waarvan die DA steeds ‘n deel is –
elektrisiteit te voorsien. As gevolg van hierdie oorbelaaide kragsentrales
in Suid-Afrika ondervind baie stede en dorpe gedurig kragonderbrekings.

Dié van u wat verlede Vrydag in die Kaap was, sal besef hoe ongemaklik die
lewe sonder elektrisiteit geraak het. Dit is teen die agtergrond van
bogenoemde feite dat die Minister van Minerale en Energie besluit het om
die elektrisiteitsreguleringswetsontwerp ter tafel te lê. Dit is in
soortgelyke omstandighede wat baie lande wat in dieselfde omstandighede as
Suid-Afrika was, ook begin het om hul elektrisiteitsvoorsiening te
ontbondel. Die doel is dat die regering die wetsontwerp neerlê en dat die
reguleerder die tegniese sy en kapasiteit reguleer.

Die sukses van dié wetgewing is dat almal baie seker moet wees oor die rol
wat elke speler in die bedryf moet speel, met ander woorde, die regering,
die reguleerder, die provinsiale en munisipale owerhede. Die reguleerder se
hoofdoel sal ten alle tye wees om deursigtig te wees. Verder sal die
reguleerder ook seker maak dat daar geen diskriminasie tussen die
verskillende klasse in die samelewing is nie. Die lisensies wat aan die
elektrisiteitsontwikkelings uitgereik word, sal deur die reguleerder
uitgereik en gekontroleer word. Die reguleerder sal ook pryse en tariewe
reguleer.

Ons almal weet dat Suid-Afrika van die goedkoopste elektrisiteit het, maar
teen die tyd wat dit by die eindverbruiker uitkom, het dit soms tot vyf
maal duurder geword. Dus is daar goeie nuus vir kiesers op pad. Munisipale
distriksrade kan nie meer van elektrisiteit vra wat hulle nodig het nie.

Hierdie wet maak ook voorsiening dat ander private kragstasies ook nou kan
ontwikkel word, veral teen die kusgebiede, want die meeste van ons
elektrisiteit kom van die binneland waar daar meer standhoudende riviere
vir hidroëlektrisiteit en steenkoolmyne is. Die vervoer van steenkool na
kusgebiede is baie duur, en daarom is elektrisiteit ook baie duur teen die
kusgebiede.

Die kans om op ander maniere elektrisiteit op te wek, is nou gebaan. In
hierdie geval dink ons veral aan PWMA’s, sonpanele en windmeulens. Die
reguleerder sal ook almal registreer wat tot op datum elektrisiteit opwek
maar onder geen beheerliggaam val nie. Die kwaliteit van elektrisiteit en
die gereeldheid daarvan, sal ook nou gereguleer word. Die reguleerder sal
verder ‘n gebruikersforum stig waar alle eindverbruikers die probleme kan
aanmeld.

Met dié wet gaan die ANC-regering weer eens tot sy uiterste om ‘n beter
lewe vir almal te bewerkstellig. In Afrika is daar geen middeweg nie; ons
droom en visie moet ten alle tye wees om die armstes van die armes te help.

Diegene van ons wat vanaand probleme met dié wet het, het nooit soos
daardie 60-jarige tannie die hout vir vuur gaan haal nie, en ook nie die
stink rook van steenkool ingeasem gedurende die wintermaande nie. Die ANC
steun hierdie wetsontwerp. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Mr J J COMBRINCK: Hon Chairperson, South Africa belongs to all who live in
it, and the wealth of South Africa will also belong to all who live in it.
These are two important sentences in the Freedom Charter.

It was for this dream that thousands of South Africans had to sacrifice
their lives before 1994. It is this dream that has made the ANC the most
popular organisation in South Africa to date, because the ANC has come to
an agreement and contract with all South Africans to bring about a better
life for all.

Who are you and where are you going, and have you already accepted
ownership of South Africa under the ANC-led government? Because if you are
still struggling to accept it you should seriously do some soul-searching.
Then there must be something wrong in your life. The inability of many
people in South Africa, especially among those groups who were relatively
privileged before 1994, to understand democracy leads one to ask the
question: How long is it still going to take to make South Africa a country
that will be truly free of any injustice?

Looking back at the past the aim is certainly not to conjure up feelings of
guilt or even instil guilt. Feelings of guilt are a negative energy and if
not addressed serve no purpose in contributing anything positive to the
future.

How each of us deals with the past is a personal choice. The pace at which
everyone chooses to do so is also a personal choice. [Interjections.]

Mr W D SPIES: What does that have to do with the Bill.

Mr J J COMBRINCK: The problem is that your consciences are bothering you,
which is why you will constantly talk about it. Up to 1994 no one...
[Interjections.] If you listen, you will hear where I am heading, but the
problem with you is that you forget where many of these people come from.
[Interjections.]

Up to 1994 nobody really knew what a democracy . . . [Interjections.]

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: On a point of order, Chairperson: We are dealing with a
Bill, will you please remind the speaker of that so he can stick to the
topic and get to the Bill? [Interjections.]

Mr J J COMBRINCK: The problem with the DA is that they don’t want to
listen. They forget that one has to make a statement to get to the point.

Now already 11 years into the new South Africa democracy has become so
entrenched in our day-to-day existence that we don’t even realise any
longer how lucky we are to live together without first having to ask
permission for a place in the sun. [Interjections.]

I want to ask you: Put yourself in the shoes of an elderly lady of 60
years, who has throughout her whole life had to make do by walking for
kilometres to fetch wood to make a fire; to fetch water to wash her
children. Today this same person is living in a house the ANC-led
government provided her with. There is running water . . . [Interjections.]

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Chairperson, on a point of order: I had a point of order
earlier and asked you to make a ruling on it. Would you please make a
ruling on it? [Interjections.]

THE HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I will make a ruling
when I deem it necessary, thank you.

Mr J J COMBRINCK: There are thousands upon thousands of cases like this in
South Africa where power stations that were built during the apartheid
years are complete failures. Most of them were developed...
[Interjections.] Man, it is because you didn’t listen! [Interjections.] One
has to make a statement to reach a point. Most of them were developed
before 1994 . . . [Interjections.]

Most of them were developed before 1994 for the sole purpose of providing
factories and a selected group – which the DA is still a part of – with
electricity. Due to these overburdened power stations in South Africa many
cities and towns are experiencing regular power failures.

Those of you who were in the Western Cape last Friday will know how
inconvenient life has become without electricity. It is against the
backdrop of the above-mentioned facts that the Minister of Minerals and
Energy decided to table the Electricity Regulation Bill. In similar
circumstances many countries that were in the same situation as South
Africa also started unbundling their electricity supply. The aim is that
government tables the Bill and the regulator regulates the technical side
and capacity.

The success of this legislation is that everyone must be very sure of the
role each player in the industry has to play, in other words, government,
the regulator and provincial and municipal authorities. The regulator’s
main aim will at all times be to be transparent. Further the regulator will
also ensure that there is no discrimination between the different classes
in society. The licences issued for electricity development will be issued
and controlled by the regulator. The regulator will also regulate prices
and tariffs.

We all know that South Africa has some of the cheapest electricity, but by
the time it reaches the end user, it has sometimes become five times more
expensive. Therefore, there is good news on the way for voters. Municipal
district councils can no longer demand what they need from electricity.

This legislation also makes provision for other private power stations to
be developed, especially in coastal areas, because most of our electricity
comes from inland where there are more perennial rivers for hydro-
electricity and coalmines. Transporting coal to coastal areas is very
expensive and that is why electricity is also very expensive in coastal
areas.

The way has now been paved to generate electricity in other ways. In this
instance we are thinking specifically of PBMRs, solar panels and windmills.
The regulator will also register all those that have been generating
electricity to date but do not fall under any governing body. The quality
and regularity of electricity will now also be regulated. The regulator
will further establish a user forum where all end users can report these
problems.
With this legislation the ANC-led government is once again doing its utmost
to achieve a better life for all. In Africa there is no midway; our dream
and vision should at all times be to assist the poorest of the poor.

Those of us who have a problem with this legislation tonight have never,
like the 60-year old lady, fetched wood for the fire and breathed in the
smelly coal smoke during the winter months. The ANC supports this Bill. I
thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr H B CUPIDO: On Friday, 11 November 2005, Cape Town was brought to a
virtual standstill as a result of a power failure. A leading South African
economic expert stated that the impact of this powercut on the economy
could run into millions of rands. This incident clearly illustrates our
heavy reliance on the efficient provision of electricity. It is within this
context that the ACDP harbours certain concerns with regard to the
Electricity Regulation Bill.

The Bill provides for the establishment of privately owned electricity
generators. The proposed regulator is further not required to set specific
criteria for licence applications. The question that arises is: How will
this affect the quality of service delivery? This is particularly
disturbing when one considers the fact that the restructuring of the
electricity distribution industry is not yet a cut-and-dried situation.

The Minister has further contended that the Bill will attract investment
and create jobs. There does not however appear to be a coherent plan or
framework in place that clearly shows how this will be achieved.

Notwithstanding some of our concerns, the ACDP will support this Bill.
[Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the purpose of this Bill is to establish a
National Regulatory Framework for the electricity supply industry. The
intention is to achieve the efficient, effective, sustainable and orderly
development of electricity supply infrastructure in the country.

However, there might be unintended consequences in this matter such as
inferior quality, power cuts during bad weather – which are common in our
residential areas - inability to fast-track provision of free electricity
in compliance with the policy of free basic services, and price hikes and
tariffs.

We are opposed to privatisation of strategic state assets and are for
socialisation. Privatisation at this stage will suit the rich and
disadvantage the poor and the unskilled who may not meet the set
requirements of the regulator. Privatisation results in workers being
retrenched and may aggravate poverty. In the long term, privatisation may
result in monopoly. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, South Africa constitutes an approximate
46,6 million citizenry. One of our greatest challenges is to supply all of
the citizenry with fresh running water, electricity, sanitation and in
general improve the standard of living of the large amount of our people
who are poverty-stricken.

Many in the Cape were concerned last Friday when a glitch at Eskom caused
the power failure and the MF acknowledges the dominance of Eskom in the
sector. It is at times like these that we realise the importance of
electricity in our daily lives and it is an opportunity to wonder how those
who survive without electricity actually manage.

The public at large needs to be made aware of government’s commitment to
delivering to the people and its initiative to provide electricity to all
by 2008 is well on its way.

The MF, in terms of the Bill, supports the National Regulatory Framework
for the electricity supply industry. We therefore acknowledge the benefits
of instituting a regulator to monitor, manage and regulate the sector.
The Bill constitutes a well-devised plan for the electricity supply sector
and we hope that with its efficient institution it shall usher in many
benefits in supply, co-ordination and control of electricity to the people.
Furthermore, we are glad to see the regulation of pricing and charges is
addressed.

Every light powered by electricity is a sign of life. The MF strongly
supports the 2008 deadline to supply all South Africans with electricity so
that the 46,6 million South Africans may enjoy a better life. The MF
supports the Electricity Regulation Bill. [Applause.]

Prof I J MOHAMED: Madam Chair, the Portfolio Committee of Minerals and
Energy has communicated our condolences to Minister Lindiwe Hendricks,
Minister of Minerals and Energy, on the passing away of her mother last
week. I wish to record once again in this National Assembly our condolences
and heartfelt sympathy to Minister Lindiwe Hendricks and her family.

Minister Hendricks and Deputy Minister Lulu Xingwana and the Department of
Minerals and Energy, we congratulate you on the Electricity Regulation Bill
and other legislation you have put before our committee in the past few
weeks. These go a long way in addressing various matters of concern that
the wealth of our country will be more equitably shared with our people.

The Bill’s objective is to establish a National Regulatory Framework for
the electricity supply industry, to make the National Energy Regulator the
custodian and enforcer of the National Regulatory Framework and to provide
for licences and registration as the manner in which generation,
transmission, distribution, trading and import and export of electricity
are regulated.

The objectives of this Bill are, amongst others, to achieve the efficient,
effective, and sustainable and orderly development and operation of
electricity supply infrastructure in South Africa; to ensure that the
interests and needs of the present and future electricity customers are
safeguarded and met; to facilitate the investment in the electricity supply
industry; to facilitate universal access to electricity; to promote the use
of diverse energy sources and energy efficiency as set out in the White
Paper on Energy.

The National Energy Regulator is the custodian and enforcer of the
regulatory framework provided for in this legislation. The regulator must
monitor performance in terms of compliance with the national government’s
electricity policy framework and take appropriate steps in the case of non-
performance.

It may mediate in disputes between generators, transmitters, distributors
and municipalities, and undertake investigations and enquiries into the
activities of licensees. We the end users trust that bodies like City Power
in Johannesburg can be brought to heel and not be allowed to continue
operating old outdated equipment, resulting in frequent breakdowns and
electricity supply interruptions, which at times can last a few days.

We trust that the complaints over outdated equipment from apartheid days
can be brought to an end and that we can be provided with the right
electricity supply system and maintenance that we expect should be
provided.

My task is to address the issues of licences and registration, and I will
now do so.  The regulator will be empowered to set out forums consisting of
customers, end users, to advice it on matters affecting them. The regulator
may require a licensee to establish and fund a customer and consumer forum
in the manner set out in the licence held by such a person.

With regard to electricity licences and registration, the Bill provides,
that firstly, no person may, without a licence issued by the regulator in
accordance with this Act, operate any generation, transmission or
distribution facility, import or export any electricity, or be involved in
trading. Secondly, notwithstanding subsection (1), a person involved in an
activity specified in Schedule 2 need not apply for a licence issued by the
regulator.

Thirdly, nothing in this Act precludes a potential licensee from discussing
the contemplated construction or operation of generation, transmission and
distribution facilities, the import or export of electricity, prior to
filing a licence application with the regulator. Fourthly, no request for
further information, notification or discussions referred to in subsection
(3) may be construed in any way as conferring any right or expectation on
an applicant.

With regard to certain activities not licensed, the Minister may, after
consultation with the regulator, determine by notice in the Gazette that
any activity contemplated in section 8(1) need no longer be a licensed
activity from the date set out in such notice.

The Minister may, after consultation with the regulator, determine by
notice in the Gazette that any person involved in an activity relating to
trading or the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity that
does not require licensing in terms of section 8 must register with the
regulator. The regulator may make registration subject to adherence to this
Act.

Any person who has to hold a licence in terms of section 8 must apply to
the regulator on a prescribed form and pay the prescribed application fee.
Any application contemplated in subsection (1) must include the required
description of the applicant; documentary evidence of the suitability of
the applicant; a description of the proposed installation description of
the customer to be served; the plans and the ability of the applicant to
comply with applicable labour, health and other regulations; and evidence
in compliance with any relevant integrated energy plan.

When an application is made for a licence, the regulator may require that
the applicant publish a notice of such application, which must carry the
specified information and run for a specified time in a publication that
may be prescribed.

The regulator must furnish the applicant with all the relevant information
so that the application can be properly filed, including objections to the
applicant. The regulator must decide on an application in the prescribed
manner within 120 days. The regulator must provide the applicant with a
copy of its decision.

The regulator may make any licence subject to conditions relating to the
licensee and its customers; the furnishing of such documents as the
regulation may require; the period of validity of the licence; the setting
of approval of charges, rates and tariff charges to customers; the quality
of electricity, termination of electricity supply to customers and other
such specified conditions as well as tariff principles in section 16. The
regulator may revoke a licence on application by a licensee. Under certain
conditions, the regulator may require 12 months’ notice in writing.

If it is alleged that the licensee has contravened or failed to comply with
a licence condition, the regulator may sit as a tribunal with other parties
to decide on the allegation and action to be taken. The regulator may
appeal to the High Court to suspend or revoke a licence. At the end of the
licence period, the licensee may apply for a new licence.

In any civil proceedings against a licensee arising out of damage or injury
caused by induction or electrolysis or in any other manner by means of
electricity generated, transmitted or distributed by a licensee, such
damage or injury is deemed to have been the negligence of the licensee,
unless there is credible evidence to the contrary.

The state may, under certain conditions, expropriate land to facilitate the
achievement of the objectives of this Act. I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, I would like to thank all
the hon members for supporting this legislation and would like to assure
the hon member Schmidt that there is absolutely no confusion around the
establishment of the regional electricity distributors. The process of the
establishment of the REDs is on track. Cabinet has approved the
establishment of six municipal REDs and one national RED, and that is what
we are implementing.

Regarding hon member Lucas and his concern, I think the concern is valid
and it is noted. I think it’s important to say that the reticulation of
electricity is an area that belongs to the municipalities in terms of the
Constitution and that is why it was necessary that we split the Bill and
that that issue be dealt with in terms of section 76. We are hoping that
with the assistance of Parliament we will be able to bring that piece of
legislation back onto the agenda of Parliament, because we would like to
see that Bill passed as well.

In respect of the issues raised by hon member Cupido regarding the concern
about quality of service and whether that should be guaranteed, I thought I
had addressed that fully in my speech. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF ACCESSION OF SOUTH
     AFRICA’S MEMBERSHIP OF THE INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SCIENTIFIC AND
                        TECHNICAL INFORMATION (ICSTI)

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Madam Chair, hon Ministers and hon Deputy Ministers, hon
members, I stand here before this House on behalf of the Portfolio
Committee on Science and Technology to present to you and to seek your
approval of the request for South Africa’s membership of the International
Centre for Scientific and Technical Information, which I shall call
“ICSTI”, so that I do not keep on repeating the full name.

Briefly, the International Centre for Scientific and Technical Information
(ICSTI) was established in February 1969 with the objective of providing
information and analytical and consultative support services to its members
to advance international co-operation in science and technology. The
organisation has 18 members, mainly from Eastern Europe.

The main activities of ICSTI are in the areas of information networks,
information technologies and databases. The activities are, for example,
focused on development of new advanced information technologies, especially
network technologies and database services. ICSTI is also developing an
integrated information network for member states to exchange science and
technology-related information resources, products and services.

Another area of activity of ICSTI is information and analytical projects.
Activities are focused upon the processing of scientific and technical
information within the context of specific market studies and analyses. The
objective is to provide optimal information support through accessing and
analysing global information sources for member states who work on the
development of new technologies.

Other activities on science, innovation and technology policy are
undertaken to assist member countries in the commercialisation of research
results through policy analysis, for example related to intellectual
property and market access. Priority objectives are to support small and
medium enterprises, the promotion of trade co-operation between member
states, and technology and high-technology products.

What are the benefits? One of the benefits of ICSTI participation is that
the Department of Science and Technology is pursuing the development of an
international technology and information platform as a priority objective
in order to enhance South Africa’s strategic international technology and
information collection, analysis and dissemination capabilities. The latter
capacities are critical support requirements for optimal engagement in
international science and technology co-operation activities.

South Africa’s participation in ICSTI activities will significantly enhance
counter-strategic international technology and information capacities.
Although ICSTI is an independent and international organisation, its close
relationship with the Russian Federation will also provide further impact
to the strengthening of South Africa’s science and technology partnership
with that country.

There are many strategic benefits to be leveraged from a strengthened
science and technology partnership between South Africa and the Russian
Federation, as well as many other ICSTI member states. South Africa’s
participation in ICSTI activities will significantly benefit the
strengthening of these relations.

As regards funding and the constitutional implications of this agreement,
ICSTI has an annual membership fee of only about 1 500 US dollars.
Countries must, however, fund their own costs incurred in participating in
ICSTI activities. The procedures for South Africa to join ICSTI are
governed by section 231(2) of the Constitution, since joining the
organisation has financial implications.

The member countries established ICSTI under the agreement on the
establishment of the International Centre for Scientific and Technical
Information concluded in 1969. In order to join ICSTI, South Africa must
accede to this agreement. In terms of the ICSTI statute accession is
effected through a formal written communication by the applicant government
to the ICSTI director requesting membership.

All ICSTI member states must assent unanimously to a new country joining.
This process will be effected once parliamentary approval for South
Africa’s membership of ICSTI is obtained in terms of section 231(2) of the
Constitution. Please also refer to the advice of the Chief State Law
Adviser, which confirms that none of the provisions in the ICSTI agreement
and statute are in conflict with the domestic law of South Africa.

Therefore, as we stand here as a committee today, we have to understand
that at the dawn of the 21st century scientific knowledge plays an
essential role in our everyday lives. Scientific knowledge is not only the
result of scientific endeavour and human curiosity, but it is also a
powerful means of understanding human nature, society and the natural world
on which we depend.

In the past the main role of science has been the production of new
knowledge in order to satisfy the inherent curiosity of the human mind.
Most recently scientific advancement has become the main driver for
development in society. Because of this, there are real opportunities for
science to make a significant contribution to sustainable livelihood and
the development of humankind.

In spite of its spectacular development and new opportunities, scientific
pursuit of knowledge in the 21st century faces wavering confidence,
unforeseen dilemmas, unexpected challenges and brand-new questions. These
problems can be solved only if the main producers and users of knowledge
are able to reach common ground for the new roles of knowledge and science
in today’s global society. Globalising the science system is therefore at
the centre of progress.

For these reasons the portfolio committee seeks the approval for this
agreement from the House. Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Deputy Chair, I would like to indicate that the DA will
be supporting the request. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Chair, surely after such a
scientific exposition they have no choice! [Laughter.]

Accession of South Africa’s Membership of the International Centre for
Scientific and Technical Information (ICSTI), approved.

The House adjourned at 21:12.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                          MONDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)


     (1)    The JTM on 11 November 2005 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (i)     Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)


     (2)    The JTM on 10 November 2005 in terms of Joint Rule 160(4),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (i)     National Land Transport Transition Amendment Bill [B 38 –
              2005] (National Assembly – sec 76)


     (3)    The JTM on 14 November 2005 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 77 (money) Bill:


         (i)     Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 77)

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly

1.    Report of Joint Budget Committee on the Medium Term Budget Policy
    Statement (MTBPS) 2005, dated 11 November 2005:

Introduction

South Africa’s growth strategy aims to modernise  the  economy  and  improve
its competitiveness, while broadening  participation  and  enhancing  social
inclusion. The 2005 Medium Term  Budget  Policy  Statement  addresses  these
goals,  outlining  the  expenditure  plans  and  policy  aims  of   national
departments and provincial governments. (Foreword, MYBPS 2005).

The Joint Budget Committee reports as follows:

The Minister of Finance, the Honourable Trevor  Manuel,  tabled  the  Medium
Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) before Parliament on 25  October  2005.
Sitting as the Joint Budget Committee, the Portfolio and  Select  Committees
on Finance were briefed on the MTBPS by the  Minister  of  Finance  and  the
Director-General of the National Treasury.

The Joint Budget Committee also heard submissions from selected  economists,
National Departments, non-profit and research organisations from 27  October
to 02 November 2005 under the following themes:

    • Rural Development and Urban Renewal
    • Justice and Protection Services.
    • Employment and Economic Growth.
    • Social Services.
    • International Trade.

The  report  is  divided  into  broad  sections.   Section  1  outlines  the
presentation of the National Treasury, as well as submissions of  economists
on the MTBPS.  Section 2  outlines  submissions  of  departments  and  other
organisations on the MTBPS.   Section  3  lists  the  general  concerns  and
recommendations of the Joint Budget Committee on the MTBPS.

Joint Budget Committee Mandate

The Committee’s mandate regarding the MTBPS  requires  it  to  consider  the
distribution of available expenditure against government policy  priorities.
This mandate is separate from that of the Portfolio  and  Select  Committees
on Finance, which respectively deliberate on the macro-economic, fiscal  and
intergovernmental aspects of the MTBPS.

The Committee has interpreted its mandate to mean that  it  should  consider
the following:

   • The likely impact of expenditure  allocations  in  the  MTBPS  on  the
     effectiveness and efficiency with which  departments  can  respond  to
     government’s stated policy priorities,
   • Whether departments are making the tough choices  required,  tailoring
     their  planned  expenditures   to   priorities,   choosing   effective
     strategies and seeking efficiency in implementation.

The hearings aim at addressing these issues,  and  preparing  the  Committee
and Parliament for its deliberations and vote on the Budget itself.

1. Briefing by National Treasury

The Minister of Finance, the Deputy Minister and  the  Director  General  of
Treasury briefed the Committee. The Minister opened with the statement  that
“No country can grow only on the basis of their Macro-economic  policy,  but
no country can grow without it.”

The key themes of the 2005 Medium-term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS)  were
targeting of new funding in line with  the  Accelerated  and  Shared  Growth
Initiative (ASGI), while maintaining standing budget  priorities.  The  ASGI
prioritises infrastructure development,  education  and  skills  and  second
economy interventions,  while  standing  priorities  are  housing/the  built
environment,  the  progressive  social  security  net  and  developing   the
capacity of the state. The growth forecast was strongly positive  despite  a
high current account deficit and  oil  price  pressures,  and  inflation  is
expected to stay  within  the  target  band.   Fiscal  expansion  continued,
growing by R78 billion or 6.3%, due to a  strong  economic  performance  and
there  were  significant  increases  in  allocations  for  each  sphere   of
government. Public sector capital formation increases,  while  debt  service
costs continue to decline.

Additional allocations and conditional grants over the MTEF period include”
      • R20 billion for investment in  the  built  environment  –  housing,
        community and physical infrastructure;
      • R12 billion for education, health libraries social grants, cultural
        institutions and sports participation;
      • R9 billion for economic services including science  and  technology
        and development and industrial policy initiatives;
      • R7 billion for improved courts, policing and Defence equipment  and
        access to justice services;
    • R8 billion for improved public administration.

The provincial budget saw R46 billion added, R30 billion to  the  provincial
equitable share, R15 billion added to conditional grants and a  further  R15
to be spent on the provincial infrastructure  grant.  The  Director  General
noted that the MTEF includes an allocation of R24 billion to  municipalities
to compensate for the terminated RSC levies. Local  government  receives  an
additional  R2  billion  over  the  MTEF  period  in  addition  to  the  RSC
replacement.

Investment in human resource development, institutional capacity and  skills
development in all spheres of government were a  major  focus  of  Committee
concern. It raised the questions of whether a skills audit  been  done.  The
recurring problem of  municipal-level  capacity  and  skills  deficits,  and
particularly whether  there  was  sustainable  skills  transfer  by  Project
Consolidate, came under  focus.  Underspending  by  and  fiscal  dumping  on
municipalities  were  also  questioned,   and   why   under-performing   and
underspending departments and  institutions  continued  to  be  compensated.
Concerning the impact of skills  deficits  on  underspending,  the  Treasury
team highlighted poor planning systems as  a  cause  of  underspending,  not
merely poor financial management. The  decreased  budget  deficit  reflected
limited viable expenditure possibilities, according to Treasury. Quality  of
proposed expenditure programmes had to  be  taken  into  consideration  when
allocating budget resources. In tracking  performance,  there  needs  to  be
measurement of outcomes for effective oversight, not merely the inputs.

2. Economists’ comments

Four economists commented on the MTBPS. All were broadly positive about  the
direction of fiscal policy, though skills constraints and the effect of  the
regulatory burden, especially on small business, were common concerns.

Independent  economist  Noelani  King  Conradie  warned  that  the   current
consumer-led boom cannot achieve 6% a year growth unless matched by  export-
led growth in production capacity. Tax cuts would help create jobs, and  she
believed that there was enough room in  the  budget  to  cut  taxes  without
cutting spending or driving up the deficit.
Equally important were steps to make it easier, simpler and  cheaper  to  do
business in South Africa,  and  introducing  more  innovative  and  generous
incentives to stimulate small business.

Nazeema Moola  of  Merrill  Lynch  agreed  that  the  regulatory  burden  on
business should be lifted  to  stimulate  business  development.  While  the
infrastructure  development  programme   envisaged   by   government   would
encourage some small business development, more could be done to help  small
business by lowering company taxes and deregulating the labour market.

Riefdah Ajam of the Federation of Unions  of  SA  said  the  Reserve  Bank's
recent inflation projections  were  too  negative.  She  believed  inflation
would peak in February 2006 at about 5.5 percent as oil  prices  moved  down
to about $50 (R338.50) a barrel and telecommunications  costs  continued  to
fall.

Cecil Mlatsheni of UCT focused on youth unemployment, and measures  required
to bring it down. Skills training initiatives have limits, given a  lack  of
aggregate labour market demand. However,  lack  of  skills  in  turn  limits
growth. Schooling efficacy is a major cause of concern and FET  colleges  an
important intervention, but more information  on  the  effect  of  education
mechanisms on growth and employment is required.

3. Theme 1: Rural Development and Urban Renewal
Thursday 27 October 2005

Recurring issues of local and departmental capacity,  and  effectiveness  of
coordination between government institutions, were key  areas  of  Committee
inquiry under this theme.

The Department of Provincial and Local Government
The  DPLG  briefed  the  committee  on  the  Integrated  Sustainable   Rural
Development Programme (ISRDP) and the Urban Renewal Programme (URP),  noting
that their main focus was on the  second  economy.  Rural  and  urban  Nodal
areas were defined and identified. Both these programmes of  the  department
were said to be at the centre of fighting poverty and underdevelopment,  and
building  economic  growth  in  communities.  The  department  stated   that
currently the nodal areas were growing at 1,8 % per annum, and that  it  had
already begun mainstreaming  programmes  of  Project  Consolidate  in  nodal
areas. There had been economic profiling of the  nodal  areas  in  order  to
structure economic programmes for them. In conclusion, the department  added
that their priority areas and  programmes  were  concurrent/consistent  with
the current MTBPS.

The department agreed with  the  Committee  that  co-operation  between  the
DPLG, Treasury and DBSA was of importance. In response to a  query  about  a
skills audit, the department noted that its capacity  to  identify  specific
needs requires to  be  addressed.  The  department  added  that  there  were
systems being put in place to measure  success  or  the  extent  of  Project
Consolidate

The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
The department stressed the importance of its three core  programmes;  water
resource management, water services, and forestry, noting that its  business
was to address social, economic  and  environmental  problems,  as  well  as
managing  the  economic  assets  of  water  resources,  and  forestry.   The
department presentation concluded by noting that their core principles  were
in line with the MTBPS, and in terms  of  issues  of  improving  quality  of
life. The department also added that it had  limited  financial  inputs  for
water for economic growth and development.

The Committee enquired about  the  recent  typhoid  outbreak  and  moves  to
prevent  another  such  occurrence,  and  the  DWAF  replied  that  it   had
established a task team. On the Limpopo drought crisis, the  department  had
done projects to  build  dams  and  that  6  dams  have  been  completed.  A
feasibility study was currently under way for building  a  dam  in  Tzaneen.
There was also a plan to look at sourcing  water  from  elsewhere,  and  one
such place identified was Gauteng. The department also noted that its  water
crisis could not be looked at  in  isolation  to  the  other  two  countries
(Zimbabwe and Mozambique) with which it worked and used water.

The National African Farmer’s Union
NAFU started by stating  the  challenges  that  it  faced,  which  were  the
absolute levels of spending in agriculture,  and  also  the  cumbersome  and
slow government programmes. However, it noted that the  share  of  money  to
agriculture  had  in  fact  increased.  Weaknesses  highlighted  were   slow
processes and limited finance. It recommended  that  government  review  its
funding,  and  address  the  problem  of  lack  of  clarity  as  to  AgriBEE
programmes.  The  organisation  urged  that  the  department  stop  creating
complex solutions to simple problems. Lastly,  the  organisation  noted  the
lack of access of black farmers as of major concern.

Members engaged with the issue  of  NAFU  members  being  unable  to  access
relief funds, and asked about issues of profitability and market  access  of
emerging farmers. NAFU proposed one-stop shops so that people  could  access
these programmes  at  a  less  cost.  However,  NAFU  raised  the  issue  of
Agriculture Department officials managing members’ farms  on  their  behalf.
Its also stressed the need for  government  to  coordinate  service  to  the
people, noting that while the budget  was  adequate,  the  manner  in  which
delivery of services was coordinated limited  delivery,  which  resulted  in
the need for more funds. A Department of  Agriculture  official  then  added
that it was essential  that  its  stop  creating  new  structures  to  solve
problems. She said that structures were in place and needed to be  used.  In
terms  of  NAFU's  recommendation   that   implementation   be   driven   by
communities,  she  was  concerned  about  issues  of   accountability,   and
capacity.

The Department of Agriculture
The presentation was short, and the department was  asked  not  to  continue
with the presentation, as it did not address the issues in relation  to  the
MTBPS.

Members wanted to know what measures had been put in place  to  address  the
issues raised by NAFU and wanted clarity on the weakness of  delivery.  Land
Use Management coordination within district municipalities was  raised.  The
Committee enquired how many beneficiaries requesting assistance from  MAFISA
received it, and in terms of underspending on CASP,  one  member  wanted  to
know if a performance audit had  been  conducted  in  order  to  assess  the
impact of MAFISA on intended beneficiaries

The department noted that it was working together  with  the  Department  of
Land Affairs. Its then noted that MAFISA was launched in 3 nodal areas,  and
in  terms  of  progress,  its  said  that  its  were   currently   screening
applications. In relation to the criteria used to  determine  allocation  of
funds to provinces for CASP, the  department  said  that  it  considers  the
number of land in province to the number of  land  already  distributed.  On
the  issue  of  land  use  and  the  coordination  of  municipalities,   the
department said that it was working closely  with  municipalities  and  that
municipalities were encouraged to identify  land  that  could  be  used  for
agricultural purposes.

The Department of Land Affairs
The Department noted that with a cumulative 1.827 million  hectares  already
redistributed, against the 2014 target of 25  million  hectares,  there  was
cause for concern, and this was one of the main reasons for the recent  land
summit.

In response to a  Committee  question  on  meeting  the  2008  objective  of
settling all land claims, the department  noted  that  performance  was  not
that good and that there were many challenges. The challenges ranged from  a
lack of financial management skills to the fact that its  were  now  dealing
with rural land claims, which were more complex.  In  terms  of  state  land
being distributed, the department noted that state land was  negligible  and
that its were dealing with capacity issues. About funding for  land  reform,
the department said focus on the medium term would  be  on  restitution  and
that more money for land reform will be made available  through  the  medium
term.

One member requested a follow-up on the Spatial Development  Framework,  and
wanted to know what measures were in  place  to  ensure  compliance  by  the
municipalities. Capacity constraints were given as the reason.

4. Theme 2 (Security and Justice)
31 October 2005

The Committee was concerned about coordination and communication within  the
cluster, and following up on issues raised in the 2004 MTBPS hearings.

The Department of Safety and Security
The Department noted that the SAPS operational priorities are in  line  with
the MTBPS, as well as those of the Justice, Crime  Prevention  and  Security
Cluster. Additional funding enables capital expenditure  on  facilities  and
capacity building for border control, additional personnel and  the  revised
reservist system to take over the SANDF commandos.

The department responded to Committee enquiry that all  spending  priorities
identified in the previous year had been achieved.  In  relation  to  Scarce
Skills Indicators, the department confirmed that it had developed  a  model,
and that the process was currently  being  refined.  The  department  stated
that reduction in crime by 3, 4, and  5%  in  the  past  few  years  was  an
indication of the  seriousness  with  which  its  officers  took  crime.  To
address crime prevention the department noted that it was important  to  co-
operate with other clusters. On the above point the  department  added  that
it was working with  other  clusters,  in  such  programmes  as  the  Nodes,
Project Consolidate, and the Urban and Rural Renewal programme.

Questioned about Commandos, and regarding the relationship between the  SAPS
and the SANDF, the department noted that there was equipment that was  being
transferred to the SAPS from the SANDF.

The Committee enquired about vehicle management;  the  department  responded
saying that its did make provision for vehicles  per  annum,  and  that  the
vehicle fleet grew by 3000-4000 units/year. The department added  that  this
process also included replacement. In terms of  resourcing,  the  department
noted that it needed to sustain these vehicles. When looking at the  vehicle
(process) model, the department felt that its model was sufficient.

The Committee recommended  that  current  priorities  be  linked  with  last
year’s, and stressed the importance of integration and the need for  greater
co-operation within the cluster. The department took note of this and  added
that maybe there needed to be greater involved of the  other  units  in  its
cluster, in this budget hearing.

The Department of Defence
The department outlined its budget history since 1994 and set out  its  nine
priorities for  the  2006  MTEF.  Key  areas  are  equipment  modernisation;
military skills development; information and communication systems;  Defence
infrastructure and ARV rollout.

The committee wanted to know whether the  department’s  concern,  raised  in
last year’s presentation, about expectations that were not reflected in  the
MTEF, notably peacekeeping, had been addressed. The department replied  that
last years presentation was still an ongoing issue, and  that  the  National
Treasury was indeed helping them. The funds allocated the  department  noted
as being insufficient, and was considering topping-up  the  allocation  from
its internal budget

On  bad  conditions  in  military  hospitals,  the  department  noted   that
maintenance was the key and that it was working with Public Works  and  that
there was progress. In terms of personnel in Burundi,  the  department  said
that it could not scale-down on personnel due to elections.  The  department
submitted that there were a total of  1287  members  currently  deployed  in
that operation.

On the issue of land restitution, which  the  department  addressed  in  its
presentation,  the  Committee  wanted  to  know  why  this  matter  was  not
transferred to Land Affairs, as it concerned state land. He also noted  that
department had said last year that Treasury  had  approved  partial  funding
for some of its initiatives  and  wanted  to  know  how  much  this  partial
funding was.

On the issue of land restitution,  the  department  noted  that  it  was  in
constant communication with Land Affairs, and that its had gone  before  the
Land Affairs Portfolio Committee. In  terms  of  other  funding  to  address
shortfalls, the department said that it had a total of  R821  million,  R500
million from the budget, R300 million from internal  budget,  and  R21  from
external funding, which would be used for deployment.  The  department  said
that there was a shortfall in the  amount  that  it  had  requested  in  the
previous year. The priorities that the department stated were still  in  the
process of being processed, according to the department

The Committee was concerned about the R1 million which  the  department  had
underspent,  and   the   way   departments   pleaded   poverty,   yet   were
underspending. The Committee said  that  departments  had  to  be  monitored
carefully during the move to the end of the financial year. On the issue  of
Land Restitution, the Committee proposed that  the  department  be  given  6
months to sort out and hand over this issue to Land Affairs,  and  focus  on
Defence issues. The proposal was accepted.

The Department of Correctional Services
In terms  of  the  MTEF  allocations,  the  department  provided  additional
funding to its  Information  and  Communication  Technology  programme.  The
budget allocation saw an increase of 10,2% from the 2005 to  2006.  For  its
spending proposals, the department  mentioned  its  ‘Centre  of  Excellence’
initiative. The department also signed a contract with an employment  agency
to assist in its recruitment drive. The  department  noted  that  it  needed
8000 additional personnel to kick-start its 7-day  establishment  initiative
by March 2007. It argued that it contributed to job creation, to the  second
economy and to the African agenda,  but  faced  challenges  regarding  anti-
corruption measures, overcrowding and detention of children

The Committee’s concern  was  again  the  lack  of  integration  within  the
cluster. He noted that the department had stated in the previous  year  that
the MTBPS favoured other departments in the cluster and wanted to know  what
the department had done to address  this.  The  next  question  was  on  the
financial implications of a 7-day week, whether  this  initiative  had  been
costed, whether it was more economical than  a  5-day  week  with  overtime.
Members put a series of additional questions.

On the issue of recruitment numbers, the department noted that in  terms  of
its White Paper, costing and planning costs were huge, and  that  the  White
Paper was a 20-year vision. On the issue of immediate  recruitment,  it  was
added that pay for overtime in the 2002-03 financial was in excess  of  R200
– R300 million, which showed the overtime system was not  affordable.  Since
the phasing in of  the  7-day  Establishment  there  had  been  direct  cost
savings, which were being used to increase  recruitment  and  to  deal  with
backlogs. With regard  to  possible  continued  corruption  despite  use  of
employment agencies, the  department  noted  that  it  had  delegated  to  3
agencies since a about 6 million people applied for 1000 posts  at  a  time,
making this volume was impractical for the  department  to  deal  with.  The
department did however note that corruption  was  a  possible  concern,  and
that its needed to speak to the  agencies  in  order  to  monitor  what  was
currently happening.

 In relation to the question about its  medical  aid,  the  department  said
that it had a fully funded non-contributory medical  aid  scheme  in  place,
and like all  other  state  employees,  correctional  service  workers  were
contributing 1,5%.

On the issue of restructuring salaries, the  department  said  that  it  was
finding it very  difficult  to  restructure  salaries/income  levels,  since
salary increases had to be looked at in terms of what work was done  by  the
personnel/correctional   service   officials.   Asked   about   a   possible
discrepancy between numbers of personnel the department wanted  to  recruit,
and the number of personnel already recruited,  the  department  noted  that
its intended to recruit 8000 over the MTEF  period,  and  up  to  3000  were
being recruited per year. The estimated cost for this  initiative  over  the
MTEF was R750 million. In relation to a question on  the  cost  implications
of the change from the overtime system, the department could not respond.

The department responded to a question about management  of  awaiting  trial
prisoners that this was due  to  the  slow  processing  and  low  conviction
rates. The department  suggested  that  integrated  planning  occur  between
departments. Even with the remissions which were granted earlier this  year,
only 32 000 awaiting trial prisoners were released,  leaving  a  further  51
000. While the department noted that this 51 000 was still in its  care,  it
said that there were initiatives between departments to address this.

One of the initiatives was participation  between  departments,  even  at  a
local level. Another measure was the possible release of prisoners who  were
granted but could not  afford  bail  of  R1000  and  less.  While  the  long
duration of awaiting trial prisoners was acknowledged as  a  problem,  other
contributing factors were mentioned such as,  persons  being  arrested  with
insufficient evidence.

The  difficulty  was  also  said  to  lie  with  the  judiciary  not   fully
implementing alternatives  to  sentencing.  The  department  noted  that  it
continued to raise these concerns with the Judiciary,  and  that  there  was
agreement (in a meeting in September) amongst  all  departments  that  there
needs to be improvement.

Another measure taken by the department was  to  put  together  a  proposal,
which would be addressed to the government Legkotla next January  about  the
detention of awaiting trial prisoners.  In  terms  of  the  Inmate  Tracking
initiative, the  department  noted  that  it  did  encounter  problems,  and
therefore the projects were not fully implemented yet.
The department added that a Task Team  was  established  to  report  on  the
effectiveness (and cost) of an Inmate Tracking System. The idea of  the  new
correctional service (‘New  Generation’)  facilities  was  to  have  smaller
units of no more than 60 offenders grouped by age  and  programmes  etc.  In
terms of their design, consultation was done with Public Works, in order  to
ensure that these facilities would  be  escape-proof.  The  department  said
that it was in the process of getting  tender  bids,  which  was  done  with
Public Works. It became apparent that the bidders had very high prices,  and
almost doubled what the department had  budgeted  for.  The  department  had
then submitted the bid offers to an independent quantity surveyor, and  will
reconsider alternatives once the quantity surveyor’s  report  is  available.
The process would also be put on hold until then. In terms of the 2  private
prisons, the department noted that an investigation  was  done  of  the  two
contracts, and that the department was advised that there was no  value  for
money in these two initiatives. The department added that this was  realised
after it had already signed the  contracts.  What  the  department  said  it
would and could still negotiate was the money  in  terms  of  insurance,  as
cost of buying out of  the  contract  was  too  high.  In  response  to  the
question of capital underspending, the department said that it  was  due  to
the delay of building.

The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
The department identified capacity building,  and  especially  prosecutorial
capacity building, in leading to reduction in awaiting trial prisoners.  The
department acknowledged underspending in some respects, and  mentioned  that
it was addressing the capital budget underspending as well.

The department’s report was commended  for  taking  into  consideration  the
cluster approach. On the  issue  of  capital  underspending,  the  Committee
urged  that  something  be  done.  Referring  back   to   the   department’s
presentation  from  the  previous  year,  the  Committee  noted   that   the
department had said that it would increase access to the justice system  for
all, particularly vulnerable groups. On this issue the Committee  wanted  to
know how far the department was in terms of dealing with these issues.

Questioned about underspending on capital items,  the  department  responded
that it was also concerned. However, by dealing with  issues  of  personnel,
it was dealing with infrastructural capacity,  and  that  its  were  filling
posts. In  terms  of  improving  access  and  building  infrastructure,  the
department said that courts had been  built.  Responding  to  concern  about
lack of financial statements, the department  said  it  was  undertaking  an
advertising bid for a consortium to handle money and trust funds.

In terms of personnel expenditure, the  department  noted  that  there  were
areas with insufficient personnel, and a process  was  being  embraced  that
separated judicial and administrative functions so  that  judicial  officers
could perform only those functions directly relating to  their  jobs,  which
the  department  believes   will   increase   efficiency.   The   department
highlighted the commitment made by Treasury to assist it by  increasing  the
number of police and prosecutors.

About  the  current  status  of  awaiting  trial  prisoners  and   diversion
alternatives, the department said that its  were  addressing  and  exploring
mediation and arbitration  alternatives,  and  increasing  the  capacity  of
advocates. The department also said that it was working on  improving  court
efficiency by  working  on  details  for  the  rollout  of  their  Reagoboso
programme. In terms of providing access and service  to  vulnerable  groups,
the department said it had already  rolled  out  secure-care  facilities  in
some provinces, and that these would be rolled out in the others.

The department noted that there was improvement in the dealing  with  sexual
offences but  that  there  still  needed  to  be  further  strengthening  of
capacity. In its interaction with Public Works  the  department  noted  that
there was still room for improvement, and that as soon as its were  able  to
address their infrastructural issues its would be better  able  to  interact
with Public Works.

Institute for Security Studies

The ISS made a written submission. It viewed the MTBPS positively, and
endorses the emphasis of government on the need to find an appropriate
balance between personnel numbers and salary levels, and between support
and front-line delivery staff in the Defense sector. It supports South
Africa’s growing role in African peacekeeping, but is concerned about the
reduction of landward defense, and urges the SA Army’s need for
modernization of main equipment.

The ISS welcomed the paid reservist system for the SAPS, but again urges
reconsideration of the phasing out of the territorial reserve, arguing for
its role in coping with natural disasters, as well as its rear area
protection role.

5. Theme 3: Employment and Economic Growth (MTBPS Hearings)
01 November 2005

The Committee inquired in some detail into the performance  of  departments,
and was  concerned  when  presentations  did  not  address  the  Committee’s
mandate, and when issues raised in 2004 were not dealt with.

Department of Transport
Transport  services  and  infrastructure  are  the  veins  and  arteries  of
economic growth, according to the Department of  Transport.  The  department
stated that in terms of its priorities, it aimed  to  with  economic  growth
and job creation,  and  bridging  the  gap  between  the  first  and  second
economies.

Also as a department it stated that it wanted to improve  access  to  public
transport, starting with rail, which carries 2,2, million passengers  daily.
There has been a 31,9% growth in rail passengers, and  that  the  ‘Gautrain’
would  be  integrated  with  the  existing  rail  network.  The   department
mentioned that 58 contracts had already been awarded for bus  subsidies  and
that R7 billion would be spent on the taxi  recapitilisation  process.  Some
100,000 taxis would be recapitalised and at a cost of R50 000 each. This  R7
billion  was  said  to  include  that  training  of  traffic  officers.  The
conversion of taxi permits to route based licenses was  seen  as  a  way  to
reduce inter-taxi association conflict. The department stated  that  Eastern
and Western corridors  would  be  rolled  out  at  all  the  provinces.  The
department noted that the  restructuring  of  the  Road  accident  Fund  was
underway. SANRA was aid to have taken over provincial roads. In  preparation
for the 2010 World Cup  the  department  noted  that  an  additional  R241,7
million had been allocated to the department in  adjusted  allocations,  and
an additional R3,5 million  was  allocated  for  infrastructure.  For  rural
transport, the department noted that R90 million was  allocated,  which  the
department, amongst other things, was  going  to  use  for  the  rollout  of
bicycles in rural areas.

The Committee was concerned about the 25% rise in vehicle purchase (car
sales), which was causing huge congestion in national road networks,
infrastructure, and maintenance. Underspending in provinces was also a
concern. On the issue of the 2010 World Cup, the member wanted to know how
sure the department was that its programmes would be done by 2010.

Responding to a question on bus subsidies, the department stated that in
all countries, public transport was subsidised, and that this was value for
money reduced the cost of public transport to commuters. The department
also noted that subsidies to smaller vehicles would drive subsidies to
second economy.

On the issue of conversion  of  taxi  permits  to  operating  licenses,  the
deadline remained and taxis were expected to comply. Those taxi drivers  who
did  not  meet  the  deadline  would   not   be   included   in   the   taxi
recapitalisation process. The department confirmed that its 2010  programmes
would be finished on time. On the ‘Gautrain’ though, the department was  not
sure that the project would meet the deadline. It noted  that  the  national
government would be assisting the provincial government.

On Basic Management Plans, the department noted that it  was  still  rolling
out bicycles. The department also acknowledged the issue of bad  roads,  and
the  need  to  provide  infrastructure  and  said  that  its  was  providing
alternatives. One option that was being considered was that of animal  drawn
carts. On access to public transport, the department admitted  that  it  was
facing difficulties: not all public  transport  was  being  subsidised,  and
that  there  were  fiscal  constraints.  The  department  hoped  that   taxi
recapitalisation would help in this regard. The department said that it  was
aware of the rollover of R30,9 million and said that  a  number  of  factors
contributed to this.

On the issue of train accidents, the department mentioned that  it  had  set
up a railway safety regulator to investigate the  causes  of  the  accidents
and to devise safety regulations.  Rail  infrastructure  would  be  upgraded
also. On taxi recapitalisation, the department said that  R250  million  was
allocated  although  not  one  single  taxi  had  been  recapitalised.   The
department  reassured  members  that  systems  were  in  place,   and   that
agreements have been  concluded  with  manufacturers  in  this  regard.  The
department said that  the  manufacturers  would  only  be  able  to  provide
vehicles  from  June  2006,  and  that  the  department  was  still  helping
provinces prepare for  recapitalisation.  On  the  issue  of  Limpopo  being
unable to provide license renewal notices,  the  department  said  that  the
province’s problems  were  due  to  administrative  shortfalls,  which  fell
outside of the national department’s operations.

Department of Housing
The department emphasized that housing development is one of the most
important economic indicators in South Africa, and the NdoH is the most
important constructor of residential property, producing on average 200,000
subsidised housing units, worth R4,5 billion, and 40,000 in the private
sector per annum. Labour intensive housing programmes create jobs and
investment opportunities, while the department prioritises women and youth
empowerment.

Concerning issues raised in 2004, the Committee wanted to know what had
been done to ensure effective monitoring of fund transfers to the
provinces. The department had responded in the previous year that there was
limited monitoring. In line with the Human Settlement Strategy, the
Committee wanted to know what the department had done to ensure interaction
between all relevant government departments and regarding accreditation to
municipalities, in terms of capacity issues.

The department responded that there had been discussions but no  conclusions
in terms of integration and alignment of resources with  other  departments.
On the issue of  accreditation  of  municipalities,  a  framework  had  been
developed and finalised by MinMec, but at the end  of  the  day  it  is  the
provinces that drive accreditation. On this the department also  noted  that
that the MinMec and SALGA came to an agreement as to housing  delivery.  The
Housing Sector Plan in the IDP was also said to  assist  with  planning  and
getting information  from  communities  to  help  the  department  plan  and
respond appropriately.

On the issue of unfinished or blocked projects,  the  department  said  that
MinMec was working on the unblocking of projects, and that guidelines  would
be provided to emphasise that those  who  are  accountable  should  account.
With regards to the monitoring function, the department stated that a  Chief
directorate was in place and was efficiently capacitated.  On  the  question
of the previous year’s prioritisation, the department said that  it  was  in
interaction with other departments. It had noted the importance of  capacity
building, and had  established  a  unit  and  directorate  in  this  regard.
Unintended consequences were those of the constant  influx  of  people  from
rural to urban areas in search of jobs. The department said that it had  now
recognised the need to consider quality. For this department added  that  it
had a rectification process in place, which was designed to  improve  poorly
built houses.

Questioned about unfinished or  blocked  housing  projects,  the  department
said that MinMec was working on unblocking of projects, and that  guidelines
would be provided. These would emphasise  that  those  who  are  accountable
should account.  With  regards  to  monitoring  of  performance  of  housing
institutions, the department stated that a chief directorate  was  in  place
for this purpose, and was efficiently capacitated. It also noted  that  that
MinMec and SALGA came to an agreement as to housing  delivery.  The  Housing
Sector Plan in the IDP was in place to  assist  with  planning  and  getting
information  from   communities   to   help   Housing   plan   and   respond
appropriately.

Questioned about the exact number of houses built, the department said that
it was not sure and that some of these houses included in this number may
still be under construction. Whether under construction meant already
transferred, the department said that it did not know. On the issue of
monitoring, the department said that it was dealing with this. The
department said that it was aware of the local authorities’ lack of
capacity and that its were taking this into account. On the issue of rural
housing the department said that policy was being formulated and that its
hoped that its would have a rural housing policy. On the issue of bursaries
the department said that it was in constant contact with the universities
in Gauteng, the Western Cape and KZN.

At the end of the presentation the Committee gave the department 7  days  in
which to provide a proper indication of how many houses had  been  built  in
each province.

Department of Public Works
The department’s presentation summarised highlights from the MTBPS.

The Committee enquired  whether  the  department  had  considered  the  MTEF
before its  came  to  this  hearing.  The  Committee  wanted  to  know  what
interaction  the  department  had  with  business   and   other   government
departments  and  asked  how  the  department  intended  to  deal  with  the
obstacles to service delivery in some provinces.

The Committee also questioned the department about  its  devolving  budgets,
including service budgets, to clients. The  department  explained  that  the
responsibility of paying for services had been with  Public  Works  for  all
government departments, but because this led to inefficient or wasteful  use
of services,  responsibility for paying for  services  is  now  devolved  to
departments  and  provinces in the hope of assigning more responsibility  in
the use of services.
Also by devolving budgets to client departments via service agreements,  the
department argued that  this  gave  the  client  department  the  option  of
choosing another agency should it feel the department of  Public  Works  was
not performing well.

The department noted that there was a general concern about its  performance
across the board, and added that there needed  to  be  greater  co-operation
and  joint  planning  between  Public  Works,  Health,  and  Education.  The
department added that unless it  improved  its  service,  other  departments
would lose faith in it. When building, the department noted  that  it  dealt
with  the  department  concerned  but  not  with  public,  which  could   be
problematic if department  had  not  fully  considered  the  public  in  its
planning.

The department was also asked whether it would not be useful to  create  its
MTIP (medium term infrastructure plan) sooner. It responded that  there  was
still on-going discussion on the MTIP, and that it was not finalised yet.

Department of Communications
The department noted that its priorities and programmes directly affected
the second economy. These priorities are Sentech’s infrastructure
investments, the SA Post Office network expansion, rollout of regional
television broadcasting services, strengthening of ICASA, uncapping the
Universal Services Fund, operationalising the Meraka Institute and
restructuring itself.

 The Committee posed a number of questions regarding institutions. The
department noted that it had been following up issues of SAPO providing
social grants. The department noted that R750 million was allocated to the
SAPO in 2003. On the question of the department requesting more funding yet
underspending, the department said that the money underspent was committed.
The department said that it was fighting underspending by aligning its
planning and implementation processes, and hoped to reduce it. The
department noted that the issue of compliance to ICASA was important and
that in terms of new legislation, the plan would be to register licenses
speedily, and for this ICASA would require more money.

On costly telephony in rural areas, the department suggested that wireless
technology was the way forward, and that its did note the challenges when
it came to the rural areas. The department said that it had been speaking
to SALGA, and had noted that in district municipalities’ concern was more
for things such as water and housing provision and not for communication.
There was a ‘battle between food and telephones’ meaning that people did
not see a direct gain in such communication technologies. The department
also acknowledged that there was potential for link up between departments.
On the issue of huge spending towards the end of the financial year, the
department said that it was on target with its spending.

FEDUSA Presentation
The Federated Unions of South Africa (FEDUSA) focused on employment and
skills issues in its presentation. A major constraint noted was the lack of
skills in the public sector. The organisation suggested that public sector
salaries be addressed and professions such as teaching and city planning be
promoted. There should be more spending on infrastructure programmes in
order to enhance the ability to deliver and business should be brought on
board. FEDUSA added that Public Works programmes needed to reconsider their
wages and allow for sustainability of people.  It also proposed more
spending on child and old age grants better salaries for police, nurses,
and doctors etc.

 With regard to SETAs, when asked about FEDUSA’s contribution to skills
development, FEDUSA said that it was undertaking initiatives, such as
learnerships, together with SETAs and National Boards, and had an input
into other sectors as well. On the issue of Public Works wages, FEDUSA
noted that there was some progress but found that people were using up
their wages just to get to work.

Business Unity South Africa (BUSA)
 BUSA  endorsed  the  target  of  a  6%  growth  rate,  and  emphasised  the
importance of enterprise development in attaining  this.  Small  and  Medium
Enterprises in particular should be encouraged, especially  by  cutting  red
tape. In ascending order,  regulatory  burdens  were  RSC  levies  and  SETA
levies; PAYE and UIF deductions; SARS tax administration; labour laws;  CCMA
cases; bargaining councils; and VAT. BUSA urges  adoption  of  a  regulatory
impact assessment strategy by government. It noted that although  the  broad
outlook is optimistic, local level partnerships  are  required  for  service
delivery, as well as increased savings and foreign direct investment.

Asked about the issue of CEOs’ pay and accountability, BUSA added that  CEOs
were accountable to  shareholders  and  board  members.   Concerning  skills
deficits, BUSA said that  there  was  not  enough  skilled  decision-making.
Price-setting too had to  be  looked  at  in  context  as  a  percentage  of
investment. When considering the ideal corporate tax  rate,  BUSA  suggested
that the issue was how South Africa  compares  with  other  countries.  BUSA
noted that there was a case for bringing rates down  further.  When  looking
at assistance to small businesses, BUSA said that it was important  to  look
at where the responsibility lies for slow delivery. Its noted that  meetings
were often held at national level, and asked why there were no  meetings  at
a local level. BUSA noted many gaps and suggested that  a  joint  initiative
was needed. BUSA also suggested that  the  political  sphere  at  the  local
level have an open door, noting that the local level is not always  as  open
as the provincial and national levels.

6.Theme 4: Social Services (MTBPS Hearings)
02 November 2005

The Committee posed  detailed  questions  about  delivery,  particularly  to
rural areas and the poor.

Department of Home Affairs Presentation
The department is made up of two core services, namely civic service and
immigration. In immigration the department hopes to attract scarce skills
to the country, in order to contribute to overall economic growth. The
department is in alignment with the government’s plan of action, and of the
7 points highlighted in the State of the Nation Address, the department
said that its core focus was on number 4; that of enhancement of social
security. The department sees itself as playing a fundamental role in the
Social Cluster by providing essential documents. On its impact on Social
Cluster issues, the department said that it was in partnership with other
departments in the provision of social services.

The Committee was concerned about the department’s budget adequacy to  serve
rural areas, especially with identity documents, The  Committee  noted  that
the  department  underspent  by  R388  million  in  the  previous  year  and
therefore wanted to know how the department would ensure  that  this  year’s
budget would be spent. Another question was raised on the  issue  of  scarce
skills and what a he department was planning on doing about  South  Africans
living abroad that had these relevant skills.

Concerning the adequacy of its budget for identity document campaigns in
rural areas, the department responded that the expenditure trend in the
department had been low, as it was mainly allocated to capital/IT related
programmes, which were important for service provision.  But now the
department said that it was looking to the future and servicing of rural
areas, and mobile units activities will be extended to December.

It was important to enhance human capital through staff  recruitment  rather
than  merely  requesting  additional   resources.   On   the   question   of
underspending, the department noted that it was currently  standing  at  41%
expenditure of this current budget. In comparison  to  the  previous  year’s
expenditure of 34% by September, the  department  felt  that  it  was  doing
well. It was also noted that there were currently on-going  projects,  which
would be receiving further funding in the next 6 months. On facilitation  of
recruitment of South Africans in other countries, the department  said  that
this was a catch 22, in that it could not do much about those who  were  not
patriotic, and could not force people to move  back.  The  department  noted
that through the Immigration Act, its were trying to import  scarce  skills,
and together with the Department of Trade and Industry, its were  trying  to
build those skills capacity within the country.

Questioned about the influx of illegal immigrants, the department said that
it did acknowledge this as a challenge and that the BCOCC was created in
order to address this problem, and to ensure co-ordination between
departments (such as SAPS) to deal with this issue. The department added
that it was also involved in deportation, noting that another problem was
that of people who come into the country with legitimate documents, and
then disappear once in the country. On the issue of capacity building, the
department clarified that it was talking about the capacity to fill posts,
and strategic capacity, such as IT systems and infrastructure (offices in
certain areas). On the issue of utilizing youth structures, the department
assured the committee that the department was part of internship
programmes, and that some of these interns go on to fill posts in the
department. On some initiatives the department interacted with uMsobomvu,
who funded the programmes. The challenges of duplicated IDs the department
hoped to address with the introduction of the ID smart cards, which it said
would be implemented by September of the following year. The problem of
children having more than one birth certificate the department said was
sometimes due to mothers registering their children more than once. The
other problem here is that the department does not take the fingerprints of
children, and is therefore unable to trace this.

Department of Social Development
The Department’s presentation said that it promotes opportunities for
marginalised communities in economic activity to improve the quality of
life of the poor. It maintains a progressive social security net, and
invests in community services and human development. It significantly
improves the capacity and effectiveness of the state by promoting service
oriented public administration. Consolidated social development spending
grew by 28,8% in the three-year period to 2005/06, and will grow at an
annual rate of 11,6% in the coming MTEF. The largest portion spent is on
social assistance, which consumes 92% of the total budget.

The Committee raised the issue of eligibility for social grants  and  skewed
allocation. The department responded that there were different  grants,  the
eligibility for which differed. On the issue  of  delays  in  processing  of
grants, the department answered that it had set up agencies to  do  this:  a
grant application should ideally take 2 days, but that  there  were  delays,
which were mostly caused by the skewed staff to beneficiary ratio, which  in
some provinces was at 1: 1800. The department acknowledged the fact that  it
did not have enough staff on the ground level,  but  said  that  there  were
some improvements and that even more  were  underway.  On  the  question  of
using the SAPO to distribute social grants, the  department  said  that  the
SAPO would be the service provider of choice  but  that  it  would  have  to
demonstrate that it could provide this  service  at  a  cost  effective  and
efficient manner.

Altogether 6,3 million children are at present  receiving  grants,  and  for
those children whose documents were still being  processed,  the  department
said that provision was made for them and its  could  still  obtain  grants.
Research done showed that a significant number of people were  living  above
the poverty line because of the social grants provision by  the  department.
The department stated that it did have a plan/strategy in  place  to  retain
and recruit social workers and is looking at salary issues, and the  working
conditions of social workers. It is working with the  Department  of  Public
Works to ensure an increase in  the  stipend  for  volunteers/  care-givers,
from R500 to R1000.

Department of Health
The department’s key initiatives are upgrading and revitalisation of
hospitals, additional funding for medical equipment and information
systems, and consolidation of primary health care services under provincial
administrations.
The Committee commented that in the training of  health  professionals,  the
department  had  to  interact   with   health   councils.   The   issue   of
accountability of managers was also raised. On this  issue,  the  department
stated  that  there  were  strategic  obstacles  and   management   capacity
problems. Clinics in the rural areas face challenges and upgrading  them  to
medical centres was not possible for lack of doctors.  This  reiterates  the
Human  Resource  question  yet  again.  The  department  said  that  it  was
considering a strategy to  expand  the  mid-level  workers  pool;  therefore
focusing on increasing the number of pharmacists,  medical  assistants,  and
training medical aides for nursing work. It noted that emphasis  on  numbers
might also undervalue quality. As  part  of  its  retention  strategies  for
nurses it was looking at reviewing structure of training.

On the issue of training colleges, the department  said  that  most  of  the
tutors for these were by now in the UK, and were  discouraged  by  the  fact
that  its  would  have  to  start  at  the  lowest  level,  as  per  Nursing
Regulations.

The department said  that  it  was  on  track  with  its  malaria  reduction
targets. Similarly with the ARV roll out, the  department  said  it  was  on
track. On its competence to do  DNA  forensic  analysis  at  hospitals,  the
department said that this was a very specialised  field  and  could  not  be
provided at all hospitals, though it being done in Pretoria. The  department
is trying to decentralise this to the hospitals in provinces.  In  the  case
of suspected rape, especially of children, testing has to  be  done  through
the police, who had more competence in this regard.

Department of Education
The department summarised the increases to the  national  baseline,  and  to
the provincial Equitable Share as set out in the MTEF.

Responding to questions, in terms of higher education the  department  noted
that there was a throughput problem, and that the minister  contemplated  an
enrollment planning initiative. On the issue of its difficulty in  retaining
temporary  and  substitute  teachers,  the  department  agreed  that   their
conditions were  unacceptable, and said  that  some  provinces  were  moving
speedily  to  ensure  sure  that  temporary  and  substitute  teachers  were
absorbed permanently.

The department noted the importance of  FET  and  technical  skills,  adding
that this was not only a South Africa problem. The  department  assured  the
committee  that  once  good  FET  colleges  were  set  up   a   considerable
improvement  would  be  seen.  On  the  issue  of  teacher  shortages,   and
especially  schools  with  no  mathematics  teachers,  this  was  said  most
probably to be  a  problem  of  the  management  systems,  with  the  School
Governing Bodies having the final say on who gets appointed. In relation  to
the Early Childhood Development, 600 000 children in rural areas  were  said
to be on this programme, and that it was still expanding.

On the issue of no-fees schools, the department said  that  this  would  not
happen this year, but that no-fees schools would  be  formally  declared  by
2007. It also noted that not  all  schools  would  be  no-fees  schools.  On
school  transport,  the  department  said  that  this   was   a   provincial
competency, although the department  acknowledged  the  challenges.  On  the
issue  of  safety  at  schools,  the  department  said  that  it  did   have
initiatives in  place,  but  also  stressed  that  it  encouraged  community
involvement and participation in this regard.

The People’s Budget
The People’s Budget approved the expansionary fiscal policy of the MTBPS,
and awaits the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative to see if increased
spending will translate into benefits for the majority of South Africans.
Relatively high housing expenditure is good, though current programmes are
inefficient and replicated apartheid settlement programmes. There is a
concern that Treasury does not review the ARV rollout in the MTBPS. The
People’s Budget  is concerned about the low budget deficit, and questions
expenditure trends within the period of reducing the deficit.

With regard to fiscal discipline, the People’s Budget argued that,  compared
to other countries, the deficit could have been relaxed  more  in  order  to
allow for spending. On the issue of  expenditure  trends,  the  organisation
noted that there were capacity constraints,

SALGA
SALGA endorsed the MTBPS measures to boost socio-economic activities and
expand social services and income support. It noted that some needs were
not addressed, such as the next phase of the National Skills Development
Strategy, the expansion of the Child Support Grant and allocations on
environmental health services. Clarity is needed on devolution of bus and
taxi subsidies to municipalities.

 The Committee noted that SALGA raised challenges, and wanted to know
whether SALGA had any plans of overcoming these obstacles. SALGA was also
asked what it thought about the lack of skills, and whether it thought that
the budget would address this issue. SALGA was asked to comment on the
issue of skills and the competence of municipal managers in relation to the
level of service provided. One member added that SALGA needed to look at
training of councilors rather than leaving problem articulation to the
community.

 SALGA mentioned that even in the apartheid era, skills deficits at the
local level were a factor, but that together with the DPLG its were
addressing this issue. On the competence of municipal mangers, SALGA noted
that a performance contract has now to be signed by these managers, and
that there were key performance measures and indicators. SALGA said it was
aware of the issues of capacity at local level and also noted that most of
the local government service challenges lay in the provision of Housing. On
the issue of youth involvement in the IDPs, SALGA mentioned that it had a
roll out plan for youth programmes. On the question of child-headed
families, SALGA said that there were initiatives in place to help in this
regard, such as the provision of food parcels to the children, through the
social workers, and that its did have other alternatives.

 IDASA
IDASA submitted its review of spending in the MTBPS, noting that the
redistributionary effects of social spending do show effective targeting
towards the poor. Inter-group inequality is falling, but there is a net
increase in inequality within groups.

IDASA argues that more spending is possible by increasing  the  deficit.  It
reviews infrastructural  spending  implications  and  the  need  to  improve
effectiveness of public spending. It reviewed the MTBPS in the light of  its
consideration of HIV/AIDS and the rights of children.

7.Theme 5: International Trade (MTBPS Hearings)
02 November 2005

Department of Trade and Industry
The DTI’s presentation focused on its foreign trade interventions. The
DTI’s key policy initiatives for the year are the launch of the Angola and
DRC strategic development initiatives; preparation for and participation in
the African Peer Review mechanism; further development of bilateral
relations with key African countries; continue with US FTA negotiations and
the launching of China and India negotiations.

The department mentioned that it wanted  to  build  structures  for  greater
regulation and interaction. The department mentioned that the  role  of  the
International Trade was to open up markets for  South  Africa,  Although  it
was noted that South Africa has some competitive advantage,  the  department
mentioned that there were other elements that influenced trade issues;  such
as import duties in other countries, multi-lateral and bi-lateral  barriers.
The department said that it was looking at securing preferential  agreements
through  bilateral  agreements.  The  department  said  that  it   did   not
differentiate between FDI and portfolio flows, but  that  their  main  focus
was on services and trade.

When questioned about the accessibility of the department to rural areas,
the department responded that there was an initiative for rolling out to
provinces and municipalities, so that products of the department could be
made available at municipalities. There was a close co-operation between
DTI and local government on the issue. The department also noted the
difficulty of accessibility to markets and said that it was looking into
it.

Recommendations

The Committee recommends as follows:

1. The Committee recommends that Parliament enhance  its  effectiveness  in
   monitoring  the  capacity  of  departments  to   implement   progressive
   policies.
2. The Committee recommends that Parliament pay particular  attention  over
   the medium term to the effectiveness of facilitating policies  regarding
   the key MTBPS priorities of human and institutional capacity development
   and  infrastructure  investment,  as  well  as  the  focus  on   growth,
   macroeconomic stability, raising the employment capacity of the economy,
   and reducing the gap between the first and second economies.
3. In considering the Budget documentation of key departments such  as  the
   Departments of Home Affairs and Social  Development,  Parliament  should
   satisfy itself that such Departments have monitoring systems  in  place,
   ensuring that their implementation  supports  their  policies  and  that
   their policies have the  required  outcomes.  This  will  enable  timely
   policy adjustments.
4. The Committee  recommends  that  Parliament  strengthen  monitoring  and
   oversight  of  expenditure  trends  between  National  MTBPS  functional
   allocations and Provincial budget allocations to  the  smaller  spenders
   supportive of social  and  rural  development  and  job  creation  (i.e.
   housing, land affairs, tourism and agriculture) to address  concerns  of
   adequate financing at provincial level.
5.  Parliament  should  explore   ways   to   influence   cooperation   and
   complementarity   rather   than   competition    between    departments,
   particularly coordination of planning between departments  in  the  same
   cluster.
6. Parliament should follow up on the amendment of strategic plans in order
   to align them with the MTBPS.
7. The Committee should carry out oversight visits, in particular to
   development nodes.

Report to be considered.


National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Revenue Laws
     Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 77), dated 09
     November 2005:

The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of the
Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 77),
referred to it, and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a Money
Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Revenue Laws
    Second Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2005]  (National Assembly – sec 75), dated
    09 November 2005:

The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture on the Study
  Tour to the Northern Cape, dated 8 November 2005:

1. THE DELEGATION
     i) Ms SD Motubatse-Hounkpatin (ANC): Leader of the delegation
    ii) Mr. MH Matlala ANC
   iii) Ms ND Mbombo (ANC)
    iv) Mr. R Sonto (ANC)
     v) Mr. BZ Zulu (ANC)
    vi) Ms TR Cawe (Committee Secretary)

2. OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY TOUR

    • The Committee intended to  meet  and  interact  with  the  Provincial
      Committee on Arts and Culture.
    • To inspect Arts and Culture infrastructure in the province
    • To interact with organized formations in the sector
    • To assess the progress made in implementing and  celebrating  “Living
      Heritage” three year theme
    • To assess project of Arts and Culture that  are  funded  by  National
      Lottery
    • To interact with organizations that are funded by the  Department  of
      Arts and Culture and
    • To meet with municipalities that are doing interesting work  on  Arts
      and Culture

3. INTRODUCTION

The  Chief  Whip  of  the  Majority  party  in  the  province  welcomed  the
delegation The Chairperson of the Standing  Committee  on  Sport,  Arts  and
Culture, Mr. Galela briefed the delegation.  He brought to the attention  of
the Committee that the overview on Arts and Culture issues will be  done  by
the Head of Department and the MEC of Art and Culture  in  Upington  on  the
fourth day.  He mentioned that the province has managed to complete some  of
their projects despite the limited budget.

4. FINDINGS
The Portfolio Committee visited the following places  in  order  to  achieve
the mission for the visit.

4.1 SOL PLAATJE HOUSE

The Sol Plaatje House was declared a monument in 1992.  The McGregor  Museum
provided the information about the family. They are currently undertaking  a
research about Plaatje family; The Museums also reserved a room for the  Sol
Plaatje family  tree.   The  house  contains  the  political  voice  of  the
Northern Cape.  The house is very useful for the youth in  the  province  as
it gives them  a  clear  understanding  of  some  of  the  people  they  can
associate with.

The ongoing  projects  based  at  the  house,  like  the  museums  displays,
reference library and the associated publications, all  have  the  potential
to create over time an awareness of the legacies of  the  indigenous  people
of the Northern Cape in general and that of Sol Plaatje.

The museum is working in  collaboration  with  Pansalb.   With  the  lottery
contribution, they managed to do recording of Setswana stories and  proverbs
in the villages around Pampierstad by a community based  interviewer.   They
also conducted a research and draft  report  on  the  life  history  of  the
people of the Richtersveld and,  the  amaXhosa  of  Colesburg.   They  moved
around the pre-schools working  on  work-study  in  promoting  the  use  and
importance of mother tongue. The pre-school  teachers  were  very  keen  and
interested in the intervention of the language usage.   They  established  a
steering Committee to deal with developing and  promoting  the  language  in
the province.

4.1.1 CHALLENGES

The Committee felt that the Sol Plaatje intended projects were too  academic
because it involved intellectuals and students in  Universities  and  by  so
doing they neglect the elders who can help them  with  more  information  on
language and story telling.  They also appreciated the  library  books  that
were written by local people but  suggested  that  the  books  can  also  be
distributed to all the provinces.

4.2 McGREGOR MUSEUMS

The McGregor Museums are the owners of the Duggan-Cronin collection and  the
Duggan-Cronin Foundation.  The foundation was established with the  specific
purpose of working with the museum to  raise  funds  and  generally  assists
with the conservation programme.  McGregor Museums is the house that  stores
more than 4000 copies  of  negatives  that  were  scanned  as  part  of  the
restoration process.

The photographic collection dates back  to  the  indigenous  people  of  men
working in the  mines  and  living  in  the  compound.   Most  scholars  and
historians are using the museums for  research  purposes.   They  carry  the
diversity of all our cultures the most important feature are the picture  of
the tribal kingdoms around Southern Africa.

The Museums were able to carry their restoration project through  Department
of Arts and Culture funding and Lottery.  The Thandabantu gallery is in  the
museums to commemorate the life and work of Martin Duggan-Cronin.

4.2.1 CHALLENGES

To be able to restore the work of Duggan-Cronin  they  need  to  raise  more
funds.

4.3 WILLIAM HUMPHREY GALLERY

The gallery is the national museums of art and its primary  function  is  to
collect  and  conserve  the  artistic  heritage  of   the   nation.    These
collections form part of the national estate,  and  are  exhibited  for  the
enjoyment and education of all who visit the museum.

A number of special community projects are run  at  the  gallery  that  deal
with national initiatives such as poverty alleviation,  skills  development,
job creation and moral regeneration. The  Gallery  has  a  partnership  with
prisoners around Northern Cape with  the  project  on  Arts  against  crime.
Prisoners were trained to do beadwork, embroidery and weaving.

The skills taught are in preparation for them when they  are  released  from
prison.  Some of their work is exhibited in the gallery  and  some  are  for
sale.  The gallery is a house to Sol Plaatje-       statue.  The  management
are organizing for the statue to be  opened  officially  by  the  President.
Currently they intend to discuss the details with the Minister of  Arts  and
Culture. The Sol Plaatjie statue  was  commissioned  by  the  South  African
Heritage Resources Agency and they intend to put it in the monument.

4.3.1 CHALLENGES

The gallery planned  to  open  children  theatre  to  motivate  and  develop
interest on theaters.  More funding is required  to  be  able  to  meet  the
needs of the communities.

4.4 WILDEBEESTKUIL

The project employs  craft  development  specialist  to  train  and  develop
crafters in the entire province.  It has started in year two thousand,  with
R2m to set up the  project.   It  is  a  community  based  public  rock  art
project.   Khoi-San  people,  researchers  and  other  stakeholders   joined
together to conserve the engravings in the site;  the  engravings  are  more
than 400 spreads over a small sacred hill.

The site is owned by the !Xu and Khwe San people.  At  the  visitors  center
they have some displays, shop for craftwork made by !Xu  and  Khwe  crafters
and other  community-made  souvenirs.   They  managed  to  run  the  project
through a funding from the Department of Arts  and  Culture  (DAC)  and  the
lottery.  In an attempt to revive the !Xu and Khwe San language they  opened
a radio station in their language that  has  been  neglected.   The  project
management are involved in investing in Culture projects that was  initiated
by the DAC in 2001.  The project management train crafters and look  at  the
products and the potential for their marketing.  All  the  projects  in  the
region are under one umbrella body  called  Mayibuye  Cultural  Centre.   It
helps the crafters to participate at local and international exhibitions.

4.4.1 CHALLENGES

The project has a lot of crafters and craft  production  but  they  are  not
generating enough money to be sustainable because  some  of  the  production
does not meet the required standard.  There is a lack of capacity  building.
The project has only one regional manager to oversee all the  areas  because
there is no personnel in those areas.  When the project was stating  it  had
enough budget to train the crafters with marketing  skill  but  they  cannot
sustain their business.  The project  coordinators  approached  Council  for
Science and Industrial Research  to  help  the  crafters  to  improve  their
quality but could not afford the required amount to do the job.

4.5. SOL PLAATJE MUNICIPALITY

The municipality manager informed the delegation that the unemployment  rate
is at 41%.  On that note they decided to seek ways to improve  the  standard
of living by creating more jobs.  The municipality task team decided  on  an
event called “Diamond and Dorins” during Easter time.  The  event  has  been
running for the  past  two  years.   On  Saturdays  it  targets  youth  from
surrounding areas for the festival at Galeshiwe stadium.   On  Sundays  they
target adults with music festival.

They also involve the local artists to combine  with  international  artists
and they charge nominal fee.  During this period they  receive  more  people
from other provinces to attend the function.  The  main  objectives  of  the
festival are to reduce unemployment rate and to provide  a  national  window
for the artist and cultural groups.  Many SMME’s participated and were  able
to sell their goods.  In organizing the festival the municipality is  trying
to familiarize people with indigenous music.  Although  it  was  a  once-off
event it helped the small business and artist to market their goods.

Two million rands were budgeted for the festival.  The budget was  used  for
production, marketing the event, burners, press releases and gala  functions
to promote and publicize the festival to increase the  number  of  audience.
The municipality is working with Kagiso exhibitions  to  try  and  help  the
local artists and crafters to use the market related prices.

4.5.1 CHALLENGES

The municipality wishes to have a help desk were every person  entering  the
Northern Cape can be informed of  the  activities  that  are  taking  place.
There is no future  for  the  “Diamond  and  Dorings”  because  of  lack  of
funding.  The municipality does not have an existing relationship  with  the
Department of Arts and Culture.  Business does not invest  nor  support  the
events they are not sure of sustainability.

4.6 MULTI-PURPOSE CULTURAL CENTRE

The center is still under construction.   It  is  the  structure  that  will
accommodate Arts, Culture, Sport and Recreational activities.   The  project
intends to have a double storey arts  and  craft  center,  including  dance,
drama and orchestral studios, arts and crafts design and workshop areas.   A
separate two storey building will be used  for  games  and  sports  complex,
including a double volume “sports hall” and dedicated  areas  for  aerobics,
static training, weight training, circuit training.  They hope  it  will  be
able to bring youth together  to  utilize  the  facilities  provided.  Local
people  do  the  construction.   The  project  has  created  jobs  for   the
unemployed.

4.6.1 CHALLENGES

There is no clarity as to who will be the owners of the center  when  it  is
completed.

4.7 THE BIG HOLE

The Big Hole is currently listed number one on the  Tentative  List  of  the
World Site List of UNESCO, as the Kimberly Mine and  associated  Industries.
The site is identified with the Industrial Revolution of Africa and  is  the
spark  for  the  scramble  for  Africa.   The  Big  Hole   site   is   under
construction.  All the De Beers Consolidated mines museums  items  are  kept
for safety until the refurbishment of the museums.

The construction  has  created  employment  for  400  people.   The  project
received R50m from De Beers; R23m has been allocated for  black  empowerment
and  R3,  8m  for  local  business.   When  the  construction  is  complete,
preference will be given to local people to own the business, however,  only
those who can be able to sustain it.  They  intend  to  make  a  paving  for
visitors to see the Big Hole nearer.  The interesting  part  about  the  Big
Hole is that the migrant labourers did it manually.
4.7.1 CHALLENGES

The mine labourers are not  recognized  in  the  Big  Hole  with  particular
reference to their work.

4.8 APOLLO DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

The Apollo Development Association was rediscovered in 1998 and  the  Apollo
Development Association that is a community organization was  born  and  the
Apollo Project started.  The cinema was reopened and other  activities  such
as training, craft development, video recording started.  The community  and
the youth run it.  It is a  Section  21  Company  with  a  board  and  three
directors.

In Apollo they are involved in many  community  projects  such  as  resource
center. The management converted a horse stable  into  a  studio  using  the
Department of Arts and Culture funds. Crafters are taught  craft  skill  and
are provided with material by the association. They  bought  a  house  using
funding from the Lottery to open a  craft  shop.   They  also  host  a  film
festival every year with the help of National  Film  and  Video  Foundation,
where they feature African films and short stories.  They are able to  train
youth on video production.   They  also  train  people  in  computer  skills
through the Department of Labour department.  Tupperware  and  Business  Day
donated the computer equipment.  The ADA approached 30 unemployed people  to
study computer.

The ADA intends to open a film school and to use some of their studios as  a
conference venue.

4.8.1 CHALLENGES

There is a lot of decline in Apollo  movements  due  to  capacity  problems.
They  have  a  R20  000  overdraft  in  their  day-to-day  running  of   the
association.  The report they have and questions suggest  that  there  is  a
mismanagement of public funds.  The association bought the house  under  Mr.
Johan because the previous owner did not want to sell it to the  association
for the reason unknown to them.  They requested  the  provincial  government
to intervene in the transfer of the  property.   Lately,  they  now  have  a
problem in accessing Lottery money because Lottery wants  them  to  use  the
money for the intended request but they use it as the need arises.

4.9 VICTORIA WEST MUSEUMS

The Victoria West Museums is  a  Province-aided  museum  and  existed  since
1967. The museum employed two personnel, namely a  cleaner  and  a  curator.
The museum is run by a Board of Trustees of  six  members  with  a  term  of
office of three years. The museums  have  two  sections  namely  a  cultural
history and a natural history section.  It also  serves  as  the  source  of
information for school projects and a special arrangement was  necessary  to
provide a place for learners to work.

4.9.1 CHALLENGES

The museum needs to be capacitated in order to  run  effectively.   It  also
needs additional staffing, as two staff members currently run it.

4.10 BRITSTOWN MUSEUM

The Museum is a municipality museum and is housed in an old church  building
that is a national monument. It is a museum by name but there are  very  few
items inside that are not well kept.  The  Councilor  indicated  that  after
1994 people who owned it took most of the items that were  on  display,  but
according to rules of the museums once one donates an item  to  the  museums
one loses the ownership of such an item.

4.10.1 CHALLENGES

The management of the museum is not good.  According to the Regional  Office
of the Department they could not establish  a  catalogue  of  exhibits  that
existed and there is no file with information on  all  the  objects  of  the
museum.  The museum does not have any permanent personnel.

4.11 SIYANDA THEATRE

The mission of the theatre is to commit itself towards  the  development  of
the performing arts such as dance, music, drama, folklore and  poetry.   The
Siyanda Theatre Laboratory culminated from the genuine need of  transforming
existing individual talents into positive advantage.  It made provision  for
marginalized local  community  groups  to  make  their  voices  heard.   The
Siyanda laboratory is a platform  to  allow  local  art  groups  to  develop
themselves as artists that can equally make it to the national market.   The
artists are participating in some of the local competitions  such  as  Idols
and Old Mutual choral.


4.11.1 CHALLENGES

The  request  for  funding  from  the  Business  Arts   South   Africa   was
unsuccessful.  The distance  in  the  provinces  is  also  another  problem,
because sometimes they are unable to participate in  events  due  to  travel
cost.  There is an unfinished craft centre.  Marketing is  another  problem,
because they do  not  have  the  necessary  skills  to  market  their  craft
products. As a result, they end up selling it to people who get more  profit
than the producers.  Although they are very strong in music genres they  are
unable to reach the studios  to  record  because  of  the  distance  in  the
province.  In terms of staff there  are  no  service  contractors,  no  post
description, no duty sheet, no daily management of staff and  training,  and
there is no capacity building for staff to become  multi  skilled.   Another
problem is the structure and organization since there is no  organogram,  no
strategic plan and no operational plan.

4.12 MEETING WITH THE MEC ON SPORTS, ARTS AND CULTURE: MR K MOLUSI

Mr. Molusi indicated that the province is making  progress  in  other  areas
such as skills development on arts and culture  and  created  jobs  for  the
unemployed in  the  province.   He  mentioned  that  finance  is  the  major
problem.  The budget allocated for them does  not  meet  the  needs  of  the
province.  The province is short of 47% of labour and needs  an  R13m  boost
to  fill  the  existing  positions.   As  an  example  of  the  shortage  of
personnel, the MEC mentioned that the Head and the  deputy  director  manage
the heritage unit in the province.

The provincial government has conducted an  audit  on  libraries  and  found
that the municipalities are not interested in running  the  libraries.   The
provincial  government  is  concentrating  on  restoration  of  the  museums
because they saw a need for that. They also focused  on  policy  formulation
to have  a  clear  guideline  on  language  and  heritage.   They  are  also
intending to change names in some of the museums in  consultation  with  the
communities and the researchers.  The museums currently focus  only  on  the
past and there are few areas where every citizen is represented.

4.13 MEETING WITH THE HEAD OF THE DEPARTMENT MR. H. ESAU
The Head of Department gave an overview of the department  is  work  through
their programmes structure as follows:

 4.14 ARTS AND CULTURE

Arts and Culture  is  responsible  for  events  management  and  hosting  of
commemorative days such as  Freedom  day  and  Heritage  Day.   It  is  also
responsible for the development of Community Arts  Centres.   They  look  at
training of out of school choral  musicians,  development  and  training  of
drama artists and crafters. It  also  encourages  the  promotion  of  dance,
drama, music and arts genres

4.14.1 CHALLENGES

The immensity of the  provinces  impact  on  traveling  expenditure  of  the
department.
The inadequate funding allocated towards celebrating commemorative events.
Unemployment rate is very high. The shortage of staff due to lack of  skills
in the unit.  Communities in rural areas are not committed.

4.14.2 ACHIEVEMENTS

    • Exposure of crafts and exhibitions throughout South Africa
    • Establishment of  Northern  Cape  Federation  of  Community  Arts  and
      Culture Centres
    • Participation at the Grahamstown Arts Festival
    • Successful hosting of festivals e.g. Vukani Arts Festival

4.15 MUSEUMS AND HERITAGE

The major challenges are the maintenance  of  its  Victorian  and  Edwardian
buildings.  Northern  Cape  did  not  inherit  a  museum  service  in  1994.
Municipal museums do not  get  the  necessary  assistance  due  to  lack  of
capacity.   Municipalities  subsidize  only   five   museums   and   private
institutions fund the rest.

4.15.1 ACHIEVEMENTS

Launch of the  Duggan-Cronin  Thandabantu  and  the  Children  of  Democracy
exhibitions.   Photographic  storage  facility  to  house  all  photographic
material was built with funding received from  Lottery  Board.   The  oldest
house in Eksteenfontein has been restored to house a community museum.

4.15.2 CHALLENGES

In order for the museum to be run adequately, funding needs to be  increased
for the restoration  of  museum  building  and  transformation  of  regional
museums.  Staff  shortages  in  certain  crucial  areas  hamper  the  smooth
running of the institutions and also the transformation of the museums.

4.16 LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION SERVICES

The Library and Information Services strives as  an  agent  for  development
through  the  provision  of  Library  and  Information   Services   to   all
communities thus creating educational and  recreational  opportunities.   It
has 98 Community Libraries, 23 depots and 41 Mobile Book Boxes.  The  number
of visitors to the libraries  has  increased  for  the  past  two  years  to
192,252 registered members compared to other years.
4.16.1 ACHIEVEMENTS

The provincial government has managed to purchase 34,715 copies  of  library
material and distributed it to 162 service  points.   They  provided  Mobile
Book Box services to 38 outlaying rural communities  through  donor  funding
and created 29 jobs.

4.16.2 CHALLENGES

The impact of Schedule  5  function  of  the  constitution  on  delivery  of
library services.  The sustainability of the  established  services  is  not
guaranteed.

4.17 KHOMANI SAN COMMUNITY PROJECT (KALAHARI DESERT)

The Khoisan people are unable to run the land officially.   They  complained
about corruption in giving out land. The Khoisan are not benefiting  as  the
owners of the land.  The project got the money from the South  African  sign
language and the government.  A building was promised for crafters,  however
it  is  not  yet  erected.   They  are  complaining   that   there   is   no
infrastructure in the area to provide work for the young ones.

The government is providing funding for one year only and by so  doing  they
are losing staff because there is  no  commitment.   They  are  only  making
traditional inspired craft they need to be trained on new skills.  The  lady
hired as a craft specialist will be leaving at the end  of  the  year;  they
are struggling to get people because people are reluctant  to  work  in  the
desert.

4.17.1 CHALLENGES

The Khoisan people need a  proper  workshop  on  the  advantages  of  having
Identity Documents.  The Khoisan is moving away from their  traditional  way
of living.  They have a feeling  that  the  government  does  not  recognize
their culture.

5. CONCLUSION

    • Although the province is big, the government has done a great deal  in
      developing it Members who visited the province just after 1994 were so
      amazed with the development and improved infrastructure
    • When visiting the municipalities, there were no municipal  mayors  and
      councilors to brief the committee on what  is  happening  on  language
      board at local level
    • There is a lack of capacity building
    • The Department of Arts and Culture and the Department of Education are
      not working  together  in  terms  of  cross  cutting  issues  such  as
      Language, Arts and Library
    • There is no mention of migrant laborers in the Big  Hole  in  Kimberly
      mines such as digging the hole manually and their history in terms how
      they landed in the mines
    • The craft centers are poorly managed due to a  lack  of  capacity  and
      skills development
    • The crafters are not aware of  the  trade  fares  and  they  are  just
      selling their products to a person who resells it for  better  offers,
      by so doing the inventor does not get the patent
    • The crafters lack the marketing information
    • The province does not utilize the SITA’s or have  the  idea  on  their
      operations
    •  In Bristown people looted the objects of the  museum  and  there  are
      follow ups on that
    • There is no mention of the oral literature  in  all  the  institutions
      visited
    • 43% unemployment is too high
    • The Khoisan people do not understand the issue of not having  Identity
      Documents will make not to qualify for houses.
    • Although they are aware of the poverty alleviation programmes they  do
      not know how to access them
    •  For the artists groups there is no proper leadership
    • Pansalb is more concentrating on academics than in elderly people  for
      language development
    • The Northern Cape is very rich in Indigenous knowledge but  there  are
      no dedicated people to pursue that.

      6. RECOMMENDATIONS

    • The provincial government should speedup the process  of  transferring
      the arts centre house to the association as a matter of urgency
    • The province should get some qualified quality control to access their
      work
    • The crafters should have a  workshop  on  quality  control,  financial
      management and marketing
    • Each institution should be encouraged to have its own  clear  business
      plan and budget.

Reports to be considered.

4. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture on a Study Tour to
  Pretoria, dated 8 November 2005:

1. BACKGROUND

The Committee visited Pretoria on the 13 April 2005.  The  municipality  has
on numerous occasions attempted to obtain approval for  the  utilization  of
the  Paul  Kruger  Museum,  Capitol  Theatre,  Palace  of  Justice  and  Old
Synagogue  properties  since  the  previous  established  City  Council   of
Pretoria and the Greater Pretoria Municipal Council.

In  2004,  the  Office  of  the  Chief  Operations  Officer  (COO)  made  an
intervention and informed the Tourism division that the Office  of  the  COO
will facilitate the project.

2. OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY TOUR

    ❖ To look at how the buildings that were previously used  as  government
      houses were utilized
    ❖ To access the buildings that are considered for heritage  purpose  and
      are part of the city’s urban renewal strategies

3. COMPOSITION OF THE DELEGATION
The multiparty delegation that went to Pretoria consisted of  the  following
members:

Mr. S L Tsenoli  (Chairperson)(ANC)
Mrs. N D Mbombo (ANC)
Mr. P Maluleke (ANC)
Mr. M H Matlala (ANC)
Ms. M Mdlalose (IFP)
Dr C P Mulder (FFP)
Mr. C L Gololo  (ANC)
Mr. M R Sonto  (ANC)
Mr. L Zita (ANC)
Ms N Borotho (Committee Secretary)

4. MUSEUMS VISITED

    • Paul Kruger Museum
    • Capitol Theatre
    • Palace of Justice
    • Old Synagogue

5. FINDINGS


   5.1 PROCESS

The office of the Director  General:  Public  Works  was  contacted  on  the
municipality’s interest in  the  utilization  of  the  four  properties  for
heritage tourism benefit for the city. The delegation was informed that  the
Palace of Justice will be utilized on a full-time  basis  and  is  therefore
not available, the Old Synagogue was available and proposals have been  made
by the Jewish community  but  not  followed  through,  the  Capitol  Theatre
belongs to Provincial Public Works and is currently being  utilized  by  the
municipality as parking space.

The Project Facilitator, Ms Makwange approached Development  Bank  of  South
Afica (DBSA) for possible funding of a feasibility study on the  restoration
and utilization of the Old Synagogue and the Capitol Theatre. The  DBSA  was
keen to assist and became part of drafting the terms of  reference  for  the
study. DBSA also introduced the University of Pretoria to the  process.  The
last conducted feasibility study on the Old Synagogue was in 1995.

Public Works has informed the Department that they are busy with a study  to
determine the extend of dilapidation of the Old Synagogue and the  costs  of
maintenance thereof. The results  of  the  study  will  form  part  of  this
process.

   5.2 CHALLENGES

    • To get Public Works’ disposal or future use plan of the properties
    •  To  get  Public  Works  (provincial  and  national)  to  support  the
      municipality’s efforts and get coordination and integration on the way
      forward.
    • Funding for the restoration and/or development of the properties.

The Chief Operations Officer has commissioned the University of Pretoria  to
conduct a feasibility study on the properties and to  provide  proposals  on
the possible future use for heritage tourism benefit to  the  city  and  the
country. The study will be concluded in June and  will  form  the  basis  of
negotiations with Public Works and other stakeholders as  well  as  possible
funding.

6. PROGRESS ON LIBRARIES

The library services management conducted an audit of all  library  services
in Tshwane with a view to come up with a strategy that will  inform  further
provision of the service to under-serviced areas.  This  audit  showed  that
there was a skewed distribution of library services  towards  areas  in  the
South, Central and some parts of the East of Tshwane  whilst  areas  in  the
North of the City were under serviced.  The  challenge  then  faced  by  the
Social Development Department  was  to  explore  various  ways,  which  will
ensure provision of services to under-serviced areas  of  the  North  whilst
ensuring that services in other areas are still maintained.  This  would  be
done within the budgetary constraint of the Department.

The results of this audit  therefore  prompted  the  library  management  to
write a report to  Council  requesting  for  permission  to  engage  in  the
process to  redistribute  library  services.   The  first  report  dated  11
February 2004 was discussed at the Portfolio Committee:  Health  and  Social
Development and subsequent   Council meeting of the 11 March 2004  with  the
following resolution taken:

    • That note is taken of  the  current  imbalance  of  service  provision
      between the Northern and other areas of Tshwane.
    •  Approval  in  principle  be  given  to  proceed  with   the   planned
      redistribution of services to improve service delivery to the Northern
      areas of Tshwane
    • Note be taken of alternative  services  to  be  provided  to  affected
      communities
    • The process to  redistribute  library  services  is  implemented  with
      immediate effect and  implementation  plan  be  submitted  to  Council
      within six months.
To comply on the four resolutions by Council,  a  follow  up  implementation
plan was submitted and resolved as follows by Council at its meeting of  the
28 October 2004:

The implementation plan in respect of redistribution of library services  as
presented in the report is approved.
Redistribution of library services forms part  of  the  alternative  service
delivery program of the Health and Social Development Department.

The Strategic Executive Officer (SEO):  Health  and  Social  Development  be
mandated to facilitate a public participation process in  consultation  with
the office of the Speaker of the legislature with a view  to  implement  the
redistribution  plan.   The  SEO  was  also  requested  to  investigate  the
possibility of providing a budget  for  the  construction  of  libraries  in
certain parts of the cross-boundary areas in consultation with the  relevant
Provincial Department of the North West Province for the year 2005/2006.

7.  CURRENT  LIBRARY  SITUATION  IN  THE  COUNCIL  OF  TSHWANE  METROPOLITAN
   MUNICIPALITY

At present there are 39 community Libraries in the Tshwane area.   There  is
an imbalance in service provision between the Northern and  other  areas  of
Tshwane.  There are only 4 community Libraries in  Soshanguve,  Hammanskraal
and Temba while the rest of the Libraries are situated  in  close  proximity
to one another in the South and central Tshwane.  The Library services  gaps
have been identified in the. Northern areas of Tshwane where communities  do
not have adequate Library services.

Some Libraries are in a dilapidated state e.g. Pretoria North  and  Waverly,
and this will need a lot of money  for  maintenance  and  repairs.   In  the
Northern area of Tshwane where there are fewer Libraries, they are  situated
very far from each other with an average  of  13  km  from  one  Library  to
another.  Of great importance  is  the  fact  that  the  Northern  areas  of
Tshwane are characterized by  a  need  for  basic  services,  which  include
learning opportunities to improve the quality of life.  Due  to  the  socio-
economic status of the  majority  of  people  especially  in  the  North  of
Tshwane, these people are found not to have cars  for  traveling  to  access
libraries.

7.1 CHALLENGES

    •  Improvement  of  current  service  delivery:  Information  provision,
      especially of digital/electronic nature
    • Needs Libraries of better standards that would provide efficient  and
      effective services to develop communities
    • Lack of development programmes such as ABET,  etc  with  the  aim  of
      breaking the lack of literacy in our country.

8. INTERVENTIONS/STRATEGIES TO ADDRESS THE CHALLENGES

In order to address the above challenges the Social  Development  department
proposed the following strategies:

9. ESTABLISHMENT OF HUBS THROUGHOUT TSHWANE

 A Hub is a fully resourced information centre.   This  will  have  adequate
physical space, personnel, stock (books as well as audio  visual  material),
computer equipment (at least 2 for  internet  usage  and  2  to  search  the
library data base), copiers,  fax  machines,  answering  machines,  Security
system, study  areas,  activity  rooms  and  programs  often  presented  and
facilities to rent out.
10 hubs have been identified for the  Library  services  and  they  are  the
following:
Bodibeng,    Hammanskraal,    Akasia    (North)     Saulsville,     Hercules
(West)Es’kiaMphahlele (Central)Olievenhoutbosch,  Lyttelton  (South)Mamelodi
West,  Alkantrant (East)

For every hub there will be a satellite and a number  of  libraries  in  the
same area, hence  this  hub  will  become  the  main  library  in  the  area
concerned.

10. TRANSFORMATION OF DEPOT SERVICES
The Department is  currently  looking  at  transforming  Depot  services  to
enable accessibility by the members of the community.  This  will  encourage
cooperation and build relationships. A  Depot  service  provides  a  limited
number of books and it only provides books and  no  other  Library  material
such as periodicals, tapes, etc and the person responsible for  a  Depot  is
not a staff member of Tshwane.

11. INCREASING MOBILE LIBRARY SERVICES
The extension of services through the mobile service  would  be  encouraged,
so that people without actual library buildings are  still  able  to  access
them.  There are currently two busses that are  fully  operational  and  the
intention is to introduce more bus services and to post these to areas  that
are currently without services.

12. PARTNERSHIP WITH OTHER STAKEHOLDERS
The  Department  is  considering  partnerships  with   other   stakeholders,
including the Department of Education, with  the  aim  of  locating  Library
services in Schools.  There are already four libraries  existing  as  pilots
and these are: the  community/school  libraries  of  Bajabulile  (Mamelodi),
Gauteng (Mamelodi), Mahlasedi Masana (Mamelodi) and West Park in  operation,
though this was done in an ad-hoc manner.  The strategy  would  then  be  to
formalize the  partnership  with  the  Department  of  Education.   To  this
effect, the Social Development department  has  already  initiated  meetings
with the Gauteng Departments of Education  and  Sports,  Arts,  Culture  and
Library services with a view to draft a formal Memorundum of Agreement  that
can be signed between the three parties. These  meetings  have  resulted  in
the setting up of a TASK team that  will  develop  the  said  Memorandum  Of
Agreement.

13. PHASING OUT OF RENTED FACILITIES
A lot of Money is being used to pay for the  rented  facilities  and  it  is
difficult  for  the  Library  service  to  afford  such  payments.   It   is
anticipated that with the agreement in place, the services will be  rendered
from facilities such as schools. Care will  be  taken  in  the  location  of
libraries in schools to ensure that the normal learning environment  of  the
learners is not disturbed.

14. PUBLIC PARTICIPATION MEETINGS

The Department recognizes the importance of  informing  the  public  in  the
processes and getting their inputs to enable the finalization of  the  plan.
This is also in terms of  the  requirements  of  the  Act  as  well  as  the
resolution by Council.  The public  participation  meetings  were  scheduled
with the assistance of the Office of the Speaker of Council.

Report to be considered.

5. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture on a Study Tour to
  Robben Island, dated 8 November 2005:
1. BACKGROUND

The Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture has undertook a study tour to
Robben Island as part of its oversight function to the institution on the
04 August 2004.

During the budget speech of Arts and Culture the Minister mentioned that
Robben Island Museum was allocated R35.5 million to invest in more
effective management, maintenance and refurbishment.  Robben Island Museum
is one of the defining symbols of democracy and the World Heritage site in
South Africa.

2. OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY TOUR

Robben Island is one of our World Heritage  Sites.   The  intention  of  the
visit is to see all the work that has been done in terms of maintenance  and
refurbishment of the Island.  Robben Island is one of the  defining  symbols
of our democracy.  The  Committee  wanted  to  assess  the  building  as  it
carries our rich history.

3. DELEGATION

     i) Mr. SL Tsenoli  (Chairperson) ANC
    ii) Mr. CL Gololo ANC
   iii) Mr. P Maluleke ANC
    iv) Mr. MH Matlala ANC
     v) Ms ND Mbombo ANC
    vi) Ms D Kohler-Barnard DA
   vii) Mr. LW Greyling ID
  viii) Dr CP Mulder FFP
    ix) Ms TR Cawe (Committee Secretary)


4. OFFICIALS IN ROBBEN ISLAND

Mr. P Langa (Chief Executive Officer)
Mr. B Martins (Council Deputy Chairperson)
Mr. A Kathrada (Chairperson)
Mr. T Nemaheni
Mrs. D Prins-Solani (Senior Manager for the Pubic Programming Department)
Mr. J Makola Exhibition (Unit Manager)

5. INTRODUCTION BY MR. A. KATHRADA

The Robben Island Officials at the Nelson Mandela Gateway welcomed the
delegation.  Mr. Kathrada in his welcome mentioned that they felt honored
to be visited by members of Parliament as sometimes they feel that they are
neglected.  He started by explaining the importance of the gateway in their
auditorium, as it is the last point to the museum.  It took three years to
build the auditorium.  The cost for the building was R44m the funds were
raised privately and R8m from the Department of Arts and Culture (DAC).
The auditorium accommodates 150 people and is open to be hired for
conferences and meetings etc.

6. VISITING ALL THE SITES

The committee received an overview on World Heritage Status and Integrated
Management Process, and organizational structure after viewing the
following sites that are of significance on the Island: Visitors Centre, OU
Trong, Blue Stone Quarry, Lepper Swimming Pool, Desalination Plant, WWII
Guns, Light House, Medium B Prison, Lime Quarry, Sobukhwe Complex, Maximum
Prison, Kramat and Penguins.

6.1.MURRAY BAY HABOUR

The Island has spent R66m during a period of  three  years  to  rehabilitate
the habour.  The repair and improvement of the habour was to  make  it  user
friendly for even those who are physically challenged.  The history  of  the
habour is derived from time to time from the former  prisoners  who  narrate
the stories of Robben Island according to experience.

6.2 VISITORS CENTRE

The visitors’ centre will be renovated but it will keep  the  old  image  of
the centre.  The old structure has not been changed in that there are  still
barriers between the visitor and the prisoner; there is no direct contact.

6.3.BLUE STONE QUARRY

The Island management is in the process of rehabilitating the  quarry.   The
manner in which the rehabilitation will  done,  it  will  be  build  similar
shape to the blue stone quarry, the wall will be made to be  able  to  stand
the harsh weather of the island. They  applied  to  South  African  Heritage
Resource Agency to build the wall. The challenges they are faced  with  they
cannot mine in heritage  site,  but  to  try  to  balance  the  culture  and
heritage.

6.4. LEPER SWIMMING POOL

Sick females who were suffering from leprosy used this tidal pool.   It  was
treated, as the pools of Bethesda in the Old Testament  were  they  believed
that the  seawater  would  heal  their  wounds.   In  the  new  project  the
researchers investigate people who have a real story  and  are  living  with
leprosy to be sent to the island.  The researchers also  collect  the  dates
around leprosy in Robben Island.

6.5. WWII GUNS

In the island they also have some 9.2-inch guns that were never used  during
the war.  The estimated costs for transport were more than a  million  rands
from England just to be used for practice.

6.6. LIME QUARRY

The lime quarry is the place where  the  prisoners  used  to  work  and  the
advantages to this kind of work was that the prisoners could work in  groups
and discuss some crucial political issues.  They used this  time  to  study,
share information and to understand the different cultures.

6.7. MEDIUM B PRISON (Multi-purpose centre)

In 1970 the complex was converted into a prison for  common  law  prisoners.
The Medium B Prison was officially closed  in  1996.  When  the  museum  was
opened the Medium B required a new use for the structure.  It was  converted
to  a  resource  centre  where  programmes  and  courses   are   held.   The
facilitators, train students from all over the African countries  on  Robben
Island Training Programme (RITP), which helped increase the number of  black
heritage practitioners.

The learner’s centre is used during school  holidays  and  school  term  for
specific curriculum activities.  Seventy learners can be  accommodated.  The
project was made possible by funds made available by the Department of  Arts
and Culture.

The Robben Island Museum also has a library facility that  is  used  by  the
students from University of the Western Cape and  University  of  Cape  Town
(UCT) for research purposes.  The library has books and powerful  collection
and was assisted by UCT on how to conserve books.  In the entrance there  is
a garden of Indigenous plants, where they have  medicinal  plants  that  are
taken by HIV/AIDS people.

6.8. ROBERT SOBUKWE COMPLEX

Mr. Robert Sobukhwe is one of the early prisoners  of  the  island.   During
his stay in the island he was housed in isolation to  other  prisoners.   He
had his own house and used it alone  with  the  security  around  him.   The
prison officials allowed his family to  stay  over  and  provided  him  with
newspapers.  According to Mr.  Kathrada  the  former  government  wanted  to
create the impression that Mr. Sobukwe was a special prisoner so that  other
prisoners can convey the message to his organization to  discredit  him  and
his views.

The site has dog kennels where Sobukwe’s children used  to  stay.   The  RIM
researchers have decided to  destroy  the  walls  of  the  kennels  but  are
working on the whole interpretation  of  the  complex.   The  DAC  has  made
available R1, 2m for repairs and maintenance and R2m  for  photographic  and
other exhibitions.

7. WORLD HERITAGE STATUS AND OVEVIEW OF INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT PROCESS BY  MR
   T. NEMAHENI

Mr. Nemaheni started his address by mentioning that the Robben Island
Museum had a visit from the IUCN-ICOMOS-ICCROM Monitoring Mission to
inspect Robben Island in February 2004.  The Monitoring group highlighted
nineteen recommendations for Robben Island to qualify to be a World
Heritage Site. It was mentioned to the World Heritage Committee that some
of the recommendations they mentioned the RIM is already working on them.
They were also commended for the work they have done.  They have started
with the integrated management plan that is one of the recommendations;
they have an existing operational plan and identified five areas and have
worked on four already.  In implementing these recommendations they will
have to prioritize.

7.1 MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK

The organization structure for RIM has been reviewed and consolidated based
on the KPMG.  RIM council has adopted the new organogram in principle.

On the vacancies to be filled in by qualified and experienced staff they
managed to fill some of them and are working on few post.  RIM got a
3.5million from the Department of Arts and Culture to work on the
integrated management plan.

Robben Island Museum has worked extensively on some of the requirements by
the World Heritage Committee.

8. COMMENTS BY THE COMMITTEE MEMBERS

Members raised concerns as to what extent can the Robben Island Museum
continue as an institution.  What do they have to teach people on how they
survived the crucial part of heritage and how do people learn from the RIM
legacy.  Did the RIM consider bringing together the relevant departments
that have an interest in some of the areas such as the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism?

The management should bring together the provincial and local government to
assist in funding, not to depend on the Department of Arts and Culture for
funding while other departments are taking credits. Members asked about the
changing of the street names that are not reflecting people of South
Africa.  What is the RIM doing about fire management and members wanted to
be informed more on disaster management strategy.

9. RESPONSE FROM THE RIM MANAGEMENT
Mr. P Langa the responded by stating that the RIM has a whole range of
issues such as the endangered site, they are working on the relation
between the conservation and whole list of sites that are in danger.  At
the moment they are concentrating on issues that need attention such as
providing sufficient water and emergency services to run the RIM.

RIM invited a representative from the Cape Town City Council to attend
their meetings to be informed of the processes taking place.  World
Heritage Committee recommended that they should rectify their Human
resources and they already worked on that.  By improving the RIM with
slight changes they intend to make people aware of the institution rather
than making money.   The problems they have with RIM it falls under the
Department Environmental Affairs and Tourism and the Department of Arts and
Culture legislation were the RIM has to comply with.  Ideally they are
supposed to account to Department of Arts and Culture and the Department of
Environmental Affairs but its not so.  In terms of the Legacy of the RIM
they have drawn a public programme in consultation with the Department of
Education, former prisoners and collected relevant information.  They
produced to a documentary that is used in Universities.

They also work with Nelson Mandela Municipality that is building museums
they requested museum information from the RIM.   The rescue services is
their priority because Koeberg fire station is almost 10km from RIM, they
have sent people for training in first aid and medical training.  On
Fridays they exercise and work on fire fighting.  A plan is in place for
more training.

RIM has a lot of challenges, as it is not just an ordinary museum, but a
historical site and the resources to preserve it are very scarce.  The
management hopes the review planned by the Department of Arts and Culture
on Heritage Act will be able to clarify issues.

Report to be considered

6. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing on fact-finding  mission  to
  Joe Slovo informal settlement in Langa  and  Khayamnandi  in  Stellenbosch
  Western Cape dated, 16 August 2005:

The Portfolio Committee on Housing having undertaken a fact finding  Mission
to Joe Slovo Informal Settlement in Langa and  Khayamnandi  in  Stellenbosch
in the Western Cape on 25-26 January 2005, reports as follows:

1. Introduction

     The Portfolio Committee on Housing undertook a provincial visit to  the
     Western Cape, to the areas that were affected by the fire  disaster  in
     Joe Slovo, KwaLanga and Khayamnandi  in  Stellenbosch.  The  visit  was
     undertaken over two days, on January 25 - 26, 2005.


1.    Members of the delegation were as follows:
      • Ms ZA Kota-Fredericks          ANC (Chairperson)
      • Mr RJ Tau                      ANC (Chairperson: Select Committee
                                  on Public Services)
      • Ms BN Dambuza             ANC
      • Mr DC Mabena              ANC
      • Mr GD Schneemann          ANC
      • Ms NJ Ngele               ANC
      • Ms MM Ramakaba-Leseia     ANC
      • Mr AC Steyn               DA

      Staff:
      Ms M Ntuli       Committee Secretary
      Mr S Makeleni    Committee Assistant


1. Purpose of visit
           The main purpose of the visit was to assess the relief needs  in
           the areas that were affected by the fire disaster  and  to  find
           out what the Stellenbosch Municipality and the  Council  of  the
           City of Cape  Town  had  planned  to  do  in  this  regard.  The
           Portfolio Committee also wanted to give support to  the  victims
           of the fire disaster.


DAY 1  25 JANUARY 2005
           On  Tuesday,  January  25,  2005,  the  delegation  visited  the
           Stellenbosch  Municipality,  where  the  Executive   Mayor,   Mr
           Alderman Ortell, welcomed them.   Municipal  Manager,  Mr  Bruce
           Kannemeyer, briefed the delegation  on  the  fire  disaster  and
           highlighted two specific areas, which  were  severely  affected,
           namely, Zone J and Zone O in Khayamnandi.


           The Mayoral Committee included the following members:
       • Mr Alderman Ortell       Executive Mayor
       • Mr Bruce Kannemeyer:           Municipal Manager
       • Alderman MW Kalazana:    Speaker
       • Councillor GW Adonis:          Deputy Executive Mayor
       • Concillor JC Anthony:          Executive Mayoral Committee Member
       • Councillor HC Bergstedt: Executive Mayoral Committee Member
       • Councillor SM Gordon:          Executive Mayoral Committee Member
       • Councillor NA Mgijima:         Executive Mayoral Committee Member
       • Councillor HG Pheiffer:        Executive Mayoral Committee Member
       • Alderman JB Truter:      Executive Mayoral Committee Member
       • Mr Piet Smit:            Director – Corporate Services
       • Mr Jan Wolmerans:        Director – Strategic Services
       •  Mr  Eddie  Delport:         Director  –  Engineering  &  Technical
         Services
                                  & Acting Director – Planning & Economic
                                  Development Services
      • Mr Keith Ford:            Director – Community Services
      •  Mr  Kevin  Bey-Leveld:            Acting  Director  –   Electrical
        Engineering
                                  Services
      • Mr Neville Langehoven:         Director – Public Safety
      • Mr Dries van Niekerk:          Acting Director – Financial Services
      • Mr Lester van Stawel:          Head – Program Manager: Housing
      • Mr Emile van der Merwe:        Program Manager: Planning and
                                  Economic Development
      • Mr Frans van Dalen:       Program Manager: Technical Services


The delegation accompanied by the  Mayoral  Committee  departed  to  a  site
inspection in Khayamnandi.

2.1   Findings
    The delegation saw brick hostels, which were  originally  part  of  the
    Stellenbosch Winery and had been developed  and  later  converted  into
    family units.  The Stellenbosch Municipal Council had also  built  some
    new houses for  the  families  that  were  previously  in  shacks.  The
    Municipal Council was in the process of repairing a few formal  houses,
    which were severely affected by smoke during the fire  disaster  in  an
    area called “Zawazawa”, in Mondi Crescent.


    Zone “O” was the first area where the fire broke  out.   The  area  was
    undeveloped, with no roads and fire hydrants, thus allowing the fire to
    run wild and uncontrollable.  The densification of the shacks  made  it
    difficult to move freely in terms  of  security  and  rescue  measures.
    Fire fighters could, therefore, not access  the  area.   The  area  was
    declared a disaster area.


    In Zone “O”, about 650 structures were destroyed by  the  fire  and  in
    Zone “J”, 25 structures were burnt down. It was reported that  a  total
    of about 1000 structures had been burnt down since December 2004.

    In Zone “J”, there were only two (2) fire  hydrants.  It  was  reported
    that the Municipal  Council  was  in  the  process  of  putting  infra-
    structural services in place. People in this area  would  be  moved  to
    Watergaan area at a later stage.


    The Stellenbosch Municipal Council had identified a piece of land in an
    area  within a walking distance from where the fire had occurred.   The
    area would be utilized to accommodate the victims  of  the  fire  on  a
    temporary basis until suitable land could be identified.  At  the  time
    of the visit, the Municipal Council of Stellenbosch was in the  process
    of liaising with the Government of the Western Cape in this regard.

   3. The delegation also visited  a  local  community  hall  in  which  the
      victims of the fire were in the process of being registered to receive
      immediate relief grants of R500 per family unit from the Department of
      Social  Welfare.   The  Department  of  Home  Affairs  was  also  busy
      registering the victims of the fire for new Identity Documents in  the
      same venue. The victims of the fire had also received an emergency kit
      valued at R800 per family unit from the Department of Housing  in  the
      provincial  government  of  the   Western   Cape.    The   Masibambane
      Volunteers, who are funded by the government were  also  available  to
      assist during the registration process.  The  police  department  from
      Stellenbosch was also available  in  the  community  hall  during  the
      registration process.


           It was reported that arrangements to move families to  Watergaan
           Development had already  been  put  in  place.  The  Khayamnandi
           Development Corridor would undertake this project.

        4. After the site visit, the delegation returned to the offices  of
           the Stellenbosch Municipality where  they  were  shown  a  slide
           presentation of the whole area affected by  the  fire  disaster.
           It was reported that three (3) helicopters had  come  to  assist
           when the fire broke out. The Fire Department  was  on  permanent
           deployment in the area from the  time  that  fire  disaster  had
           occurred  in  December  2004.   During  the  presentation,   the
           delegation had the opportunity to ask questions from the members
           of the Mayoral Committee and made comments as follows:


 • What were the main causes of fire?
 • Are the  women  contractors  involved  in  putting  up  the  new  housing
   structures, especially those who are accredited by the SETA’s?
 • What are Golfers putting back into the economy of Stellenbosch?
 • Is there any community education to prevent fires in the near future?
 • Who is in control of the Emergency Kit,  which  is  administered  by  the
   Western Cape provincial government?
 • The Watergaan project is a good  initiative,  but  how  is  it  going  to
   resolve problems faced by the municipality regarding human settlements?
 • Are the emerging contractors involved  in  putting  up  the  new  housing
   structures?
 • The Stellenbosch Municipality should try and look at other projects  such
   as schools, clinics etc. and not just houses.

4.1   Response by the Municipal Manager
 • The main cause of fire is still unknown at this stage, but the  Municipal
   Council learnt that a stove had exploded and caused the  fire.   Most  of
   the poorest families use highly flammable materials to make fire.
 • In terms of land availability, in most instances, Stellenbosch  is  zoned
   as an agricultural area.
 • The Municipal Council has realized a  need  to  give  education  on  fire
   prevention and fire fighting, not just to react to a  disaster  situation
   only.
 • The Watergaan project would also cater for other  developmental  projects
   and not just housing only.
 • The Municipal Council is in the  process  of  getting  women  contractors
   involved.
 • Overall, the Stellenbosch Municipality has tried to improve the lives  of
   people since they took over the Council.

4.2   Comments by the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee
    • The issue of commercial land was discussed at the last MINMEC meeting.
        Negotiations  between  the  Department  of  Land  affairs  and   the
      Department of Housing are still underway in this regard.
    • The Stellenbosch Municipality should try  and  accommodate  the  women
      contractors in their housing projects by 30% as stated in the  Housing
      Legislation.

     5. In  conclusion,  the  Municipal  Manager  requested  the  Portfolio
        Committee delegation to assist the Municipality in  addressing  the
        housing backlog.  He said municipality required an amount  of  R800
        million for this purpose.


DAY 2: 26 JANUARY 2005

           During the second day of the provincial  visit,  the  delegation
           went for a briefing in the Mayoral Offices, in the City of  Cape
           Town.  The delegation met with the Mayor  of  Cape  Town,  Ms  N
           Mfeketho,  together  with  certain   Councillors   and   Council
           officials.


           In his welcoming address, the City Manager thanked the Portfolio
           Committee for coming to see the Joe Slovo  informal  settlements
           after the fire disaster.


           Thereafter, the Mayor of Cape Town gave a briefing together with
           a slide presentation on the overview of the N2 Gateway  Project.
           She stressed the fact that  the  N2  Gateway  Project  is  being
           implemented  in  partnership  with  all  three  (3)  spheres  of
           government.


           The Mayor informed the delegation  that  there  were  three  (3)
           strategies in place to address the recurrent fire  disasters  in
           Joe Slovo. The main aim was to develop the N2 Gateway, not  only
           because of the fires, but to develop the communities.

 • The first strategy was for the City of Cape  Town  to  provide  immediate
   shelter and services in tents for the victims of the fire.
 • The medium-term strategy included the identification of  land  in  Epping
   and KwaLanga to build temporary houses. The proposal was submitted to the
   Cape Town Chamber of Commerce and some objections were raised.  The  City
   of Cape Town has sought legal advice to assist in accessing sites.
 • The long-term strategy  was  to  build  houses  and  to  create  economic
   opportunities for the communities and also  to  address  the  problem  of
   backyard dwellings as well as shacks near the hostels.

   6. After the presentation  and  the  briefing,  the  Chairperson  of  the
      Portfolio Committee thanked the Mayor and stated that the City of Cape
      Town was moving in the right direction, especially  in  terms  of  the
      emerging contractors.

6.1   Members of the delegation posed the following questions:
 • What measures have been put in place  to  prevent  the  same  thing  from
   happening in the future?
 • What measures has the City of Cape Town taken to address the cause of the
   fire?
 • What precautions has the City of Cape Town taken regarding corruption  in
   housing?
 • The transit camps, which include the use of schools,  might  disrupt  the
   children’s education. How is the City of Cape Town going to address that?
 • The committee  members  asked  whether  the  current  projects  won’t  be
   affected by the Joe Slovo challenges.

6.2   Comments by the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee
 • The delegation noted that most people affected  in  such  fire  disasters
   were mainly young women.  The Portfolio Committee was planning to host  a
   “Fire and Floods Conference” in Parliament in March 2005,  in  which  the
   City of Cape Town was invited to attend.


     7. In her vote of thanks, Councillor Beerwinkel thanked the delegation
        for listening. She also expressed a desire to have an ongoing and a
        good  working  relationship  with  the  Portfolio  Committee.   The
        delegation, together with the Mayor and her delegation, went out on
        a site visit to the Joe Slovo settlement.

8. Findings
           The delegation went to the site where many homes were burnt down
           on January 15,  2005,  during  the  day.  The  hostel  area  was
           surrounded by the shack dwellings, which were  completely  burnt
           down.  In one of the shack dwellings, a four months old baby who
           was inside the house when the fire disaster occurred died  after
           inhaling smoke. The government of  the  Western  Cape  took  the
           responsibility of burying the child.


           The delegation thereafter went to a temporary venue where  there
           were fourteen (14) marquees on site in which  the  fire  victims
           from Joe Slovo were housed. Each  marquee  housed  450  families
           together with some of their belongings.  There  were  three  (3)
           volunteers in each marquee who were delegated  by  the  City  of
           Cape Town to act as Liaison Officers between  the  fire  victims
           occupying the marquees and the City of Cape Town.  Meetings were
           held everyday between the officials from the Mayoral office  and
           the occupants during whom their needs/concerns were raised.

           One of the fire victims requested the delegation  to  arrange  a
           sewing machine for her. By sewing and selling some clothes,  she
           would be able to pay for her children’s school fees.


           While on site, the delegation made the following observations on
           some of the activities, which were already put in place:
      • There was another large marquee, which was  mainly  utilized  as  a
        crèche.
      • Daily collection of refuse by a big truck was in place
      • A group of people cleaning the yard
      • Six water stand pipes to supply the water to the occupants
      • A temporary structure with disposable taps and mobile  showers  for
        (males & females separately).
      • Three (3) urns provided for the children to get hot water.
      • Daily supply of food for the  fire  victims  from  NGOs.  Bambanani
        Volunteers were busy assisting in dishing out the food.
      • Private sector companies had donated some blankets and  mattresses,
        which were supplied at night.
      • The Department of Home affairs  was  using  one  of  the  tents  to
        process identity documents.
      • The Department of Social Welfare was also outside on site supplying
        baby food to the fire victims.


   1. The delegation also went to the Langa sports complex  in  which  items
      such as second-hand clothing, shoes, mattresses and food parcels  were
      sorted out for distribution to the fire victims. The  items  mentioned
      were donated by organizations such as the Red Cross Society  and  some
      NGOs in support of the fire victims.


      All of the above-mentioned activities were co-ordinated  by  officials
      from  the  mayoral  offices  under  the  leadership  of  Mr   Bathembu
      Lugulwana, who is a Project Co-ordinator.


        9. The delegation also visited another area called  Wallacedene  in
           which 14 houses were burnt down.  The  delegation  met  with  Mr
           Steven Erasmus, Senior Housing Manager in the Housing Department
           from the City of Cape Town. Mr Erasmus reported  that  when  the
           fire occurred, which started in  a  nearby  shop,  it  was  well
           managed, as there was no wind at the time. There were no  deaths
           or injuries to the fire victims. The  cause  of  fire  was  also
           unknown. The Disaster Team from the City of Cape  Town  supplied
           the fire victims with some food parcels and clothing. The houses
           in the area had already been re-built by the City of Cape Town.

10. Recommendations

      Stellenbosch Municipality


     1. The Portfolio Committee recommends that  it  be  given  a  progress
        report on zone “J” and zone “O”.


     2. The Portfolio Committee requests an update on the  housing  backlog
        and the integrated housing strategy in Stellenbosch.

     3. The Portfolio Committee is asking for a progress report in terms of
        their disaster management strategy.


     4. The committee recommends that  a  land  audit  be  carried  out  in
        Stellenbosch Municipality.

The City of Cape Town

   1. The Portfolio Committee needs an update on their  disaster  management
   plan.


   2. The committee requires an update on the number of temporary houses  in
      Delft and Langa as well as their plan to place the victims of fire  to
      permanent accommodation.


   3. The Portfolio Committee recommends to be given an update  on  how  the
      Epping land dispute was resolved.

7. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing on study tour to Norway and
  the Netherlands, dated 16 August 2005:

The Portfolio Committee on housing having a undertaken a study to Norway
and the Netherlands from 4 - 18 June 2005, reports as follows:

1. INTRODUCTION

A multi-party delegation of seven (7) committee  members  of  the  Portfolio
Committee on Housing and the Committee Secretary, undertook a study tour  to
Norway and the Netherlands from 4-18 June 2005.

Accompanying the parliamentary delegation were  three  representatives  from
the Social Housing Foundation (SHF),  a  representative  from  the  National
Department of Housing and two  representatives  from  the  National  Housing
Finance Corporation (NHFC).

1. The entire delegation was comprised of the following persons:
    • Ms ZA Kota             ANC (Chairperson)
    • Ms BN Dambuza          ANC
    • Ms MM Ramakaba-Lesiea  ANC
    • Mr GD Schneemann       ANC
    • Mr TS Dodovu           ANC
    • Mr AC Steyn            DA
    • Ms S Sigcau            UDM
    • Ms NM Ntuli            Committee Secretary
    • Mr Brian Moholo        Managing Director: Social Housing Foundation
    • Mr Marlon Abrahams           Social Housing Foundation (SHF)
    • Ms Odette Crofton            Social Housing Foundation (SHF)
    • Mr William Jiyana            National Department of Housing
    • Mr Tlhoriso Thelejane  National Housing Finance Corporation (NHFC)
    • Ms Mandu  Mamatela             National  Housing  Finance  Corporation
      (NHFC)
                            (Joined study tour during second leg)

1.2   The study tour was sub-divided into two (2) sections:
         • The first leg of the study tour took place in Norway  from  5-11
           June, 2005; and
         • The second leg of the study tour took place in  the  Netherlands
           from 13-17 June, 2005

1.3 Objectives of the Study Tour
      • To gain insight into the  policy  basis  for  the  social  and  co-
        operative housing approach in Norway and the Netherlands.
      • To gain insight  into  the  results  achieved  through  the  social
        housing  and  co-operative  housing  approach  in  Norway  and  the
        Netherlands.
      • To gain insight into the experiences  and  lessons  learnt  on  the
        social and co-operative  housing  approach  in  Norway  and  rental
        housing stock in the Netherlands and how this has  affected  policy
        development in these countries.
      • To learn how the  international  social  and  co-operative  housing
        approaches relate to and compare with the South African context and
        policy development approach as well as  the  roles,  functions  and
        responsibilities of the different  spheres  of  government,  these,
        national, provincial and local.
      • To look at the institutional architecture and players required  for
        a well functioning social rental and co-operative housing sector.
      • To strengthen parliamentary relations and share experiences on  the
        aspects of social and co-operative housing.

FIRST LEG OF THE STUDY TOUR: NORWAY
6-11 June 2005


DAY 1

On June 6,  2005  the  delegation  visited  the  offices  of  The  Norwegian
Federation of Co-operative Housing Associations  (NBBL).  NBBL  was  founded
after the Second World War in 1946 and their vision is to offer members  the
opportunity to attain  decent homes in  a  sustainable  living  environment.
NBBL is a country-wide membership based association  which  represents  over
ninenty (90) co-operative housing associations.
In his welcoming remarks, the Chief Executive  Officer  (CEO)  of  NBBL,  Mr
Ralph Norberg, stated that NBBL activities are funded by  a  combination  of
members’ contributions and income generated from the sale of  NBBL  products
and services. Mr Norberg also highlighted the fact that  on  the  next  day,
(7th June 2005) during the visit, Norway would be celebrating 100  years  of
its independence from Sweden. This was an historic day  for  Norway  and  he
was glad to have the delegation around during such  an  historic  event  for
Norway.

The delegation also received the following presentations from NBBL:
    • The Norwegian –  South  African  partnership  concerning  co-operative
      housing development, by the Director of International Development,  Ms
      May Summerfelt.
    • The Norwegian Co-operative  Housing  Policy,  whose  main  concept  is
      “ownership” by the Managing Director of Borrettsregisteret, Mr  Sverre
      Bugge.
    • The  Norwegian  Co-operative  Housing  Movement  (Legislation)  by  Mr
      Henning Lauridsen, Lawyer at NBBL.


All documents outlining the  above  presentations  were  circulated  to  the
delegation.

The delegation thereafter visited the  three  (3)  Norwegian  urban  housing
development projects. Professor Sven Erik Svendsen, took the  delegation  to
the following housing projects: Lambertseter: with a lot of facilities  such
as schools, shops, and an estimated population of 5 000 people. Romsas:  was
built in the 1970s and has a  population  of  10  000  people.  The  housing
project also has facilities like a  library,  schools,  a  railway  station,
shops etc.  Mr  Marius  Nygaard,  Architect,  took  the  delegation  through
Pilestredet Park. The entire area used to be  the  state  hospital  and  was
redeveloped into a housing project. This housing project was different  from
other housing developments in that 90% of the demolished  hospital  material
was re-used for the housing project. 25% of the demolished material was  re-
cycled as paving slabs.

DAY 2
On June 7, 2005, the delegation visited Horten  Co-operative’s  offices  and
received presentations by the Director, Mr John  Syvertsen,  and  the  Admin
Director of HBBL, Mr  Rolf  Mikaelsen.  Copies  of  the  presentations  were
circulated to the delegation. After  the  slide  presentations  on  Horten’s
historical background, the delegation thereafter  visited  apartments  which
were managed by Horten Housing Co-orperative. The  delegation  saw  eighteen
(18) apartments  which  are  designated  mainly  for  the  elderly  and  the
physically challenged people and are subsidized by the state. The  Nowergian
government pays for  the  care-taking  services  for  the  inhabitants.  The
Horten Housing Co-operative supplies them with meals on a daily  basis.  The
CareTaker’s apartment is also residential.

The delegation also visited another  housing  project  in  Moss  across  the
North Sea with 4 000 apartments which were built  in  the  early  60s.  Most
people who live in Moss work in Oslo and travel by buses  and  trains  on  a
daily basis.

DAY 3
On June 8, 2005 the delegation visited  the  Norwegian  Parliament  and  met
with two (2) Members of Parliament; Mr Peter Skovholt Gitmark  (Conservative
Party) and Mr Heikki Holmas (Socialist Left  Party)  who  were  representing
the Parliamentary Committee on Housing. The two MPs briefed  the  delegation
on their housing policy as well as government intervention  in  the  housing
sector. The Norwegian MPs also stated that in the Norwegian Parliament,  all
seven (7) political parties are equally represented and there is  about  40-
50%  women  representation  in  all  political  parties.    After   a   long
interaction with the Norwegian MPs, the delegation  thereafter  visited  the
offices of the Ministry of Local Government and Regional Affairs.

The delegation received presentations  by  the  State  Secretary,  Mr  Roger
Iversen, who  welcomed  the  delegation  and  gave  a  presentation  on  the
Norwegian Housing Policy: Responsibilities &  Challenges,  followed  by  the
Deputy Director General in Housing & Building Department,  Mr  Per  Nygaard,
who gave a presentation on the  History  and  Background  of  the  Norwegian
Housing Policy, who also highlighted  the  fact  that  in  the  50s,  Norway
experienced the same enthusiasm for housing  that  South  Africa  is  facing
currently; and the Director General in the Housing  &  Building  Department:
Ms Inger  Lindgren,  who  gave  a  presentation  on  the  Norwegian  Housing
Legislation. The main highlight of her presentation was  the  fact  that  in
the housing sector, all laws are against discrimination  and  also  that  by
law, all parents in Norway are to provide a  house  for  their  children  as
long as they are minors.  Copies of all  presentations  were  circulated  to
the delegation.

The delegation thereafter visited the offices of OBOS which was  established
in 1929 when there was a housing shortage in Norway.  OBOS  is  the  largest
Housing Management Co-operative in Norway  with  a  membership  of  200  000
people. OBOS provides full support to its members who live  in  its  housing
projects. They own commercial properties and are also involved  in  property
development. In his presentation the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of  OBOS,
Mr Martin Maeland, highlighted the fact  that  they  provide  their  members
with big incentives by negotiating discounts with their partners  on  behalf
of their members. They act as a  service  provider  for  their  members  and
ensure that their members get the best products  available  in  the  housing
sector. Copies of the presentation on the history of  OBOS  were  circulated
to the delegation.

DAY 4
On June 9, the delegation visited offices of the State  Housing  Bank  which
was established after the Second World War, in 1945. The State Housing  Bank
has six (6) Regional Offices and a staff complement of  350  employees.  The
Director at Head Office, Ms Inger Vold Zapffe, gave a  presentation  on  the
Role of the State Housing Bank in the Housing Policy. The Director, Ms  Anne
Ruden, gave a  presentation  on  Challenges  to  fill  the  Role  as  Useful
Implementors  and  the  Senior  Advisor,  Mr  Torstein  Syvertsen,  gave   a
presentation on The Need for Social Housing.

The presentors highlighted the fact that only 5 200 people are  homeless  in
Norway. The bank acts to stabilize the housing sector  and  also  stimulates
competition  within  the  banking  sector  as  a  whole.    Copies  of   the
presentations were circulated to the delegation.

The delegation thereafter visited the offices of the  Norwegian  Agency  for
Development Co-operation (NORAD) and met with the Acting Director of  NORAD,
Ms Inguun Klepsvik. Ms Klepsvik made a brief presentation on the  historical
background on the Memorandum Of Understanding (MOU),  which  was  signed  in
1994 between the Norwegian Government and the South African Government.  The
main objective of the agreement was to develop a co-operative housing  model
for  low-income  households  in  South  Africa,  utilizing  the  Norwegians’
experience and technical support. The Social Housing Foundation (SHF) a non-
profit company established by the South  African  Government  in  1997,  was
mandated  to  promote,  support  and  assist  the  integrated   process   of
sustainable social  housing  development  in  South  Africa.   An  agreement
between NORAD, the National Department of Housing in South  Africa  and  SHF
was signed in 2002 for NORAD to provide  financial  assistance  for  SHF  to
develop the housing co-operative sector in South Africa.

Ms Klepsvik stated that the financial aid to South Africa was coming  to  an
end in November 2005. The main  purpose  of  the  grant  was  to  strengthen
justice and democracy in South Africa. In terms of exchange  and  knowledge,
their experience had been highly enriched. However, she asked SHF to  submit
reports on the projects which were covered through the financial  assistance
from NORAD for the past three (3) years.

The Chairperson of the delegation, Ms Z  Kota,  stated  that  the  Portfolio
Committee would continue to engage with SHF  on  its  preparations  for  the
outstanding documents. The Committee would also ensure that SHF  submit  all
the  necessary  information  required  and  would  request  NORAD  for   the
extension of the  financial  assistance.   She  further  stated  that  South
Africa needed to continue learning from  the  successful  Norwegian  housing
experience.

In conclusion, Ms Klepsvik emphasized that:
    • An application for the renewal/extension of the programme  should  be
      prepared and sent to NORAD before the due date which  is  October  1,
      2005.
    • Recommendations and  motivation  for  the  extension  should  be  put
      together and stated clearly.
    • The report should be specific about the systems that  are  in  place,
      such as management, auditing, fighting corruption,  accessibility  of
      information both technical and administrative.
    • The report should explain fully if the stakeholders have a say in the
      organisation.
    • The report should reflect balance in gender issues.
    • The reported results on the programme are important.

She further stated that the South African Finance Minister should prepare  a
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and have it signed, as  the  rest  of  the
world stands in admiration of what has been achieved in  South  Africa;  and
Norway still wants to be partner in whatever way.

DAY 5

On June  10,  2005  the  delegation  visited  Gamle  Oslo  Sevicesentral,  a
Caretaker Services company involved in the revitalization of the inner  city
of Oslo and the renewal of the housing projects. The delegation met with  Mr
Ulf Guldbrandsen who is employed by Gamle Oslo  Servicesentral  and  Mr  Lee
Roy Tandy, who is on a year’s exchange programme between Norway  (NBBL)  and
Cope Housing in South Africa.

The Caretaker Services company offer a service to people  who  live  in  the
housing projects by maintaining and fixing the housing projects in  whatever
needs to be fixed such as  plumbing,  electricity,  doors,  windows,  refuse
removal as well as gardening. Anything that is broken in  the  apartment  is
reported  and  repaired.  The  tenants  pay  for  the  repairs.  Mr  Tandy’s
experience with the Norwegian  model  was  invaluable  and  members  of  the
delegation encouraged him to learn  as  much  as  he  could  and  bring  his
experience and knowledge back in South Africa when his contract  expires  in
November 2005. He was very keen and said he enjoyed what  he  was  doing  in
Norway. He would then return to Cope Housing  in  Gauteng  and  work  on  an
Advisory basis.  He expressed the desire to teach and influence other  South
African youngsters on being a Care-taker and not to look down  upon  such  a
position.

The Chairperson of the delegation encouraged Mr  Tandy  to  learn  more  and
channel his experience to the youth in South Africa when he gets  back.  She
also encouraged him to try and influence  more  South  African  students  to
engage themselves in this particular programme.

The delegation thereafter went to the NBBL offices for  the  summing  up  of
the entire visit in Norway.  They  then  received  a  presentation  from  Ms
Kristin Fjeld-Eiken, former NBBL Legal Advisor, and  currently  an  Attorney
in Haavind Vislie,  on  Regulating  Housing  Co-operatives.  Copies  of  the
presentation were circulated to members of the delegation.

In  conclusion,  the  delegation  received  a   farewell   speech   by   the
International Relations Officer of NBBL, Mr Sverre Bugge.  In  his  remarks,
Mr Bugge stated that as members of parliament, it was  their  responsibility
to decide on the legal framework for the housing sector and ensure that  the
legislation was consistent  with  their  current  economical  situation  and
national tradition. He said it was up to the  South  African  delegation  to
sort out which  part  of  the  Norwegian  ideas  and  experiences  could  be
transferred or adapted to their own challenges.

He further stated that good housing is one of the  four  cornerstones  in  a
society together with education, health and jobs. Education  contributes  to
jobs, jobs contribute to housing and health. He summed  up  by  wishing  the
delegation well in their further stay in Holland and  said  it  had  been  a
pleasure hosting them.

SECOND LEG OF THE STUDY TOUR: THE NETHERLANDS
13-17 June 2005


DAY 1

The second leg of the study tour started on Monday, 13  June  2005,  in  the
offices of the Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and Environment  (VROM)
in the Hague, where the Deputy Director General  of  Housing,  Mr  Bert  van
Delden welcomed the delegation.

The International Relations Officer, Mr Huib van Eyk made a presentation  by
giving a brief overview on the Dutch Housing Policy.   He  stated  that  the
Netherlands  was  densely  populated,  with  a  population  of  6,1  million
inhabitants.  He emphasized that housing in the Netherlands  is  never  free
for anybody.

The Co-ordinator of the Rental Policy, Mr Edwin Buser, made  a  presentation
on the Rental Policy in which  he  highlighted  the  fact  that  the  rental
sector provides quality housing whereas 54% of the housing stock  was  owner
occupied.  The social rental stock was managed  and  owned  by  the  housing
associations.  About  30%  of  the  available  land  in  the  municipalities
consists of social housing.

The Senior Policy Advisor for Urban and  Regional  Affairs,  Mr  Richard  de
Haan, made a presentation on Urban Renewal.

After interaction  between  the  delegation  and  representatives  from  the
Ministry of Housing, copies of all the presentations were circulated to  the
delegation.

The delegation thereafter received a welcoming address by  the  Minister  of
Housing, Ms Sybilla Dekker. The Minister expressed her delight in  receiving
the South African parliamentary delegation for the first time.

The Minister highlighted the  relationship  between  South  Africa  and  the
Netherlands in the area of housing and  urban  renewal  which  was  formally
established in a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signed  in  1997  by  the
Ministers of Housing from each country.  The MOU was renewed  in  2004  with
the current South African Housing Minister,  Dr  LN  Sisulu.  The  bilateral
partnership was limited mainly to the social rented housing sector in  South
Africa.

The Minister stated that they work with  Aedes,  the  national  organization
that  promotes  the  interests  of  social  housing  organizations  in   the
Netherlands, and with the Association  of  Netherlands  Municipalities  (the
VNG). A large and unique network of stakeholders had been  formed  in  close
cooperation with the South  African  counterparts  of  these  organizations:
with the Ministry of Housing and the  Social  Housing  Foundation  (SHF)  in
Gauteng,  the  South  African  Local  Government  Association  (SALGA)   and
recently with the  National  Association  of  Social  Housing  Organisations
(NASHO).  She said the network was unique in  that  no  two  countries  work
closely together on housing  as  the  Netherlands  and  South  Africa.   She
stated that she was planning to  visit  South  Africa  between  October  and
November 2005.

In her concluding remarks, the Minister wished the delegation  a  productive
and  enjoyable  study  tour  that  would  help  to  fulfill  the   important
commitment to “housing the nation”.
 After the presentation by the Minister, the  delegation  received  a  video
presentation by Mr Joop van Dam on the  urban  restructuring  projects.  The
delegation then visited  Duindorp  district  with  a  population  of  6  000
inhabitants. About one third of the houses were to be demolished  and  build
new ones as many of the houses had become too small.  About 50% of  the  new
houses would be rented to the low-income earners.  Some of the buildings  in
the area had survived the First and the Second  World  Wars.   The  original
tenants had the first option to move back into the newly  built  apartments.
The area also catered for the elderly persons and  had  facilities  such  as
pre-schools, schools, a community center and a church.


DAY 2

On 14 June 2005, the delegation was welcomed by the International  Relations
Officer, Mr Kees Elgershuizen at the offices of Vestia  Housing  Corporation
in Rotterdam.  Mr  Elgershuizen  also  made  a  video  presentation  to  the
delegation on the Vestia Association. This housing association had built  70
000 houses, including students’ accommodation after the  Second  World  War.
The Vestia Association had 100 years’ social  housing  experience  in  which
they provide support and have regular consultations with the  tenants.   The
International Relations Officer also highlighted  the  fact  that  they  had
transferred their knowledge to South Africa  and  had  played  a  supportive
role in setting up housing associations in East London. The  delegation  was
shown another video presentation by  the  Project  Manager,  Ms  Matine  ter
Velde, who works for a  housing  project  called  “Hoogvliet”  with  17  000
houses which were built  in  the  50s.   About  5  000  houses  were  to  be
demolished and better houses would be built as they now  needed  bigger  and
better houses with a variety of social services and more parking space.   Ms
Matine ter Velde warned the South African delegation to be  careful  of  the
previous mistakes made by the Netherlands.

The Financial Manager, Mr Joop Ras, made a  presentation  on  the  financial
problems regarding the management of the housing projects.   The  delegation
also interacted with the Chief Executive Officer of Vestia, Mr  Eric  Staal,
about his experience with social housing in South Africa.

Mr Vincent Smit and Ms Sandra Kessels  from  the  Advisory  Council  in  the
Ministry of Housing also made  a  presentation  to  the  delegation  on  the
Debate and Perspective in  Social  Housing  in  the  Netherlands  and  their
specific role in  South  Africa.   All  copies  of  the  presentations  were
circulated to the delegation.

The delegation  thereafter  visited  the  Hague  Municipality  and  received
another presentation on Social Housing: Housing Stock in  the  Hague,  Urban
Policies and Regional Planning by Mr De Rouw and Mr Teule at the  city  hall
at  The  Hague.   Copies  of  the  presentations  were  circulated  to   the
delegation. The delegation thereafter visited the housing  projects  in  the
city centre.  The region of Hague has nine (9) municipalities.  Most of  the
housing projects were built close to the sea with a lot  of  parks.   People
who live there were low income and middle income  groups.   There  were  230
000 houses, of which 18% catered for single parent families.  About  72%  of
the houses were in  the  low-income  category  and  28%  were  in  the  more
expensive  category.   All  the  apartments  were  owned  by   the   housing
associations under the concept of “building for the neighbourhood”,  meaning
the low-income groups with multi-cultural neighbourhoods.


DAY 3

On 15 June 2005, the delegation visited the offices  of  the  Ymere  Housing
Association in Amsterdam, whose slogan is “Passionate About  Housing”.   The
delegation was welcomed by the  Chairperson  of  the  Board,  Mr  Lex  Pouw.
Ymere is one of the largest housing associations in  the  Netherlands  which
manages 47 000 rented homes, retail  properties  and  business  spaces.   It
also develops new homes within the private and  rental  sector.   Ymere  was
founded in 1950 and takes part in various quality  of  life  projects  which
they initiated.  Their main focus is housing  for  the  elderly  people  and
also for the  physically  challenged  individuals.  They  also  develop  and
manage business properties.  The Ymere Housing Association is also  involved
in a housing project in South Africa (Buffalo City) in East London,  through
a company called “Own Haven Housing Association”. A video  presentation  was
shown to the delegation in which  challenges  faced  in  sustaining  housing
development in South Africa were highlighted, and these  included  the  non-
payment of rent and the interference by politicians in the  housing  sector.
The delegation also received a presentation  on  Urban  Regeneration  by  Dr
Harry Platte.

The delegation thereafter  visited  the  Ijburg  housing  project  which  is
situated at the sea front. The Ijburg housing project has  houses  built  on
land that has been re-claimed from the sea.

The delegation also visited the Dutch Union  of  Tenants  which  has  7  000
individual members.  In her presentation, the Director, Mrs Maria van  Veen,
pointed out the challenges that faced the Union.  However,  she  stated  the
fact that they had a good working relationship with Vestia, which is one  of
the largest Housing Associations in the Netherlands.  She  also  highlighted
their achievements, which included bringing about a huge  increase  in  rent
subsidies, negotiating a standard compensation figure  of  €500  for  people
who had to be relocated during the renewal of projects and bringing about  a
law which forced the landlords and tenants to discuss issues together  which
affected them mutually.  A copy of the presentation was  circulated  to  the
delegation.


DAY 4


On 16 June 2005, the delegation visited the offices of the Central Fund  for
Housing in the Netherlands and  received  a  presentation  by  the  Managing
Director, Mr Jan van der Moolen.  Mr van der Moolen made a  presentation  on
“Tiers of Financial Support in Housing  in  the  Netherlands”.  The  Central
Fund for Housing was established in 1988  and  serves  housing  associations
only.   The  Central  Fund  for  Housing  is  an  independent   governmental
organisation,  which  plays  a  supervisory  role.   It  is  funded  through
compulsory contributions from the housing associations.  Its  Board  members
are older people with a lot of experience in the  housing  associations  and
are appointed by the Minister of Housing. Copies of  the  presentation  were
circulated to the delegation.

The delegation thereafter visited the Dutch  Parliament  where  they  had  a
meeting with two Members of Parliament, Messrs  Staf  Depla  (Labour  Party)
and Bas-Jan van Bochove (Christian Democratic Party) and a Committee  Clerk,
Mr Mark van der Leeden.  The  Members  of  Parliament  also  served  on  the
Committee on Environmental Planning  and  Housing.   They  stated  that  the
committee meets every two weeks to discuss correspondence and/or  statements
by the Minister of Housing.  They  highlighted  the  fact  that  people  who
cannot afford to pay rent are paid subsidies by government  to  assist  them
to pay rent.  People buying houses also qualify for a housing  subsidy.   In
the Netherlands, more emphasis is  paid  to  rental  housing.   Parliament’s
view on social housing was that social housing companies are very  important
as they build and re-new houses for the sick, the aged  and  the  low-income
groups.  Although they are private companies, they seek  to  achieve  public
goals.  Lastly, because they are private, the Board  of  Directors  controls
them.

The delegation also had an opportunity to tour the parliament  building  and
visited the parliamentary chamber.

DAY 5

On 17 June 2005, the delegation visited the offices of Aedes and  the  Dutch
International Guarantees for Housing (DIGH), a foundation that  mediates  in
the financing of public housing  projects  in  transitional  and  developing
countries and was established by a number  of  Dutch  housing  associations.
DIGH reviews the  loan  applications  and  presents  the  outcome  to  Dutch
housing  associations  and  municipalities.    Dr  Erik  H  Beijer  made   a
presentation on the Financial Structure of the Dutch Public  Housing  Sector
and copies of the presentation were circulated to the delegation.

In the same offices the delegation also received  a  presentation  from  the
International Relations Officer, Ms Tineke RI  Zuidervaart  from  Aedes,  on
Dutch Social Housing in a Nutshell.  “Aedes”,  meaning  a  house  with  many
rooms, is a federation representing housing  associations.   Ms  Zuidervaart
stated that the involvement of Aedes in  South  Africa  is  on  two  levels,
namely, through the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and has also  financed
two (2) Technical Advisors. Within the  housing  stock,  the  proportion  of
dwellings belonging to  owner-occupiers,  in  particular,  is  growing.   In
comparison with most European countries, home ownership in  the  Netherlands
is still limited.  Aedes’s main aim  is  to  house  all  those  in  need  of
special care  and  it  also  involves  tenants  in  policy  and  management.
Housing allocation is done according to a system which  takes  into  account
the tenant’s history as a  rental  client,  their  credit  worthiness,  etc.
Copies of the presentation were circulated to the delegation.

CONCLUSION
In summing up the study tour, the International Relations Officer,  Mr  Huib
van Eyk from the Ministry  of  Housing,  expressed  his  happiness  for  the
opportunity of accompanying the South African delegation for the whole  week
on visits to the housing projects.  He also stated that it was  his  longest
to accompany  a  delegation  from  another  country.   The  Chairperson  and
members of the delegation thanked the Dutch people for hosting them and  for
their  support.   She  also  said  she  wished  for  a   continued   working
relationship between South Africa and the Netherlands.

The delegation returned to South Africa on Saturday, 18 June 2005.

RECOMMENDATIONS
     1.  The  relationship  between  the  two  parliaments  needs   to   be
        strengthened.
     2. The Portfolio Committee has agreed  to  co-host  the  International
        Housing Conference with Norway (NBBL) in 2006.
     3. The Portfolio Committee recommends that the National Department  of
        Housing utilise the expertise of the exchange student,  Mr  Le  Roy
        Tandy, and that the exchange programmes be continued.
     4. The Portfolio Committee recommends that the government  fast  track
        the rental housing policies as a matter of urgency.
     5. We recommend  that  we  intensify  the  programme  of  co-operative
        housing in South Africa as  we  have  seen  its  ability  to  build
        communities in Norway.
   1.  We  recommend  that  a  starter  funding  be  given  to  the  housing
      institutions to assist  emerging  contractors  in  operational  costs.
      These were the lessons learnt during the visit by the committee to the
      Netherlands, that the government for a long period  of  time  assisted
      the emerging contractors.

8. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing on the Conference on
  Challenges of Fire and Floods in Human Settlements, dated 16 August 2005:

The Portfolio Committee on Housing on the Conference on Challenges of Fire
and Floods in Human Settlements held in Parliament, on 19 & 20 April 2005,
reports as follows:

1 Introduction
The Portfolio Committee on Housing held a conference on Challenges of Fire
and Floods in Human Settlements in Parliament, over two days on 19-20 April
2005.
146 delegates attended the Conference from a wide  variety  of  spheres  and
organizations, and Members of  Parliament  (MPs)  from  different  portfolio
committees/select committees.

2.    Conference  Theme:  To  enhance  the  creation  of  sustainable  human
   settlements by examining the challenges  of  fire  and  floods  in  these
   settlements.

3.    Conference Objectives:
    (       To introduce early warning systems in communities especially as
        far as floods are concerned;
    (       To analyze planning systems for settlements so as to avoid mass
        destruction of property when fires do occur;
    (       To look at non-inflammable building material as well as  stoves
        that are amicable for informal settlement purposes; and
    (       To clarify  roles  of  government  and  communities  in  taking
        ownership for existing policy framework.

   4. Opening Remarks by Ms Z  Kota,  Chairperson:  Portfolio  Committee  on
   Housing
      Focus: Dialogue window of opportunity for the meetings of minds for  a
      better tomorrow and harnessing common energy towards a common goal  of
      sustainable human settlements.
      Concern: Recurrent fires and floods  -  every  fire  through  informal
      settlements could have been prevented.
      Needed:  Comprehensive plan aimed at  addressing  these  issues  in  a
      holistic manner with partnerships  formed  with  various  stakeholders
      from different areas of specialisation.


5.    Key Note Address:  Ms N Mfeketo , Mayor of Cape Town
      Challenges:
      (     Despite all the preventative measures and as  long  as  adequate
        housing was not a reality for  all  citizens,  there  is  always  a
        possibility for disaster.
        No measure could be successful in  an  environment  with  unplanned
        settlements, as witnessed fires in Joe Slovo, which had firebreaks.
      (     There is a need to acknowledge we cannot go back to the old
        policies of influx control, plan for migration of people into our
        areas. Must ensure that settlements are planned and policies are
        such that they prevent invasion. Policies may need to be reviewed
        to welcome the thousands of people migrating to big cities,
        introducing safe cooking and heating measures.
      (     Municipalities need to be assisted to plan for urbanisation  and
        migration to the city

6. Statistics SA: Mr P Lehohla, Statistician-General
  FACT:     Disasters are  both  natural  and  man-made:  Fire  is  man-made
  therefore it can be managed

6.1   Challenges:
      (     High percentage of housing units that lend  themselves  to  high
        risk
      (     Geographical referencing is  needed  to  ensure  rapid  disaster
        response: need for addresses
      (     Volume of migration to Johannesburg and Cape Town
      (     Disaster prone areas are known:  why  are  we  waiting  for  the
        disaster to happen?

6.2   Discussion
      It was pointed out that fires constituted over 40% of the risk and
      that this, combined with high density housing, made a good recipe for
      disaster.  Because the structures in informal settlements were man-
      made, they could be improved.  It was emphasised that it is imperative
      to have proper planning of informal settlements.

7. Paraffin Safety Association: Ms N Ahmed, Managing Director

Challenges:
      (     No quick  fixes,  paraffin  related  incidents  cost  tax-payers
        millions per year.  People that use  paraffin  have  little  choice
        over the cooking utensils and fuels they use, and use it because it
        is low cost.
      (     Sub-standard paraffin stoves are the norm, with an initiative to
        design a safe stove.  It is a problem that the  unsafe  stoves  and
        fuel in unsafe containers is used until then.
      (     Possible legislation for the removal of paraffin  stoves.  Local
        government  and  provincial  government  must  pressurise  national
        government to legislate and improve paraffin stoves.
      (     Portfolio Committee on Housing needs to call SABS to account and
        ask  what  is  happening  with  the  process  of  reviewing   stove
        standards.
      (     What is city and province’s statement of intent within framework
        to address preventable disasters, as people will  continue  to  use
        energy regardless of the structure of the house they have. Dynamics
        of poverty are such that people will continue  to  use  cheap  fuel
        source, and when talk about an integrated housing strategy need  to
        address integrated household energy strategy.

8.    South African Weather Services: Mr G Schultz, General Manager
      Challenges and Resources:
      (     Hazards become disasters when people’s lives and livelihood are
        swept away.  Nearly 90% of the economic impact of disaster in last
        ten years was weather and climate related.  Impacts of natural
        hazards can be reduced through preparedness and mitigation, but
        people need to be informed of risks and options.  It is six times
        more difficult to address relief actions in developing countries as
        hazards are linked to vulnerabilities of communities, the more
        vulnerable the community, the greater chance the hazard will turn
        into a disaster.

      (     Weather Service can offer hazard monitoring in real time,  early
        warnings, risk-identification, climate records, and expert  advice.
        Main risks in South Africa are  lighting,  hailstorms,  floods  and
        drought.  In periods of drought we should start preparing  for  the
        next floods and vice versa.  Lightning  is  a  significant  weather
        issue  in  South  Africa.  Preparedness  and  emergency  management
        includes timely and accurate  forecasts  and  warnings  of  natural
        hazards. Knowledge management includes further improvements in  the
        prediction of high-impact weather and user education and awareness,
        to ensure that warnings are understood and acted upon.
      (      Rural  communities  experience  problems  with  lightning   and
        tornadoes - there have to be systems to ensure that communities are
        aware of the risks.
      (     The Weather Service is embarking on a recapitalisation  plan  to
        buy in more sophisticated weather radars, such as those used in the
        USA. Tornadoes are a devastating phenomenon – have models  to  give
        indication of possibility, but only half an hour lead time to  give
        warning.  Want to put in lightning system to cover whole  of  South
        Africa and cover 500m.  This would probably  be  able  to  pick  up
        lightning  and  movement  of  lightning  in  a  certain  direction.
        Software would automatically generate  SMS  to  cell  phone  in  an
        affected area and warn of approaching storm.


      (     People and communities do  not  always  understand  the  weather
        service - they have to be reached.  It is a challenge to  translate
        jargon into everyday language.  Looking at application  systems  to
        convert the science  into  a  more  application  type  of  message.
        Weather  Service  itself  cannot  warn  a  local  community  –  the
        community itself must warn its people.
    ( There needs to be a close relationship between  the  Weather  Service
        and provincial and local governments  for  quick  response  and  to
        prevent flooding.   South  African  Weather  Service  (SAWS)  issue
        warnings, but alerts to evacuate and  life  threatening  situations
        can only be done at a local community level.  Working together with
        disaster management to a very large extent by providing warnings to
        disaster management in the local communities to inform  them  about
        disasters so that they can be ready to  act  upon  it  and  monitor
        local area more efficiently.
    (        Risk  perception  requires  mapping  into  sociology  of   the
        community, e.g. understanding of  drought  might  be  perceived  as
        being when crops do not grow. NB to understand the risk  perception
        from the  community’s  point  of  view.   A  person  in  the  least
        developed country’s chances of being  affected  by  hazard  is  400
        times greater than that of a person living in  a  highly  developed
        country.

8.1   Discussion
      Considerable concern was expressed about the need  for  early  warning
      systems, particularly for vulnerable people in rural  areas.   It  was
      also noted that warnings were not always understood and therefore  not
      acted upon.  A number of delegates agreed that there was  a  need  for
      better communication with communities and local authorities.   It  was
      also noted that weather services around the world were co-operating on
      better early warning strategies for natural disasters.

9.    Role of the Province in managing disasters: Ms M Murris (Western  Cape
      Director: Disaster Management and Fire Brigade Services)

9.1   Challenges and resources:
      (     We can be as prepared for disasters as we want to be, but if  we
        do not look into people’s living  conditions,  it  will  always  be
        necessary to deal with the impact of fire and natural disasters.
9.2   At present: In  the  Western  Cape,  there  are  six  focal  areas  of
      implementation of the Disaster Management Act:
      • Development of a provincial framework:  developing draft provincial
        framework and bring that  in  line  with  the  National  Framework,
        consulted and published during this year.
      • Establishment of a Disaster Management Centre:  secured co-location
        with EMS and Traffic, obtained suitable site  for  the  Centre  (on
        premises of Tygerberg Hospital), and obtained budgetary  commitment
        from Treasury and looking at an official launch during  06/07.   It
        is Important that we  are  not  approaching  disasters  alone,  and
        working  on  a  process   to   capacitate   particularly   district
        municipalities in a similar format.
      •  Development  of  Disaster   Management   Plans:    developed   and
        implemented an IT management system,  compiled  a  holistic  hazard
        assessment in the province, and implementation  of  provincial  key
        performance areas (KPAs), namely disaster management planning  risk
        reduction and preparedness; and  disaster  response,  recovery  and
        rehabilitation and reconstruction. The  Department  has  picked  up
        flooding patterns, for example; and is  now  able  to  predict  the
        times at which flooding is likely to reach certain areas.   Are  we
        experiencing  communication  problems  to  make  the  system  fully
        functional,   and   have   we   currently   opted   for   satellite
        communications? All land-based communications tend to go down  once
        there is a disaster.


      • Appointment of the Head of the Centre.
      • Establishment of intergovernmental committee, chaired by the MEC of
        Local Government, after publication of the provincial framework.
      • Establishment of Provincial Advisory Forum, chaired by Head of  the
        Centre. The long term  goal  is  to  reduce  disaster-prone  areas,
        communities and households,  making  communities  safer,  with  the
        emphasis on disaster prevention and mitigation, and to prepare  for
        efficient and effective disaster management preparedness,  response
        and recovery structures, systems and  mechanisms.  This  needs  the
        commitment of municipalities as the implementing agents.
      (     Embarked on a training initiative (TEAM –  training,  education,
        awareness and marketing), a pilot production to  enhance  the  risk
        reduction and coping skills  of  the  residents  in  the  ten  most
        vulnerable areas in the Province  through  training  and  education
        interventions tailored to  specific  hazards  and  risks  faced  by
        communities.
      (     Need early warning system for floods, and focused on areas where
        invariably people have settled on low lying ground that was vacant
        because on flood line, they don’t have an alternative even if they
        get an early warning – this is where disaster management needs to
        play a role.
      (     Removing people from the areas that have not proved a  solution.
        People tend not to want to move away, and the situation arises when
        women and children are accommodated in community halls and  so  on,
        but men remain behind to look after their property.
      (     Over-crowding will lead to fire.
      (     Breaking New Ground Plan – the N2 Gateway project is  the  pilot
        for the plan, this housing for 22 000 families, and  this  will  be
        providing  new  housing  and  dealing  with  in-situ  upgrading  of
        informal settlement areas.  Also  need  to  look  at  de-densifying
        informal settlement areas.
      (     Standard of RDP houses.
      (      Veld-fires  -  started  by  unknown  persons  and   spread   to
        residential areas - need
        or firebreaks.  This is a matter that boils  down  to  policing  as
        well.
      (     Affected communities must be involved in decision-making.
      (     Road flooding, e.g. in Western Cape.


      (     Need to  bring  planning  legislation  and  disaster  management
        legislation closer.
      (     Fire-resistant and durable products need to be used.

9.3   Discussion
      Evidence indicated that fires  in  particular  were  very  costly.   A
      suggestion to ban paraffin stoves outright was supported, but  it  was
      pointed out that enforcement of any legislation  was  a  challenge  in
      this respect.  The legislative route had been followed, and  the  sale
      of unsafe paraffin stoves would be prohibited.


      It was agreed that there was an urgent need for resources to be made
      available for early warning systems to enable communities to become
      pro-active in respect of disasters.  Problems would continue to arise
      while the housing problem persisted, as most vulnerable settlements
      were either below the flood line, or within over densely populated
      areas.  Upgrading of the Western Cape’s informal settlements had
      already been identified as a priority by the provincial government.


      Delegates also addressed the problem  of  the  poor  standard  of  RDP
      housing.  Unfortunately there were no quick fixes, but the  Department
      of Housing was working on interim relief programmes, particularly  for
      disasters.

10.   Impact of Fires and Floods In the City of  Cape  Town:  Mr  G  Pillay,
      Manager: Disaster Management


10.1  Fires: Challenges
      (     Victims of fires place belongings in the roads outside their
        dwellings to protect them from the fire, in the process obstructing
        the passage of emergency vehicles trying to reach the scene of the
        fire.
      (     Need for sufficient vacant space  within  and  between  informal
        settlements is a key safety requirement
      (      Infrastructural  damage  as  well   as   personal   loss   cost
        implications of the huge costs  of  emergency,  medical  and  other
        disaster relief services
      (     Fires originating from informal settlements often posed a threat
        to formal housing such as hostels surrounded the  by  the  affected
        informal structures.
      (     The loss of livelihoods in informal settlements was  potentially
        substantial as no accurate statistics were available on the  number
        of jobs created by informal settlements

10.2  Floods: Challenges
      (     Safety and security concerns for emergency relief  workers,  and
          anger generated by incidents
      (     Need to supply counselling and support personnel to victims
      (      Education  of  community  on  flood  threats,  and  buy-in  and
          enforcement required
      (     Registration of persons on the scene
      (     Integrated Development Plan  (IDP)  needs  to  be  aligned  with
          disaster relief  management plans of the municipality
        • Disaster Management Act 2002 is good legislation but needs  to  be
          implemented properly.


10.3  Discussion
       It was emphasised that partnership was key, and  in  this  instance,
       the Department of Social Services worked in close co-operation  with
       the City of Cape Town and various  other  organisations.   Reference
       was also made to the human and emotional  cost  of  disasters,  with
       particular  reference  to  the  fires  in  the  Joe  Slovo  informal
       settlement.


       Mention was also made of  the  dangers  faced  by  emergency  relief
       personnel, such as fire fighters.  It was  also  important  to  have
       preventative measures in  place  and,  once  more,  enforcement  was
       raised as problematic. As in previous discussions, communication and
       co-operation were essential.   In  addition,  community  based  risk
       assessment programmes were being undertaken, and it was  hoped  that
       this would address some of the issues.

11.   Disaster Management  Act:  Mr  L  Buys,  Executive  Manager:  Disaster
      Management, National  Department  of  Provincial  &  Local  Government
      (DPLG)
11.1  Challenges:
      (     Policy and strategy must target  the  most  vulnerable  and  the
        interventions should be co-ordinated.
      (     Disaster Management  Act  -  good  but  the  Bill  needs  to  be
        implemented

      ( Challenges to the implementation of the Act:
      Financial constraints
      Lack of qualified personnel
      Co-ordination
      (     Turn around time for housing assistance too long and could  lead
        to arson
      (     Need to increase helicopter capacity

11.2  Discussion
      A number of delegates stated that municipalities lacked the funds to
      address disaster management.  Other delegates pointed out the need for
      municipalities to incorporate disaster management in their IDPs as
      required by the Act.  It was recognised that disaster management was a
      new discipline in the country, and that training was vital.

12.   National Department  of  Housing:   Ms  J  Bayat,  Director:  National
      Housing Programmes

12.1  Challenges:
        (  International experience shows that communities in informal
        settlements are vulnerable to environmental hazards, nature and
        location of the settlement and external threats from outside the
        settlement.
      (     Design of urban policies - are they sufficiently  well  designed
        to prevent disaster and are there adequate mechanisms in  place  to
        respond to disasters, and can sufficient resources be mobilised for
        post-disaster reconstruction.  If the funds are available, why  are
        they not filtering down?
      (     In planning for sustainable human settlements, need 4  essential
        elements:  space  (land  –  is  there  sufficient  space);  economy
        (ensure there  is  a  good  economic  base);  governance;  and  the
        environment (not only the trees  etc  but  also  how  children  are
        raised, safety, the quality of the soil, etc.).
      (     People need to be  given  safe  neighbourhoods  and  sustainable
        human settlements.  Currently over 1.45 million households  are  in
        informal  settlements.   Victims  of  floods  and   flooding   come
        essentially from there.
      (     Over 12% of  the  households  living  in  freestanding  informal
        housing are most often  located  on  the  periphery  of  the  city.
        People  have  no  services,  and  it  is  inappropriate  land   for
        settlement.  Sites are on steep slopes (Inanda  in  Durban),  flood
        planes (Alexandra, Johannesburg), close to mind  dumps  (East  Rand
        near Johannesburg), close to heavy industrial areas  (Wentworth  in
        Durban), landfill sites settlement.  All of these contribute to the
        vulnerability of people in these settlements.  The  materials  used
        to build the structures are prone to rapidly spreading  fire,  they
        collapse and are a health risk.
      (     Government Departments need to  come  together  (DPLG,  Housing,
        Health and Social Development) to formulate relevant policies,  put
        into  place  early  warning  systems  for   preparedness,   address
        accidents in the home and  settlements  and  ensure  that  capacity
        building happens at all  levels.   Need  to  ensure  that  relevant
        legislation and systems get buy-in from stakeholders –  communities
        need to be involved.
        (  It is a sensitive issue to remove shacks and relocate persons.
      (     Lack of capacity in local governments and  a  need  for  a  huge
        capacitation exercise for local government.

12.2  Discussion
      The issue of shack  lords  and  shack  farming  was  recognised  as  a
      particularly thorny  one.  It  was  mooted  as  an  option  for  local
      government to do in situ upgrades of informal settlement areas, rather
      than relocate residents.  There  was  inter-departmental  co-operation
      between the Departments of Housing and DPLG on the  issue  of  ongoing
      migration, amongst others.  It was further noted that some issues  had
      to be addressed by communities themselves, rather than by government.

13.   Department of Water Affairs  and  Forestry:   Mr  A  Muller,  Director
      General

13.1  Challenges:
       (    In an impoverished environment, any number  of  steps  we  have
          moved forward in the eradication  of  poverty  can  be  wiped  out
          completely by a single fire or flood event.
       (    Risk reduction measure:  what can be avoided and how?  What are
          mitigating measures and do we have the means to do this?
       (    It appears that recreation is more important than human lives -
          relates to planning.
       (    If faced with  the  situation  where  there  already  has  been
          development and very expensive to move that  development,  can  we
          mitigate the situation?
       (    Need to beef  up  ability  to  control  development  below  the
          floodline. This is  a  challenge  –  how  can  it  be  effectively
          applied.
       (    Funding -  have  national  disaster  management  structure  and
          national disaster management  fund,  but  procedures  need  to  be
          streamlined.
       (    Technical challenges include structural measures, such as flood
          absorption dams, active flood warning systems and community  river
          watch systems.  South Africa has good  network  of  flood  warning
          systems, but it is questionable  that  these  are  adequate.   The
          social challenge is  also  important  –  a  need  for  alternative
          accommodation, and the involvement of  traditional  and  community
          leaders.
       (    The extent to which South Africa has met the objectives set  by
          the UN General Assembly in 1989 when they declared the period 1990
          - 2000 as the International Decade of Natural Disaster  Reduction.


       (    Municipalities need capacity to address river bank management,
          because to a large extent what happens upstream in the river will
          have an impact on what happens downstream.

13.2  Discussion
      It was noted that dam owners were responsible for the  dams  in  their
      care, although this was monitored by the Department of Water Affairs &
      Forestry (DWAF).  It was suggested that vulnerable areas be  used  for
      recreation, where flooding would not pose a threat.

14.   Fires:  A case study – Joe Slovo settlement – Councillor Gophe
14.1  Challenges:
       ( Strong South-Easters prevent firebreaks from performing their role
       ( Communities need to be close to work

15.   Floods:  A case study – Overberg:  Councillor S Mentile / R Stevens
15.1  Challenges:
       (    Who maintains the rivers - this affects work on river banks
       ( Communities put blame on government and feel is their  problem  to
          return communities to same way.
       (    How schemes are built - need provision  for  services  in  each
          area.


DAY 2:  20 April 2005


16.   Council for Scientific and Industrial Research  (CSIR):  Mr  K  Yates,
      Forensic Fire Investigator
16.1  Challenges:
       (    Lack of scientific  evidence  and  knowledge  of  disasters  in
          informal  settlements  need  to  distinguish  between  arson   and
          accidental fires.
       (    Fires  not  properly  investigated,  there  are  criminal  acts
          disguised as paraffin stove accidents.
       ( Flammable mattresses, fuels used, fire level  suppression,  socio-
          economic factors, geographical and meteorological factors etc.
       (    Need for adequate planning in informal  settlements  i.e.  more
          space  between  dwellings  to  allow  easier  access  to  disaster
          response vehicles and personnel.
       (    Need to involve  community  and  local  risk  perceptions  into
          disaster management policies.

16.2  Addressing the Problem
       (    Solutions must be cost effective and socially acceptable.
           Involve all relevant role players and stakeholders, like SANDF,
           Fire Brigade etc.

16.3  Discussion
      It was noted that fire investigation was a new science in South
      Africa, and a scarce resource.  It was noted that inter-sectoral co-
      operation was needed, and that research had to be co-ordinated.
      Research was essential so that the true causes of fires could be
      addressed.  One of the delegates raised the fact that many victims die
      after the fire, and their deaths are then not attributed to it, thus
      contributing to under-reporting.


17.   Department of Provincial and Local Government (DPLG):   Ms  X  Sibeko,
      Chief Director: Public Participation & Empowerment
17.1  Challenges:
      (     Lack of physical infrastructure hampered service delivery,  e.g.
        how to provide free basic electricity to informal settlements.
      (     Community participation essential to ensure success  in  service
        delivery.
      (     Alternative measures of providing basic services such new
        billing technologies were being investigated.
      (     Poor municipalities did not have  an  equal  revenue  base  with
        affluent communities.
      (     Reality that poor people rely on  multiple  sources  of  energy;
        i.e. would use paraffin instead of electricity.

17.2  Discussion
      It was an ongoing  problem  that  municipal  accounting  systems  were
      inadequate.  This contributed to excessive use of alternative  sources
      of energy by poor communities.  It was noted  that  the  provision  of
      electricity did not necessarily eliminate the use of paraffin, as this
      was considerably more cost effective.  Once  again,  delegates  raised
      the  need  for  communication  with  communities,  and  the  need  for
      effective community  participation  in  decision-making  and  disaster
      prevention.

18.   Commission 1:  Cause,  effect  and  prevention  of  fire,  floods  and
      disasters in human settlements

18.1  Consideration of a variety of aspects
      • When  looking  at  a  proposal  for  a  prevention  strategy,  it’s
        important  that  there  are  different  aspects  that  need  to  be
        considered, e.g. sociological, economic,  political,  environmental
        and technological factors.
      • A process needs to be followed in terms  of  investigation,  design
        and development, early  detection  and  empowerment,  and  seasonal
        changes.  Risks related to timeframes to be investigated.

18.2  Appropriate Planning
      • A proper budget has to be made available for new  settlements  with
        sufficient money to cover  cost  where  disasters  occur,  and  for
        programmes that will be geared  to  reduction  and  elimination  of
        risks.
      • More money needs to be available for  the  various  municipalities,
        e.g. Cape Agulhas and Johannesburg, to roll out their plans
      • More money would also facilitate the clear  implementation  of  the
        IDP plans.
      • A disaster management plan needs  to  be  put  in  place  for  each
        province.
      • Appropriate developed institutional structures  that  would  enable
        municipalities to fulfil their function of disaster management
      • Municipalities need to be kept informed of the  migration  patterns
        of  people  into  their  areas,  in  order  to  be  able  to   plan
        appropriately.

18.3  Policy Interventions
      • Existing legislation to be  enforced  and  new  legislation  to  be
        prioritised.
        e.g Veld and Forest Fires Act which in fact makes provision for the
        establishment of a fire protection forum.
      • Also Inter-ministerial Disaster Management Committee
      • Disaster Management Act 2002 –SALGA has asked for a progress report
        by municipalities by end of April 2005, on  the  implementation  of
        the Act

18.4  Risk Reduction Management System

      • In addition to the prevention plan, we  need  to  acknowledge  that
        risks, hazards and vulnerabilities cannot be eliminated completely,
        but municipalities need to have a clear risk  reduction  management
        system in place.

18.5  Service Delivery to Risk Areas
      • There has to be consistent service delivery, e.g.  refuse  removal,
        as well as maintenance of services rendered.

18.6  Research
      • Relevant research that will inform hazard and vulnerable risk areas
        in human settlements.

18.7  Capacity building
      • Capacity building through training for ward  councillors  and  ward
        committees is essential  as  these  are  important  people  in  the
        implementation of legislation.  This  must  be  applicable  to  all
        spheres of government.
      • There needs to be ongoing community education about risks,  hazards
        and vulnerabilities in their communities.

19.   Commission 2: Provision and Construction of Safe Houses
      (Where, How and What Building Materials Are Used)


19.1  Lack of Adequate  Data  or  Information  Systems  on  Areas  Prone  to
      Disasters  Preventative and Causal Effects)
19.2  Proposal: There is a dire need to do the following:
    • Promptly collect relevant data on areas (Urban/Peri-Urban  and  Rural)
      that are prone to disasters (Floods or Fires).
    • Ensure that the gathered data is turned into a user-friendly data-base
      catering for specific preventive and causal mechanisms
    • Ensure that the necessary resources and capacity, available  for  this
      processes, are used optimally to cater for disaster prone areas
    • Ensure that in areas where there are no capacity  or  resources,  such
      resources are made available by competent authorities (individually or
      collaboratively)

19.3  Lack of Suitable land to settle people from disaster prone areas
19.4  Proposal: Ensure the existence  and  use  of  a  Land  Identification,
      Acquisition and Development Programme:
      • Land acquired through negotiations with Municipalities  and  Public
        Entities;
      •  Suitably  located  Land  identified  and  acquired  from   Private
        individuals (Negotiated settlements or applicable  appropriation  –
        qualified public need with no other alternative);  That  should  be
        the area that is highly prioritized
      • Serviced sites for persons to be relocated  (Qualifying  Government
        Beneficiaries – Land, services plus Top  Structure;  Non-Qualifying
        Beneficiaries – Serviced Sites: People (Bank  Defaulters;  previous
        home  owners  etc)  afforded  an  opportunity  to   construct   own
        structures within applicable quality control measures;
      • Preventative measures ensuring No-Unplanned Land Occupation  –  The
        demise of mushrooming informal  settlement  that  end  being  areas
        prone to disasters

19.5   Lack  or  limited  levels  of  Community  Consultations  on  proposed
      developments to move away from disaster Prone Areas
19.6  Proposal: For every  programme,  planned,  developed  and  implemented
      with regard to human  settlement  development  (Taking  preventive  or
      causal measures on disaster prone areas), there  must  be  prompt  and
      relevant consultation with Ward Councillors/Officials/Committees etc:
    • Identified and confirmed Areas prone to disasters
         • Levels of  involvement  –  complementing  administrative  bodies
           operational in affected areas or likely to be affected

19.7  Minimal Compliance, Irrelevant or too Rigid or Absent

19.8  Proposal: Ensure that compliance authorities such as NHBRC,  SABS  etc
      take into consideration the following:

    • Exact Needs: Identified, investigated and confirmed areas with  regard
      to related development;
    • Use of Alternative/Indigenous Building technologies  e.g.  What  works
      for rural areas vs. urban areas; fires that are experienced  in  rural
      areas must be catered for.
19.9  Lack or Minimal Collaborative Prioritization & Monitoring

19.10 Proposal: Areas to be prioritized as per area of need:
    • Confirm areas of need;
    • Oversight bodies monitoring


    20. Commission 3: The Use Of Energy Sources In Preventing Disasters
         • There are a number of existing strategies, but they need  to  be
           integrated into a national household energy strategy
         • Currently, reactive approach to disaster management. There is  a
           need to focus on risk reduction strategies, which are more long-
           term.
         •  Ongoing  education  and  training  of   communities   and   the
           strengthening of community leadership is important.
         • Stakeholder identification to ensure integration: Fire Services,
           Local Government, Communities, business, Department  of  Health,
           Department of Education, SABS
         •  Risk  mitigation  activities  already   being   undertaken   by
           communities  - need to identify, explore and support these.
      • Need for Parliamentarians to be cognisant of research results as  a
        basis for action

20.1  This Conference called Develop from  existing  strategies  a  national
      integrated household energy strategy for low income households that:
      on the government to:
      • Ensures that citizens have sustained access  to  affordable,  clean
        and safe energy that does not cause damage to their health and well-
        being, nor the environment
      •  Ensures  that  all  the  necessary  legislation  and   enforcement
        mechanisms exist that allow households to reduce risks
      • Ensures that users have the necessary information to use energy and
        appliances safely
      • Ensures that all low-income houses built should be  designed  in  a
        way that takes cognizance of the reality that poor  households  use
        multiple fuels for their domestic energy requirements
      • Ensures that all low-cost housing be energy efficient,  with  sound
        ventilation
      • Need to fast-track developments in alternative energy  like  solar,
        wind to allow users freedom of choice
      • Ensure  development  of  standards  for  enforcement,  and  ongoing
        monitoring of enforcement.


21.   Commission 4: Developing An Integrated And Holistic National  Disaster
      Prevention Strategy

21.1  Disaster Management Act
    The commission agrees that the Act is a brilliant piece of  legislation
    but must  become  a  living  document.  The  DMA  creates  an  enabling
    environment for the prevention  and  management  of  disasters  by  all
    spheres of  government.  Policies  and  strategies  must  cascade  into
    practical and feasible Action Plans and Procedures for the execution at
    community level.
    (       Enabling environment especially at operational level
    (       Report directly to the municipal manager
    (       Own budget allocation

21.2  Community Empowerment
    (  Paradigm  shift  to  empower  communities  for  the  first  response
       mechanism;
    ( Training and educational modules on disaster management;
    ( Volunteer recruitment on a number of modules, must be  registered  to
       qualify for insurance an out of pocket expenses, they  also  qualify
       for S&T at level 12 (Deputy Director)
    ( Note: compensation vs payment

21.3  Funding strategy
    (       Equitable share formula include disaster management
    (       % of the National Contingency Reserve Fund  to be put aside for
       disaster management – Presidency?
    ( Inter Ministerial Committee chaired by Departments of Provincial  and
       Local  Government  and  Housing  to  place  the  issue  of  disaster
       management as a standing item on its agenda,  this  will  allow  for
       coordinated interventions by government across spheres.

21.4  Partnerships
    (       Public/public to include civil society structures
    ( Public/private
    (        Innovative  systems   to   be   encouraged   using   Municipal
       Infrastructure Grants
21.5  Interim Measures
The gap between formal and informal housing needs to be narrowed.
In the short term:
    (        DOH  must  set  minimum  standards  for  housing  victims   of
       disasters;
    (       Temporary must be defined so that it does not exceed 4 months
      In the medium to long term:
    (       An innovative product must  be  designed  which  must  be  cost
       effective  with  non-flammable  materials,  to  be   the   temporary
       structure.

22.   Department of Minerals and Energy: Ms L Xingwana, Deputy Minister
      It was the Department  of  Minerals  and  Energy‘s  responsibility  to
      ensure that people had access to energy. Paraffin and paraffin  stoves
      had been  identified  as  major  causes  of  injuries  and  death  The
      Department should act to prevent  these  disasters  given  that  these
      products were regulated by it. The government had provided free  basic
      electricity to millions of people.  Alternative sources of energy  had
      to be provided to those who did not have access  to  electricity.  The
      use of Liquid Petroleum and  Gas  (LPG)  would  greatly  diminish  the
      health and safety risk associated with other fuels. The Department was
      negotiating with the oil and gas industry with to view to  making  gas
      more  affordable.   She  pledged  her  Department’s  support  to   the
      Committee’s activities.

23.   Adoption of the Declaration
      The Deputy Speaker of Parliament,  Ms  G  Mahlangu-Nkabinde,  led  the
      conference in adopting the Declaration (herein attached).


                                 DECLARATION


 NATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHALLENGES OF FIRE AND FLOODS IN HUMAN SETTLEMENTS:
                             19 -20 APRIL 2005,
                 OLD ASSEMBLY CHAMBER, PARLIAMENT, CAPE TOWN

We, the representatives of diverse sectors of  our  South  African  society,
assembled at the Old Assembly Chamber in  the  National  Parliament  of  the
Republic of South Africa,  from  19  to  20  April  2005,  under  the  theme
“Challenges of Fire and Floods in Human Settlements”,  are  propelled  by  a
burning desire to create sustainable human settlements in our country.

We note that this historic  conference  has  brought  together  people  from
different  backgrounds,  carrying  a  wealth  of  knowledge,  expertise  and
experience in the areas Fire and Floods  in  Human  Settlement,  accordingly
acknowledge the immense contribution made by the first Minister of  Housing,
the late Joe Slovo and this year we mark the 10th Anniversary of his  death.


We reaffirm our unflinching commitment to prevent fire and floods  in  human
settlements and commit ourselves to  enhance  the  creation  of  sustainable
human settlements by tackling the challenges of fire  and  floods  in  these
settlements.

At  the  beginning  of  this  conference,  we  noted   that   the   physical
devastations, emotional effects  and  financial  implications  of  fire  and
floods in human settlements have catastrophic consequences for  poor  people
living in these settlements, and  accordingly  challenged  all  of  us  that
through our actions, to prevent these environmental hazards.

We recognise the reality that housing is  one  of  the  greatest  challenges
facing the poor communities in South Africa and accept that  the  extent  of
this challenge does not only derive from rural to urban  migration  and  the
enormous size of the housing backlog, but also accept that the  problems  of
fire and floods in human settlements is exacerbated by  the  desperation  of
the homeless to find themselves adequate shelter fit for human habitation.

We observe that  despite  monumental  achievements  South  Africa  has  made
during the First Decade of Freedom to provide access  to  adequate  housing,
particularly to poor people, housing still constitute a  daunting  challenge
facing South Africa and  that  the  proliferation  of  informal  settlements
makes  this  form  of  shelter  a  major  contemporary   urban   residential
landscape.

We further note that  many  people  are  still  living  in  backyard  shacks
erected on residential properties in formal  legal  townships  and  in  free
standing  informal  settlements  clustered  as  informal  structures   where
unemployment, diseases, poverty and crime are rife.

Accordingly, many people resort to  living  in  informal  settlements  as  a
result of the enormous housing backlog.  As  such,  these  people  in  these
settlements suffer  severely  from  lack  of  proper  maintenance  of  urban
infrastructure and services; inadequate  shelter;  social  dysfunctionality;
poor sanitation; environmental degradation and poverty which at  some  point
reach crisis proportions.

The outbreaks of fire and floods compound these problems.  We  realise  that
poor communities especially those in  informal  settlements  are  vulnerable
and exposed to environmental hazards  especially  fire  and  floors  because
among others they use energy sources that are often harmful to their  health
and detrimental to the environment; they do not take  preventative  measures
against floods; and they lack the necessary training and knowledge  to  deal
with these hazards whenever they occur.

In line with government’s integrated, comprehensive  housing  strategy  i.e.
“Breaking New Ground”, which seeks to create sustainable human  settlements,
we assume collective responsibility to help and advance  the  spiritual  and
material well being of poor people, especially those who are  often  ravaged
by fire and floods in human  settlements  by  embarking  on  determined  and
drastic actions and measures necessary to tackle the problems on hand.

We reaffirm our pledge to place particular attention to, and  give  priority
to focus on the challenges to prevent fire and floods in human  settlements.
To achieve this goal, this National Conference resolves to:
    • Take joint actions and  improve  efforts  to  work  together  at  all
      levels, united by our determination to prevent  fire  and  floods  in
      human settlements;
    • Ensure that  all  the  necessary  national  legislation,  policy  and
      regulatory frameworks are created to regulate,  control  and  prevent
      fire and floods in human settlements; and where these frameworks  are
      available, they have to be enforced;
    • Strengthen partnerships between all sectors of our society  including
      government,    non-government    organisations,    community    based
      organisations, the private sector to take drastic actions  to  create
      sustainable human settlements;
    • Develop national funding  programs  which  aimed  at  both  emergency
      relief and disaster management and prevention  and  ensure  that  the
      equitable  share  and  the  contingency  reserve  funds   incorporate
      disaster management budget;
    • Encourage the use and development of safe alternative fuels and other
      energy sources and focus on long-term risk reduction strategies;
    •  Provide  enabling  environments  for  disaster  management,  promote
      proactive fire and floods management through risk reduction  programs
      and manage emergencies and disasters  and  their  consequences  in  a
      coordinated, efficient and effective manner;
    • Develop national  awareness-raising  programs  to  prevent  fire  and
      floods in human settlements and to promote training  and  empowerment
      of people often affected by these environmental hazards;
    • Conduct research and collect user friendly data on all  the  disaster
      prone areas and identify suitable land to resettle communities  after
      by disasters and put all measures necessary to  prevent  people  from
      illegally occupying land;
    • Engage and consult all important stakeholders in disaster  management
      especially the communities,  community  organisations  and  statutory
      ward committees in the planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  of
      disaster management programs;
    •  Encourage  government  at  all  levels  to  take  fire  and   floods
      considerations into
      account  in  decision  making  processes  including   the   Integrated
      Development Planning, investment in infrastructure  and  financing  of
      programs to prevent fire and floods in human settlements;
    • Encourage provinces to hold similar conferences on challenges of fire
      and floods in human settlements given the nature, occurrences and the
      extent of fire and floods in various province;
    • Monitor progress at regular intervals in terms of the  implementation
      of the resolutions take in this Conference.

We express our deepest gratitude to all the individuals  and  organisations,
which participated in this conference and  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
Housing for its generous hospitality, and excellent  arrangements  made  for
this  conference  on  the  “Challenges  of  Fire   and   Floods   in   Human
Settlements”.

RECOMMENDATIONS
   1. The Portfolio Committee recommends that  Parliament  should  send  the
      report that came from  the  conference  to  all  provinces  and  their
      municipalities;  and  that  such  recommendations  should   be   taken
      seriously by parliament.


Appendix 1:
The following members of the Portfolio Committee  on  Housing  attended  the
conference:
    • Ms ZA Kota-Fredericks  ANC   (Chairperson)
    • Mr S Abram             ANC
    • Ms BN Dambuza          ANC
    • Mr TS Dodovu           ANC
    • Mr DC Mabena           ANC
    • Mr ZS Mkhize                 ANC
    • Mr LJ Modisenyane            ANC
    • Ms SH Ntombela         ANC
    • Ms MM Ramakaba-Lesia   ANC
    • Mr GD Schneemann       ANC
    • Ms NJ Ngele            ANC
    • Mr MR Sonto            ANC
    • Mr AC Steyn            DA
    • Mr RB Bhoola                 MF

      Delegates at the Conference

|R    |Abdullah    |ANC Women’s League                   |
|N    |Ahmed       |Paraffin Safety Association          |
|N    |Bavuma      |Development Officer                  |
|J    |Bayet       |National Department  of Housing      |
|X    |Bebula      |Rural Housing Loan Fund (RHLF)       |
|C    |Beer-Winkel |City of Cape Town                    |
|S    |Brown       |Nelson Mandela Metro: Disaster       |
|     |            |Management                           |
|N    |Caluza      |OR Tambo District Municipality       |
|S    |Carstens    |DDG: Department of LG & Housing      |
|V    |Charlton    |Working on Fire                      |
|T    |Diko        |Department  of Housing               |
|M    |Dlabantu    |Department  of Housing               |
|B    |Drost       |Department  of Housing               |
|R    |Duncan      |T Homes                              |
|T    |Gebashe     |Umzimvubu Municipality               |
|H    |Gcuwa       |ANC Women’s League                   |
|M    |Gillion     |ANCWL: Overberg                      |
|X    |Gophe       |City of Cape Town                    |
|D    |Gopie       |Malibongwe Women Development         |
|S    |Gouws       |Women’s Global Network               |
|V    |Gusha       |African Green Heat                   |
|R    |Hoogbaard   |Northern Cape: Department of Housing |
|T    |Human       |Thubelisha Homes                     |
|P    |Johnson     |BFT/Siyanda oil (Pty) Ltd.           |
|M    |Joka        |SANCO                                |
|B    |Jones       |Children of Fire Trust               |
|R    |Kgware      |Ebuyile/ EMP Holdings                |
|M    |Kosile      |SANCO                                |
|I    |Le Roux     |Women’s Global Network               |
|P    |Lehotla     |Statistician General                 |
|N    |Lwana       |Western Cape                         |
|S    |Mabutho     |Women’s Global Network               |
|T    |Magopane    |Imbaula Factory                      |
|P    |Maluleke    |The Banking Association of SA        |
|B    |Maningi     |Umzimvubu Municipality               |
|D    |Maphosi-Guy |Peer Africa                          |
|S    |Maqetuka    |Western Cape                         |
|L    |Maralack    |North West: Department of Social     |
|     |            |Services                             |
|T    |Marimane    |Department of Housing                |
|U    |Marshall    |Bellevue                             |
|N    |Matebese    |Nelson Mandela Metro Municipality    |
|N    |Matinise    |Metro Region                         |
|N    |Mbele       |ANC Youth League                     |
|P    |Meko        |Eastern Cape Province                |
|T    |Memani      |Chris Hani Municipality              |
|M    |Menisi      |Western Cape                         |
|E    |Mentile     |Overberg                             |
|K    |Mkhize      |Western Cape: Social Services        |
|P    |Mlonyeni-Guz|OR Tambo District Municipality       |
|     |ana         |                                     |
|D    |Mntungwa    |Department of Water Affairs          |
|B    |Modisakeng  |Tshwane Metro                        |
|P    |Moeng       |Delivery Magazine                    |
|R    |Mojalefa    |Department of Social Development     |
|S    |Mkhize      |Kwazulu-Natal                        |
|P    |Moko        |Eastern Cape: Local Government &     |
|     |            |Housing                              |
|R    |Molefe      |Social Development                   |
|M    |Moroka      |Servon Housing Solutions             |
|J    |Morrissey   |Livelihoods Programme                |
|E    |Mothelesi   |Kimberley Local Government & Housing |
|F    |Msila       |SANCO                                |
|N    |Msuthu      |SANCO                                |
|LP   |Mulaudzi    |Limpopo Local Government & Housing   |
|S    |Mxolose     |SALGA                                |
|NF   |Ndandani    |Councillor: Ward 42                  |
|E    |Ndlovu      |Councillor Johannesburg Metro Council|
|M    |Ndou        |Ibuyile/ EMP Holdings                |
|P    |Nel         |Women’s Global Network               |
|N    |Nika        |SANCO                                |
|D    |Nozizwe     |ANC Women’s League                   |
|A    |Ntebe       |Western Cape: Department of Social   |
|     |            |Services                             |
|C    |Ntotoviyane |City of Cape Town                    |
|M    |Oliphant    |Kwazulu-Natal                        |
|J    |Olivier     |Imbaula Generation                   |
|T    |Papu        |Eastern Cape Local Government &      |
|     |            |Housing                              |
|B    |Paton       |Pietermaritzburg: Fire and Disaster  |
|D    |Petros      |Africa Green Heat                    |
|G    |Pillay      |City of Cape Town: Disaster          |
|     |            |Management                           |
|J    |Rikhotso    |Gauteng Disaster Management          |
|E    |Samuels     |City of Cape Town: Department of     |
|     |            |Housing                              |
|G    |Schulze     |SA Weather Service                   |
|P    |Sekulisa    |Free State Local Government & Housing|
|B    |Serema      |Sizisa Ukhanyo – Cape Town           |
|R    |Sherman     |Liquifire (Pty) Ltd                  |
|X    |Sibeko      |Department of Provincial & Local     |
|     |            |Government                           |
|W    |Sidina      |City of Cape Town                    |
|C    |Simo        |HOPA                                 |
|C    |Singh       |Paraffin Safety Association          |
|CA   |Smith       |Northern Cape: LG& Housing           |
|W    |Solomons    |City of Cape Town: Disaster          |
|     |            |Management                           |
|L    |Sonn        |Disaster Management: Sustainable     |
|     |            |Livelihoods                          |
|M    |Sontshatsha |SANCO                                |
|T    |Stefano     |SANCO                                |
|R    |Stevens     |ANC: Overberg                        |
|D    |Swart       |Paraffin Safety Association          |
|G    |Thwala      |Tshwane Metro                        |
|G    |Truran      |Paraffin Safety Association          |
|E    |Van der     |Tygerberg Burn Unit                  |
|     |Mervwe      |                                     |
|T    |Vilo        |Community Development Worker         |
|N    |Vumindaba   |ANC: Women’s League                  |
|K    |Yates       |CSIR                                 |
|L    |Zingitwa-Gol|Ukhahlamba Disaster Management       |
|     |ogolo       |                                     |
|Mr   |M Mzizi     |MP                                   |
|Mr   |T Zulu      |MP                                   |
|Ms   |MN          |Oliphant                             |
|Mr   |N           |Mthethwa                             |
|Mr   |RJ Tau      |MP                                   |
|Mr   |N Mack      |MP                                   | |
|Ms   |BN Dlulane  |MP                                   |
|Mr   |F           |Adams                                |


9. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Labour on the International Labour
  Conference, dated 8 November 2005:


   1. Introduction


   The 93rd session of the International Labour Organisation was scheduled
   from 31 May to 16 June 2005 in Geneva, Switzerland.  The agenda of the
   Conference included:


   *  Report of the Chairperson of the Governing Body (GB) and the Director-
      General


   *  Global report under the follow-up to the ILO Declaration on the
      Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work


   *  Work of the Committees the Programme and Budget, Application of
      Standards, Work in the Fishing Sector, Promotion of Youth Employment,
      Occupational Safety and Health.


        South African delegation


   Government


   Mr MMS Mdladlana, Minister of Labour
   Dr V Mkhosana, Director-General, Department of Labour (DOL)
   Mr J Malatse, Executive Manager: Occupational Health and Safety, DOL
   Mr S Nakanyane, Executive Manager: Research, Policy and Planning, DOL
   Mr G Moroasi, Assistant Manager: Legal Unit, DOL
   Mr V Seafield, Assistant Manager: Labour Relations, DOL
   Ms Z Sigabi, Communications Officer, DOL
   Ms L Lusenga, Labour Attache: SA Permanent Mission, Geneva
   Mr L Gumbi, Deputy Permanent Representative: Permanent Mission, Geneva
   Ms T Motheohane, Private Secretary to the Minister


   Parliament of the Republic of SA


   Ms OR Kasienyane MP, Chairperson: Portfolio Committee on Labour
   Mr CM Lowe, MP
   Mr L Maduma, MP
   Ms P Jayiya, Committee Secretary


   Employers


   Mr V van Vuuren, Chief Operations Officer, Business Unity of South Africa
   (BUSA)
   Mr B Botha, Advisor: Internatinal Affairs, BUSA
   Ms A Ndoni, Member: Standing Committee on Social Policy, BUSA
   Ms F Dowie, Chief Officer: Strategic Services, BUSA
   Mr A Van Niekerk, Legal Adviser:BUSA
   Mr C Lotter, Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Advisor: BUSA
   Ms Z Maila, Youth Advisor: BUSA
   Mr N Muller, Fishing Advisor: BUSA
   Mr R Manda, Fishing Advisor, BUSA
   Ms R Ramdin, OHS Advisor: BUSA


   Workers


   Mr I Patel, Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU)
   Mr Z Vavi, Secretary-General: COSATU
   Mr CA Milani, General-Secretary: FEDUSA
   Mr J Maqhekeni, President: NACTU
   Ms A Rantsolase, COSATU




   The parliamentary delegation arrived in Geneva on 6 June 2005 and joined
   the Conference during its second sitting.  The agenda of the Conference
   was the following:


   *  Governing body elections 2005-08


    • Resolution concerning arrears of contribution of Armenia and the
      Republic of Moldova.


   *  Presentation and discussion of the reports of the Chairperson of the
      Governing Body, and of the Director-General
    * Adoption of the First Report of the Selection Committee


Official opening


   The meeting was officially opened by Mr Trotman  (Worker  Vice-President)
   who announced that the President was unable to attend  the  opening.   As
   Acting  President,  he  requested  the  Government   Group   Chairperson,
   Ambassador Yimer  from  Ethiopia,  to  propose  the  election  of  a  new
   President for the 93rd session of the International Labour Conference.


   The following persons were elected:


   President:     Minister Khalil, Minister of Labour:Jordaan
   Worker Vice-President: Mr Trotman, Barbados
   Employer Vice-President:  Mr Fuernes, Argentina


           Having outlined the procedures and identified other officers  at
           the meeting, the Chairperson suspended the plenary until Monday,
           6 June 2005.


   AFRICAN GROUP


           The group first met on Tuesday 31 May, and finalised  its  group
           spokespersons in the respective committees as follows:
   Committee on Finance                            South Africa
   Committee on Youth                         Nigeria
   Committee on Occopational Safety and Health           Senegal
   Committee on Work in the Fishing Sector         Namibia
   Committee on the Application of Standards       Nigeria


   Based on the program as agreed during the first sitting,  the  Group  met
   daily as scheduled.  The Minister of Labour from Cuba addressed the Group
   and solicited its support for  Cuba’s  Governing  Body  membership.   The
   Group was better organised and, the Johannesburg Conference decision  for
   Africa to have  common  positions  on  matters  impacting  on  Africa  is
   beginning to make Africa a force to be reckoned with.


   Governing Body Membership


   The African Union Commission on Labour and Social Affairs decided  during
   its  Johannesburg  sitting,  after  regional  consultations,  to   ratify
   proposals as agreed by regional representatives.


   The following representation was  endorsed  in  Geneva  and  informs  the
   current Governing Body membership for the period 2005-2008.


   Southern Africa                      South Africa (Titular)
                                  Malawi      (Titular)
                                  Mozambique (substitute)


   (See Annexure A for the list of elected Governing Body members)


Requests for permissions to vote


   Armenia and Moldova requested the Committee to  restore  their  right  to
   vote after  making  financial  arrangements  to  settle  the  outstanding
   balance.  The Committee agreed to recommend to the Conference that  their
   right to vote be restored.
   The Committee voted in favour of this decision on Monday, 6 June.
   The South African Minister of Labour addressed the plenary on 6 June .
   This was done by virtue of him being the current Chairperson of the AU
   Labour and Social Affairs Commission.   He reiterated the fact that there
   is a need for Africa as a continent to devise comprehensive and
   collective means to address the problems of poverty and unemployment.  He
   emphasised that joblessness and poverty are a threat to peace and
   stability.


   The delegation noted the important role played by South Africa in the
   ILO.  This was evident by it being elected as a Titular member to the
   Governing Body, the role it plays in the Africa group and the Minister
   being the Chairperson of the AU Commission on Labour and Social Affairs.


   Address by the Presidents of Algeria and Nigeria


   The two heads of State from Algeria and Nigeria addressed the 93rd
   session of the ILC on 7 and 10 June respectively.


   In his speech, the President of Algeria, President Abdelaziz Bouteflika,
   called for a social dimension of globalisation.  He also referred to the
   Algerian experience relating to democracy and employment, and his
   country’s strategy that includes fighting unemployment, particularly
   among the youth.  According to President Bouteflika, the promotion of
   youth employment through the creation of micro-enterprises, micro-credit
   programmes, pre-employment contracts, rural development programmes and
   temporary employment schemes have shown good results.  To fight youth
   unemployment in Algeria, the government has launched an integrated policy
   based on multi-level training activities and economic growth, stimulating
   and enabling job creation and employment.


   Addressing the Africa Group, on 7 June 2005, President Bouteflika
   reiterated that Africa needs capacity for handling better dialogue among
   social partners.  The 53 African states represented are a considerable
   force to make an impact in the discussions within the ILO. He welcomed
   the commitment to the New Partnership of Africa’s Development, and the
   importance of meeting the resolutions taken at the special summit in
   Ouagadougou in September 2004.


   President Obasanjo indicated that decent work and debt relief were needed
   to build a “ new Africa”.  The reduction of poverty and youth
   unemployment remains a critical challenge.  The AU had taken up the
   challenge by emphasising skills building, agriculture, the expansion of
   the private sector, small and medium scale enterprise development, and
   retraining as ways of creating jobs for unemployed youth and adults.


   Both Presidents addressed the plenary and the Africa Group.


   Governing Body elections


   The International Labour Conference elected the members of the Governing
   Body for the period 2005-08 on 6 June.  The Governing body is composed of
   56 regular members (28 governments, 19 employers and 19 workers).
   Cameroon, Kenya, Malawi, Morocco Nigeria and South Africa were elected as
   six regular members representing Africa.


   The Conference, in terms of the Article 13(4) of the ILO Constitution,
   adopted a resolution concerning the arrears of Armenia and the Republic
   of Moldova.


    2.      Summary of the reports


Report of the Chairperson of the Governing Body


      The Chairperson of the Governing Body of the International Labour
      Office, Mr llipe Seguin, presented his report on the work of the
      Governing Body covering 2004-05.


      The presentation highlighted the aspects deserved special attention
      that related to international labour standards.  In this area the
      Governing Body invited the Director-General to launch a campaign to
      promote the core Conventions of the ILO, the integrated approach to
      standards-related activities, the consolidation of maritime
      instruments and the revision of certain constitutional procedures.
      However, this past year saw the adoption of a new version of the
      Memorandum concerning the obligation to submit Conventions and
      Recommendations to the competent authorities, as well as an
      introductory note to the Standing Orders concerning the procedure for
      the examination of representations under Articles 24 and 25 of the
      Constitution of the ILO.


      The Governing Body had handled numerous representations made under
      Article 24 and had taken decisions on the follow-up to complaints
      submitted under Article 26 of the Constitution.  These included the
      cases of non-observance of Conventions by the Republic of Belarus and
      the Governments of Venezuela and Myanmar.


      In March 2005, the Committee on Technical Co-operation (CTC) examined
      and approved the “ Priorities and action plans for technical
      cooperation” under the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and
      Rights at Work and its follow-up, which focused on freedom of
      association and effective recognition of the right to collective
      bargaining.  The action plan was based on the discussion of the Global
      Report at the Conference in 2004.   The CTC noted the action which was
      carried out within the ILO’s biggest technical co-operation programme,
      namely the International Programme for the Elimination of Child Labour
      (IPEC).


      In addition to the focus on technical cooperation, the year under
      review was characterised by a very intense discussion of the Director-
      General’s proposals for the Programme and Budget for 2006/07.


      The Chairperson, on behalf of the Governing Body commended the impact
      of the support the ILO gave to the Extraordinary Summit of the Heads
      of State and Government of the African Union on Employment and Poverty
      Alleviation in Africa, which was held in Ouagoudou in September 2004.


      At recent sessions of the Governing Body, the Working Party on the
      Social Dimension of Globalisation concentrated on an examination of
      the best means of promoting decent work as a global objective.  The
      report noted that the efforts by the ILO may attest to its will to
      place the Decent Work Agenda, notably, the promotion of a tripartite
      approach to the framing of national and international policies at the
      heart of strategies for economic, social and environmental
      development.  This synergy between action of the ILO to promote decent
      work as a global objective and the activities of other organisations
      within the United Nations family aimed at achieving the Millenium
      Development Goals and meeting the targets of Poverty Reduction
      Strategy, offer a clear example of the coherence that exists between
      the policies recommended by the World Commission.


      Report of the Director-General


      The Secretary General, Mr Somavia, informed the Conference that the
      global employment crisis facing the world puts democracy, security and
      stability at risk and needed to be addressed as a matter of urgency.
      “the global economy has evolved into an ethical vaccum” with policies
      that many feel are organised too much around market values and too
      little around human values.  The overall effect is more insecurity and
      less freedom. Concern was growing worldwide over imbalances between
      globalisation and growth, and job creation.  The disconnection between
      economic growth and job creation must be repaired.  Employment and
      decent work must be moved fully into the mainstream of the
      international development debate.  Mr Somavia reflected on the agenda
      of the ILC and supported initiatives such as efforts to help the youth
      find decent jobs, address the issue of forced labour in the global
      economy, to finalise a comprehensive new standard for the world’s
      fishing industry, to review the impact of standards on hours of work,
      and to scrutinize the application of Conventions and standards by ILO
      members states.


3.    Summary of discussions in Committees

3.1   Finance Committee of Government


      This Committee discusses and concludes the budget  of  the  ILC.   The
      items discussed included the following:
    • The status of collection of contributions.
    • Assessment of the contributions of new member states.
    • The scale of assessment of contributions to the budget.
    • The composition of the Administrative Tribunal on the ILO.
    • Programme and budget proposal for 2006/7


      In addition to deliberating on the budget, this Committee  decides  on
      the programme to be followed.   South  Africa  represented  the  views
      agreed to by Africa.  The latter is the biggest contributor among  the
      African  countries  in  the  ILO.   United  States,  as  the   biggest
      contributor in the world, proposed the reduction of the budget.


      The Committee conclusions were as follows:


    • Endorse the expenditure budget for 2006/7
    • The developing countries, particularly Africa were expected to benefit
      from the ILO Technical Programmes

3.2   Committee on Safety and Health (OSH)


      Introduction


      In June 2003 the ILC adopted a global strategy for occupational safety
      and health (OSH).  The aim was to build and  maintain  a  preventative
      safety and health culture, focused on the right to a safe and  healthy
      environment and a systematic approach to managing OSH.   The  strategy
      included:


   *  The promotion of OSH through raising awareness and advocacy;
   *  The ILO instruments such as standards (subject  to  the  Committee  on
      Safety and Health), codes of practice and guides;
   *  Technical assistance and co-operation on OSH;
   *  Knowledge development, management and dissemination; and
   *  International collaboration.


   In July 2004 the Office  produced  Report  IV  (I),  titled  “Promotional
   framework  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health,  which  provided  much
   technical background and proposals for a new  instrument  on  promotional
   framework for OSH.  The same report included a  questionnaire  about  the
   way forward, and responses  to  this  questionnaire  were  summarised  in
   Report IV (2).  The second report included a commentary prepared  by  the
   Office, together with the proposed  conclusions  for  discussion  by  the
   Committee.

The Committee met for its first sitting on 31 May  2005.   It  consisted  of
192 members (73 Government  members,  48  Employer  members  and  71  Worker
members).  To achieve quality of voting  strength,  each  Government  member
was allotted 3 408 votes, each Employer member 5 183 votes and  each  Worker
member 3 504 votes.


   The Committee elected its Officers as follows:


   Chairperson:        Mr A Bekes (Government member, Hungary);
   Vice Chairpersons:  Mr C Lotter (Employer member, South Africa), and
                       Ms P Seminario (Worker member, United States)
   Reporter:            Mr A Annakin (Government member, New Zealand).


   The Committee held 13 sittings with a view to discuss  and  finalise  two
   crucial elements in the process of establishing a  promotional  framework
   on Occupational Safety and  Health.   According  to  the  proposals,  the
   Committee was  expected  to  come  up  with  the  following  during  this
   Conference:


   1. Define the form of the instrument and,
   2. The outline of the instrument. (This relates to  the  nature/structure
   of the instrument).


   Discussion


   The Office made a  presentation  on  the  report  to  the  Committee  and
   emphasized that the discussions should culminate the form of a Convention
   and Recommendation.


   Workers and the African Government members,  as  well  as  many  European
   Union countries supported the proposal by the Office. The Employer group,
   supported by the Governments of the US, UK,  Switzerland,  Australia  and
   the Netherlands opposed this proposal and indicated  that  they  were  in
   favour of a declaration.


   After a vote on the matter,  it  was  decided  to  go  the  route  of  an
   instrument in a form of a Convention and a Recommendation as proposed  by
   the Office.


   The  committee  proceeded  on  the  remaining  points  of  the   proposed
   conclusions for amendments to the text.  The proposed amendments were  as
   follows:


   *  The inclusion of a new point titled “National Policy”


   This relates to national policy forming  the  framework  on  Occupational
   Safety and Health (OSH) in a country.


   Implications for South Africa


   This area has no major impact as it is currently being addressed  through
   the  process  of  integrating  Occupational   Health   and   Safety   and
   Compensation Commission competencies.


   Other changes related to shifting the clause on “National System” to come
   before the one on “National Programme”.  This was informed  by  the  fact
   that the national programme is part of the implementation of the system.


   National Programme


   This is the  implementation  component  which  includes  identifying  and
   targeting high-risk areas as part of an OHS Programme.  In  the  case  of
   South Africa, these include iron and  steel,  construction,  agriculture,
   food and beverage sectors,  as  well  as  the  elimination  of  silicosis
   programme.


   National profile


   This outlines the OHS situation in a  country.   In  the  case  of  South
   Africa, the situation relates to the process of integrating  OHS  and  CC
   into a single competency to deal with the problem of fragmentation, which
   causes inefficiency to the system.


   The committee emphasised the  promotion  of  OSH  as  part  of  the  core
   objective on the “decent work for all”.


   However, the final report was considered and adopted by the Committee  on
   13 June.  The latter was discussed and adopted during the plenary  on  16
   June.  The 94th session in 2006 will hold  a  second  discussion  on  the
   matter with a view to establish a new Convention and Recommendation.


3.3   Committee on the Application of Standards


      Introduction


      In accordance with Article 7 of the Standing  Orders,  the  Conference
      set up a Committee to consider and report on item III on  the  agenda,
      namely, Information and Reports on the Application of Conventions  and
      Recommendations. The composition of the Committee included  Government
      delegates, Employer delegates and Worker delegates.  In  addition,  34
      international  non-governmental  organisations  were  represented   as
      observers.


      The Committee elected its Officers as follows:
      Chairperson:     Mr Sergio Paixao Pardo (Government member, Brazil);
      Vice Chairpersons:     Mr Edward E. Potter (Employer member, US);
                       Mr Luc Cortebeeck (Worker member, Belgium);
      Reporter:        Ms Carine Parra (Government member, France)


      The  Committee  considered  information  and   reports   supplied   by
      Governments in pursuance  of  Articles  19,  22  and  35  of  the  ILO
      Constitution on measures taken  to  give  effect  to  Conventions  and
      Recommendations.  In line with the indicated Articles, the Committee’s
      discussions focussed on the following:


   *  Report of Experts on the Application of Standards and  Recommendations
      (Report III (Part 1A) of the 93rd Session of the ILC.
   *  The General Survey  Report  dealing  with  Hours  of  Work  (industry)
      Convention 1919, (No. 1) and Hours of  Work,  (Commerce  and  Offices)
      Convention, 1930 (No. 30).


      The first area of debate focussed on the ILO’s supervisory mechanisms,
      (Article 19 of the ILO Constitution on adoption of  the  International
      Labour Standards and submission of the newly  adopted  instruments  to
      the competent authority) and the  mandate  of  the  Committee  on  the
      Application of Standards.
      The Committee considered the General Survey – application of  ratified
      or unratified conventions.  The extensive debate on the hours of  work
      survey was to ascertain whether hours  of  work  should  be  fixed  or
      flexible.
      By the end of April 2005, 109 states had  ratified  eight  fundamental
      Conventions and 26 ratified seven.


      During its second week, the Committee considered 25  individual  cases
      relating to the application of various Conventions.   The  examination
      of the individual cases was  based  principally  on  the  observations
      contained in the Committee of Experts’ report, and  oral  and  written
      explanations provided by the  governments  concerned.   However,  time
      restrictions required the Committee to  select  a  limited  number  of
      individual cases among the Committee of Experts’ observations.


      Social partner representatives and a  number  of  countries  expressed
      their dissatisfaction on the working methods of the Committee.
      Most developing countries, led by Cuba, raised  their  dissatisfaction
      at the measures taken to deal with the revision  of  working  methods.
      The question of transparency  and  fairness  was  raised.   Developing
      countries felt that the manner in which countries are chosen to answer
      to the Committee marginalised most members from developing  countries.
      This was viewed as an abuse of power by developed countries.
      Swaziland and Zimbabwe  were  on  the  list  of  countries  that  were
      summoned to appear before the Committee.


      Emergent issues:


     1. Competent authority:


        Employers pointed out that the  obligation  to  submit  instruments
        adopted by the ILC to the competent authorities arose from the  ILO
        Constitution and that the term “competent  authority”  referred  to
        the legislature.  They, therefore urged Governments to comply  with
        this obligation and, if necessary, approach the ILO  for  technical
        assistance.  The worker representative supported this position.


   2. Working method of the Committee:


      The request by  developing  countries  for  transparency  and  a  fair
      procedure in the identification and listing  of  countries  to  appear
      before the Committee was not  addressed.   This  matter  needs  to  be
      addressed as the Committee continues to engage in political matters of
      member states.


   3. Hours of Work:


      The majority of member states supported the proposal that there should
      be no amendments to the Conventions and that the hours of work  remain
      as they are in both Conventions 1 and 30.  It became abundantly  clear
      in the debate that no member was opposed to the  flexible  observation
      of minimum standards.


      The workers group emphasised the  link  between  hours  of  work,  and
      health and safety of  workers.  They  highlighted  the  importance  of
      recognising workers as social beings deserving time  for  family  life
      and time for recreation and self-development.
      Members proposed that an urgent meeting of experts be called to  probe
      further whether there was justification to tamper with the  provisions
      of Conventions 1 and 30, and whether a  new  international  instrument
      was necessary.  It was agreed that the Governing Body should ensure  a
      tripartite involvement in the envisaged process.


      SELECTED INDIVIDUAL CASES

      The Committee also debated the issue of respect  for  obligations.   A
      number of countries listed were  called  to  account  for  failing  to
      report  on  their  obligations.    These  were  Afghanistan,  Armenia,
      Cambodia, Haiti,  Loa  People’s  Democratic  Republic,  Sierra  Leone,
      Solomon Islands, Somalia, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.


   Cambodia


      A government representative indicated that the new Ministry of Labour,
      with the technical assistance of the ILO, would make every  effort  to
      submit to the competent authorities the  instruments  adopted  at  the
      82nd session of the Conference.  Other countries failed to respond  as
      they were registered  but  not  accredited  with  the  Committee,  and
      therefore could not furnish their responses.  The Committee  expressed
      its dissatisfaction at the latter situation.
      The general feeling was that some of these  countries’  conditions  of
      conflict, poverty and lack of capacity should be considered.


      Regarding  countries  that  were  on  the  list   of   violations   of
      Conventions, the Committee dealt with these  cases  in  the  following
      manner:
      Colombia:   Convention 87 -Freedom of Association  and  Protection  of
      Rights to Strike


      Unions had alleged that Government had deprived them of their right to
      strike and  their  members  killed.   The  Government  had  repeatedly
      pointed out that the existence of the drug  cartels  were  responsible
      for these activities.  The Committee Chairperson was invited to  visit
      the country for a first-hand experience of the developments.


      The Committee  condemned  all  acts  of  violence  and  requested  the
      Government to provide detailed reports on  developments  at  its  next
      meeting.  The Government was also requested to report on progress made
      with regards to finalised murder cases


      Russia Federation:      Convention  87  -Freedom  of  Association  and
      Protection of Rights to Strike


      The workers alleged that the current legislation was restricting their
      right to strike.  The process was tedious and restrictive  in  that  a
      strike could only take place with  the  involvement  of  a  two-thirds
      majority.  Employees, especially those with two jobs, were not allowed
      to strike.
      Government  indicated  that  it  was  in  the  process   of   amending
      legislation to bring it in line with the Convention.
      The Committee requested Government to take all necessary  measures  to
      speed- up the process  of finalising the legislative amendments.


      Panama:     Convention 87 - Freedom of Association and  Protection  of
      Rights to Strike


      The complaint related to  the  restrictive  current  legislation  that
      denies individuals the rights to freedom of association and protection
      of rights to strike.  The complaints were listed as follows:


      (1)   The limitation on the number of  party  representatives  in  the
           collective bargaining process.  This  allows  interference  with
           the autonomy of trade unions.
      (2)   The imposed penalty for withdrawing from a collective agreement.
      (3)   The imposition of  conditions  on  the  establishment  of  trade
            unions for civil servants.


      The Government argued that it had inherited the status  quo  from  the
      previous  government.   It  is  currently  engaged  in  a  process  of
      legislative amendments to bring the law in line with  the  instrument.
      Technical assistance had been requested from the ILO.


      The Committee was concerned that the ILO had not yet  afforded  Panama
      the necessary assistance despite the request.  It urged the Government
      to resolve other problems through dialogue.


      Swaziland:  Convention 87 - Freedom of Association and  Protection  of
      Rights to strike


      The complaints related to the following:


      *     The enactment of the Internal Security Bill.
      *     The interference of government in trade union activities.
      *     The  scope  of  the  Industrial  Relations  Act  on  the  Prison
           Services.


      Workers alleged that the existence of the Internal Security  Bill  was
      intended to harass the  unionists.   They  further  alleged  that  the
      Government activities led to the death of  a  unionist.   The  process
      before unions could result in industrial action.


      The Government responded by pointing out that there was no  such  bill
      in existence.   The  process  was  terminated  four  years  ago  after
      discontent from the general community.  The Government also  indicated
      that  it  had  no  knowledge  of  any   fatality   during   the   said
      demonstration, and challenged the unions to produce evidence of such a
      death.


      With respect to the allegation around  the  scope  of  the  Industrial
      Relations Act on the Prison Services, the  Government  contended  that
      the matter was  under  consideration  in  order  to  comply  with  the
      Convention since prison staff is regarded as  “armed  forces”  in  the
      Kingdom.


      The  Government  further  illustrated   progress   made   seeking   to
      practically effect the provisions of the Convention.   They  indicated
      that the current constitutional process  in  the  country,  which  has
      reached draft constitution status, takes into account  the  protection
      and promotion of fundamental rights and freedoms.


      In  his  intervention,  the  worker  representative   outlined   their
      frustrations as workers on the exclusive  nature  of  the  process  of
      constitutional consultations and how power still resided power in  the
      hands of the head of state.


      Governments from almost all the  developing  countries  supported  the
      Government  by  appreciating  progress  made  especially  relating  to
      amendments made in an endeavour to comply with the Convention.


      Swaziland appreciated the comments made and  reiterated  its  position
      that no unionist was killed as claimed by the  unions.   According  to
      them this was further strengthened by the failure  of  the  unions  to
      provide any evidence of this incident.


      Both employers and workers called for Swaziland to accept a high-level
      mission that would investigate the alleged killing.   It  should  also
      look into the implementation of the amendments and how these  are  put
      into practice.  Employers emphasised the need for  the  Government  to
      implement social dialogue.


      Committee’s conclusion

      The Committee noted that no deaths occurred during the protest action.
       It requested the government to hold meaningful consultation with
      social partners on the draft constitution to ensure that none of its
      articles would have effect of contravening the Convention, and that
      its adoption would have the effect of repealing the 1973 decree, as
      well as number 11, 12 and 13 decrees.  The government was also
      requested to take necessary measures to eliminate the remaining
      discrepancies between law and practice.  The government should provide
      a copy of the draft Constitution to the Committee of Experts.  The
      Committee also urged the government to accept a high-level mission to
      establish a meaningful framework for social dialogue.


      Niger:      Convention 182-Worst Forms of Child Labour


      The International Confederation of  Free  Trade  Unions  alleged  that
      Niger was practicing the worst forms of child  labour  in  that  young
      girls were trafficked  for  domestic  work  and  sexual  exploitation,
      whilst young boys were used  for  economic  exploitation.   Niger  was
      therefore in violation of Convention 182.


      The Government of Niger  argued  that  its  country  was  again  being
      accused under this Convention.  It  indicated  that  it  had  ratified
      eight fundamental Conventions, including Convention 182,  as  part  of
      the process of eradicating human rights violations.


      However, the Government denied that the country practised child labour
      as well as child trafficking within its territory.  The Government  of
      Niger appealed to the Committee to remove  its  name  from  the  list.
      Several countries confirmed on behalf of the Government of Niger  that
      no such practices were in place in Niger and called on  the  Committee
      to remove its name from the list.


      Committee’s conclusions


      The Committee shared the same concerns as  the  Committee  of  Experts
      that such  practices  were  harmful  to  the  welfare  and  health  of
      children, and indicated that the Government should enhance its efforts
      to eradicate child labour.


      Recommendations made to the Government of Niger were as follows:


      (1)   It should ensure access to free education, especially  in  rural
           areas.
        2) It should remove all minor children below 18 years from  begging
           and working in the mines and quarries.
      (3)   It should provide additional information to the Committee.
        4) Since it denies the existence of child  labour,  a  fact-finding
           mission should be carried out to establish this fact.  It should
           seek technical assistance from the ILO.


      Turkey:      Convention 87-Freedom of Association  and  Protection  of
                 the Right to Organise


      The Government of Turkey was accused of  refusing  workers,  specially
      those in the public  sector,  to  exercise  their  right  to  organise
      themselves and to join trade unions.   Article  2  of  the  Convention
      provides that workers without distinction have the right  to  organise
      and to join any trade union of their choice.


      The  Government  stated  that  it  had  already  amended  its   labour
      egislation to bring it in line  with  the  Convention.   In  addition,
      workers in Turkey were free to join any Union they wished within their
      sectors.  Turkey was in compliance with the provisions  of  Convention
      87.  The worker and employer  representatives  from  Turkey  confirmed
      that there was freedom of association in their country.   The  listing
      of their country was a surprise to them.  This was conceded to by  the
      biggest federation in Turkey and supported by other countries.


      The Committee  concluded  that  government  should  put  measures  and
      procedures in place to ensure that there is proper  consultation  with
      respect to the ratification of Conventions.   It  should  provide  the
      Committee with a detailed report of the developments.  The  Government
      should promote dialogue with social partners and ensure  consultation.
      Lastly, it should seek technical assistance from the ILO.


      Zimbabwe:    Convention  98  -  Right  to  Organise   and   Collective
                       Bargaining


      The Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions (ZCTU) raised a  concern  around
      the Government’s continued anti-trade union activities  based  on  the
      fact that the Labour Relations Act requires collective  agreements  to
      be submitted for Ministerial approval, and be published  as  statutory
      instruments in order for them to be in  force.   A  provision  to  fix
      maximum wages was still in force.


      The ZCTU further alleged that  the  Government  was  not  prepared  to
      engage in tripartite negotiations, and that the latter system lacked a
      governing statute and relied on the  will  of  the  Government  to  be
      convened.


      There was a difference of opinion among other ZCTU representatives who
      challenged the allegations expressed by the General  Secretary.   This
      position was supported by the employer representatives from  Zimbabwe,
      who pointed out that the labour laws  were  very  sound.    They  were
      surprised at the  allegations  levelled  against  Zimbabwe.   Zimbabwe
      maintained that this development was another way of being targeted for
      political  reasons.   The  Government   representative   of   Zimbabwe
      expressed a concern at the procedures used for the  selection  of  the
      individual cases to be examined  by  the  Conference  Committee.   He,
      therefore,  called  for  a  review  of  the  working  methods  of  the
      Committee, especially with regard to the criteria and reasons for  the
      selection of individual cases.


      All African countries commended the Government  of  Zimbabwe  for  the
      progress made with regard to amendments as proposed by  the  Committee
      in 2004.  They indicated their surprise at Zimbabwe being on the  list
      and questioned the workings of the Committee, especially  with  regard
      to identifying countries that should appear  for  alleged  violations.
      The African position was supported by  the  Governments  of  Cuba  and
      China.


      Some members of the Industrialised  Market  Economy  Countries  (IMEC)
      suggested that the government  of  Zimbabwe  should  accept  a  direct
      contact mission and technical assistance from  the  ILO  in  order  to
      bring its laws in line with the Convention.


      Committee conclusions


      The Committee noted that the government had informed the committee  of
      experts  that  the  provision  concerning  Ministerial   approval   of
      collective agreements was being amended and urged  the  Government  to
      take all the necessary measures to make the law  and  practice  comply
      with the Convention.


      It  further  requested  the  Government  to   submit   a   clear   and
      comprehensive report to the  committee  of  experts,  which  contained
      information  on  all  problems  indicated  in  the   complaint.    The
      Government was urged to obtain technical assistance from the ILO.


      The Committee concluded its work and adopted the report, which was  in
      turn adopted by the Conference.


      3.4   Committee on Work in the Fishing Sector


      Introduction


      The fishing sector had been  identified  as  a  sector  that  required
      attention as a result of the nature of work that is performed  in  the
      sector and the current provisions that  do  not  apply  to  fishermen.
      These provisions do not take into account the nature  of  the  fishing
      operations,  employment  relations,  and  other   issues   of   social
      protection.


      The  first  discussion  on  a  comprehensive  standard  (a  Convention
      supplemented by a Recommendation) on work in the fishing  sector  took
      place at the 92nd Session (2004) of the ILC.
      Following that discussion, the Labour Office prepared and submitted to
      the governments of member states  Report  V  (1),  which  contained  a
      proposed  Convention  and  Recommendation  based  on  the  conclusions
      adopted by the ILC at its 92nd Session.
      The Committee held its first sitting on 31 May  2005.   Originally  it
      consisted of 123 members (54 Government, 21  Employer  and  48  Worker
      representatives).  The Committee elected its Officers as follows:


      Chairperson:      Mr  F  Riberio  Lopez  (Government   representative,
                       Portugal) at its first sitting.
      Vice Chairperson:      Ms R Karikari Anang  (Employer  representative,
                       Ghana) and
      Mr  P  Mortensen    (Worker  representative,  Denmark)  at  its  first
                       sitting.
      Reporter:   Mr G Boumbopolous (Government representative,  Greece)  at
                       its second sitting.


      The Committee held 16 sittings and considered Reports V(2A) and  V(2B)
      as prepared by the office as the fifth  item  of  the  agenda  of  the
      Conference.


      South Africa was represented by the following persons:


      Mr N Campbell (Government representative)
      Mr V Seafield (Government representative)
      Mr K Masemola ( Worker representative)
      Mr R Manda ( Employer representative)


   However, the discussions at the 93rd Session  were  a  follow-up  to  the
   first discussions that were held in June 2004, as well as those that were
   held in December 2004 with a  tripartite  committee  of  experts  on  the
   fishing sector.    The Committee of Experts dealt with issues such as the
   provision of accommodation, the construction  of  vessels  in  accordance
   with the provisions of the sectoral determination,  noise  and  vibration
   control and other provisions of a technical nature.


   The 93rd session attempted to refine the current draft,  social  security
   protection for fishers and special provisions for larger vessels.


   Issues dealt with were as follows:


   Special provisions for large vessels


   *  The provisions on accommodation on vessels of 24  metres  (in  length)
      has to a  large  extent  been  finalised.   This  included  issues  of
      accommodation, mess rooms, medical care  provisions  and  occupational
      health and safety provisions.


   *  Since different member states use different measurement provisions,  a
      set of equivalent measures with respect to tonnage  have  been  agreed
      upon.


   *  Certain provisions for larger  vessels  have  also  been  extended  to
      vessels that remain at sea for longer than three days.


   Social Security


   *  Social security protection should be extended to all fishers  in  line
      with national legislation, policy and practice.  It  should  be  noted
      that the social  security  convention  102  of  the  ILO  specifically
      excluded fishers.
   *  This protection should be afforded to all fishers that are  ordinarily
      resident in the member state, irrespective of the nationality  of  the
      fisher.


   *  Where bi-national agreements exist,  provision  should  be  made  that
      where non–national fishers choose to return to their  countries,  they
      should be able to ’take’ their  benefits  with  them.   This  is  only
      required where bi-national agreements exist or where provision is made
      for this in such agreements.


      With respect to the position that has been forwarded  at  the  African
      Union Labour and Social Affairs  Commission,  South  Africa  confident
      that we will meet those objectives.


      The Committee discussed and finalised the text with regard  to  social
      security.  This seemed to be a contentious area for the Committee as a
      number of member states were against the extension of social  security
      to fishers, whether nationals or non-nationals.  This was due  to  the
      contributory  nature  of  some  social  security  systems  in  certain
      countries.


      The Committee agreed to a text  that  effectively  accepted  that  the
      extension of social security to fishers should be  done  in  terms  of
      national laws,  practice  and  regulations.   The  latter  takes  into
      consideration the position of  individual  member  states  on  whether
      national legislation makes such provision or not, and is in line  with
      the position that was agreed at the African Union  Labour  and  Social
      Affairs Commission meeting.  In a situation where  such  a  right  has
      been extended to non-nationals, the  maintenance  of  social  security
      should be protected in bi-lateral  agreements  or  arrangements  where
      they exist or where new ones are negotiated.


      With respect to accommodation, greater flexibility was arrived at with
      the introduction of a clause that allowed for substantial equivalence.
       This would allow for  member  states  to  have  conditions  that  are
      substantially equivalent to those set in the Convention, in the  event
      that members found it difficult to comply with.


      Issues dealt with by the Committee were as follows:
   *  Amendment to the ANNEX III of the Convention.
   *  Amendments to article 37.
   *  The size of vessel for which the special provisions that are  proposed
      should be applicable.
   *  Amendments to the section of the proposed  recommendation  that  deals
      with accommodation.
   *  Coming into force of the Convention
   *  Revision of the existing fishing Conventions (5)


   The Committee dealt with amendments to the Annex of Convention III as  it
   relates to standards of accommodation for  fishing  vessels  and  special
   provisions for vessels larger than 24 metres.


   A new article was proposed for fishing  vessel  owners  with  respect  to
   employer liability in terms of medical care where a fisher is on  foreign
   soil.  This requires the fishing vessel owner to be responsible  for  the
   cost of medical care as well as  related  maintenance  costs  whilst  the
   fisher is sick or injured.  The flexibility that is provided in terms  of
   this article is that the cost could  be  recouped  if  the  fisher  acted
   fraudulently.


   With respect to the closing articles of the convention, the following two
   issues were agreed upon:


   With respect to the Fishermen’s  Competency  Certificates  Convention  of
   1966, these Conventions could not be ratified by member states that still
   wished to ratify it but member states  that  have  already  ratified  it,
   would continue reporting on them.  South Africa has not ratified  any  of
   these Conventions.


   The Committee agreed that the Convention would come into effect  when  at
   least 10 member states had ratified the Convention with at least eight of
   them being from the coastal states.   It  further  agreed  that  previous
   fisher Conventions would be  revised  automatically  if  a  member  state
   ratified  the  new  proposed  Convention.   The  only   existing   fisher
   Convention that would not be revised was the one on a fisher’s vocational
   training.


   The text of the proposed recommendation was amended and provided a set of
   guidelines for  member  states  to  utilize  when  they  implemented  the
   Convention.


   It was reported  that  the  ILO  had  launched  a  campaign  against  the
   trafficking of women and children.


   The following matters were identified and outlined in the AU  Labour  and
   Social Affairs Commission and were agreed to by the Conference.


   *  Social Security.
   *  Different standards to be applicable to larger vessels.
   *  Identity documentation for fishers.
   *  The size standard that would differentiate small vessels  from  larger
      vessels.


   The following draft resolutions  were  proposed  for  submission  to  the
   plenary on 15 June.


   (1)      The impact of the earthquake and Tsunami disaster in the  Indian
      Ocean


   This resolution was meant to request the  Director-General  of  the  ILO,
   when using the resources of the organisation, to use the expertise at its
   disposal in order to make a contribution to the labour market, employment
   and social protection needs of the affected countries.


   (2)      Social security protection in the fishing sector


   The ILO should promote social security protection for fishers and prepare
   a global report on  the  provision  of  social  security  protection  for
   fishers.


   (3)      The impact of globalisation of the fishing sector


   This resolution proposed to the ILO that  a  report  be  developed  after
   examining the impact of globalisation on the fishing sector.  The  report
   should include the growing  employment  or  engagement  of  non-domiciled
   fishers.


   (4)      Occupational diseases and injuries in the fishing sector


   The proposal was aimed at the examination of  occupational  diseases  and
   injuries affecting fishers by the ILO and the World Health  Organisation,
   and the  impact  on  both  the  fishing  sector  and  fishers  and  their
   dependants.


   (5)      Technical cooperation relating to work in the fishing sector


   This  proposal  requested  the  ILO  to  assist  countries  by  providing
   technical expertise to member states that wanted to ratify  the  proposed
   Convention.


   The manner in which issues were dealt with was  appreciated,  as  matters
   were resolved through consensus.  In the event of disagreements,  parties
   would ask for an adjournment so that the spokesperson could  consult  his
   or her principals.
   These resolutions were not adopted although they were noted in the report
   on the work of the Committee.  On 16 June, the Conference had to vote  on
   the instrument.  However, pertinent pints emerged from the  vote  and  it
   was lost by lack of one vote as both governments and worker  voters  were
   not in plenary.  It was agreed that the matter should be  placed  on  the
   agenda of the 2007 ILC for both a Convention and a Recommendation.

3.5   Committee of Youth Employment


      This Committee engaged in discussions and  debate  on  challenges  and
      approaches to the problems of youth employment.
      Youth unemployment was identified as a global challenge that warranted
      an integrated approach.


      In 2004, the ILO organised a tripartite meeting on Youth Employment to
      identify initial areas of  agreement  for  discussion.   This  meeting
      produced a substantive document, which together with the contents of a
      report of the general survey of the Committee on  the  Application  of
      Standards and Recommendations on Employment  Promotion,  informed  the
      discussion document for the ILC Committee on Youth Employment.


      Specific  areas  that  informed  the  discussion  were  identified  as
      follows:


      (1)   The major disadvantages faced by  young  people  in  the  labour
           market and the possible consequences of their lack of access  to
           decent work


           Discussions around this matter concluded that challenges  facing
           young people were multi-dimensional.  Issues such as the  demand
           and supply of labour, and the lack of demand for labour due to a
           lack of investments and low economic growth were  identified  as
           factors impact negatively on employment.


           Other points of agreement raised  related  to  factors  such  as
           lack of relevant skills  and  labour  market  information.   The
           former related to what has been identified as a mismatch between
           education and skills required by the industry.  The  outcome  of
           this situation is availability of skills  not  demanded  by  the
           industry thus contributing to unemployment.


           Nigeria, speaking on behalf of the African Group, emphasised the
           importance of youth employment in  alleviating  poverty  on  the
           continent.  This position, supported by South Africa, is in line
           with the  resolutions  of  the  AU  Labour  and  Social  Affairs
           Commission meeting held in Johannesburg in April 2005.   It  was
           emphasised  that  Youth  Employment  should  not  be  viewed  in
           isolation from the overall unemployment problem,  especially  in
           Africa.
      (2)   Components of the  package  of  policies,  and  programmes  that
           encourage decent work for young people


           Discussions on this topic touched on a  wide-array  of  policies
           required to address the challenge of youth unemployment.   These
           included  interventions  relating  to  education  and  training,
           entrepreneurship development  and  the  support  for  small  and
           medium enterprise development.


           The Committee  supported  the  identified  policy  options.  The
           Africa group emphasised the importance of the development of co-
           operatives in attempting  to  address  the  challenge  of  youth
           unemployment.


           South Africa was concerned  at  whether  having  identified  all
           these  interventions  as  discussed  before,  it  would  not  be
           appropriate to check if there were  structural  problems,  which
           these policies are unable to address.  This position,  supported
           by other Committee members, was informed by the  need  to  shift
           from focusing on discussions to the implementation programme.


      (3)    Respective  roles   of   Governments,   employer   and   worker
           organisations in promoting pathways to  decent  work  for  young
           women and men


           The Committee concluded that this responsibility  could  not  be
           borne  by   governments   only,   as   it   was   an   inclusive
           responsibility.  There was a need to engage social partners  and
           other interested parties.  This position  was  informed  by  the
           realisation  that  persistent  youth  unemployment  has  serious
           implications to all social partners.
      (4)   The establishment of a new instrument by the ILO that will focus
           on youth employment


           The ILO needed to get an indication whether it  should  begin  a
           process of establishing a  Convention  that  would  specifically
           focus on youth employment.  Discussion on this matter received a
           negative response to such an  approach.   Member  states  argued
           that there was a  plethora  of  instruments  in  existence  that
           supported employment.  It was concluded that the ILO  needed  to
           strengthen the supervisory mechanism in  order  to  enhance  the
           existing instruments.


           The Committee reached consensus on the causes, implications  and
           necessary  policy  interventions  related  to   the   identified
           problem.   There was no contentious area of disagreement as  the
           discussions confirmed the same issues identified by forums  that
           met before this session.


           Conclusions


           The issues and challenges reflected the  same  issues  as  those
           that related to opportunities brought by young workers into  the
           working environment.  It was realised that  young  workers  seek
           employment in diverse surroundings, and that there was  lack  of
           alignment between skills and education.


           On the policies and programmes, the one-size fits  all  approach
           was not applicable.  There was a need for  a  coherent  approach
           that   combines   macro-   and    microeconomic    intervention.
           Governments needed some space in the formulation of policies and
           should most importantly place growth and  employment  generation
           at the centre of their national policy objectives.


           The action plan, however, called upon the ILO to  amongst  other
           things-


           *     Work closely with the Youth Employment Network (YEN);
           *     Expand knowledge through the gathering of factual data and
                 empirical  evidence  on  the   effectiveness   of   country
                 policies;
           *     Facilitate global peer partnerships;
           *     Develop a research  agenda  that  includes  an  evaluation
                 strategy;
           *     Strengthen research and knowledge dissemination on the  10
                 core elements in the ILO Global Employment Agenda.


           The ILO was also called  upon  to  undertake,  as  part  of  the
           advocacy a campaign to promote these conclusions.


           The Committee stressed that  the  ILO  should  as  part  of  the
           technical assistance-


           *     Intensify the provision of  guidance  and  policy  advice,
                 particularly to developing countries;
           *     Enhance capacity of employers and workers organisations to
                 effectively participate in the setting of policies;
           *      Assist   developing   countries   in   establishing   and
                 strengthening inspection services.


           The ILO  was  also  called  upon  to  maximise  the  comparative
           advantage of its tripartite  structures  in  its  activities  to
           promote decent work.


           Resolution on Youth Employment


           In line with the Conference procedures, the conclusions  of  the
           Committee were  supported  by  a  Resolution  that  invited  the
           Governing Body to give due consideration to these conclusions in
           its planning for future activities around youth  employment  and
           for the Director-General to give consideration to these  in  his
           implementation of the budget for the 2006-07 financial year.


           The Committee adopted its report, which will be used as a  basis
           for future discussions on the matter.


           A sub-regional conference on youth employment  was  convened  by
           the ILO in Zimbabwe  in  October  2005.  The  objective  was  to
           discuss challenges  for  Southern  Africa  and  further  develop
           strategies on how to address this problem.


           Youth Employment Network (YEN) debate


           The  YEN,  a  structure  established  to  connect  global  youth
           employment initiatives, held a side  event  in  which  countries
           shared their experiences on youth employment.  What emerged from
           this discussion was an emphasis on the  need  for  collectivity,
           that is, the involvement of social partners and youth structures
           in challenges posed by this problem.  The UK, through its Africa
           partnership initiative, expressed its willingness to  assist  in
           funding some of the initiatives by the Office supporting  member
           states in their approaches.


           Conclusions of the Conference


     1) Countries should develop action plans  outlining  interventions  in
        dealing with youth employment.
     2) Identify sectors with high potential for youth employment.
     3) Gather factual data on the effectiveness of  country  policies  and
        interventions.


      Recommendations


   1) The Committee’s delegation to the ILC should be increased and each
      member should be opportunity to attend.

   2) The DOL should strengthen the level of engagement with social partners
      in preparation for the ILC.

   3) The Committee should consider inviting all stakeholders from the youth
      structures to discuss matters related to youth employment

Report to be considered.

10. Report of the Portfolio Committee  on  Labour  on  briefings  by  Sector
   Education and Training Authorities, dated 8 November 2005:
The Portfolio Committee on Labour, having noted the presentations and
submissions made to it, reports as follows:

1.          Introduction

     The Committee met with six SETAs and officials from the SETA Co-
     ordination unit of the Department Of Labour (DOL) on 23 and 30 August.
     The delegation from the DOL was led by Messrs S Morotoba: Acting-Deputy
     Director-General: Skills Development and F Prinsloo: Acting - Senior
     Executive Manager: Seta Co-ordination.


     The SETAs which made presentations were the following:


     • Services Sector Education and Training Authority (Services SETA)
     • Public Service Sector Education and Training Authority (PSETA)
     • Financial and Accounting Services Sector Education and Training
       Authority (FASSET)
     • Food and Beverage Sector Education and Training Authority
       (FOODBEVSETA)
     • Chemical Industries Sector Training Authority (CHIETA)
     • Manufacturing, Engineering and Related Sector Education and Training
       Authority (MERSETA)

      2.    Terms of reference

    1. Monitor progress and establish problems in the implementation of the
       Skills Development Act (Act No 97 of 1998).
    2. Determine the level of performance of Sector Education and Training
       Authorities (SETAs).
    3. Identify the challenges and constraints faced by the SETAs.
    4. Monitor the level of compliance with the PFMA.
    5.  Assist in formulating proposals which may assist in developing a
       way forward

     The Committee agreed that a report would be compiled and tabled in
     Parliament after all the information had been collated and analysed.

      3.    Overview by DOL

       The Committee  received  a  broad  overview  from  DOL  on  the  SETA
       landscape for 2005-2010 and the provisional overall SETA  performance
       results.   The  department  indicted  that  there   had   been   some
       improvement in the performance of SETAs and government representation
       at senior levels in the SETA boards.  However,  the  scale  used  for
       performance management had  been  based  on  compliance  rather  than
       performance. Performance approach would be implemented in the future.


     The review of the SETA landscape that was finalised in 1 July 2005,
     resulted in the amalgamation of some SETAs.  The department has
     clustered SETAs for internal management purposes, with each of the five
     clusters headed by a manager.


     SETAs are mandated by the Skills Development Act to drive the National
     Skills Development Strategy (NSDS).  Although there was a significant
     improvement in the focus of SETAs, they are still faced with a
     challenge of meeting the NSDS equity targets. Each SETA was expected to
     have a number of learners registered on learnerships.  The department
     was concerned at the lack of understanding by some of employers who
     used funds meant for learnerships for their salary budgets.  However,
     organisations such as NACTU, BUSA and FEDUSA were approached to assist
     in dealing with some of the problems on learnership implementation.
     The DOL had ensured that business unit managers in provincial offices
     are capacitated to understand the learnership determination which is
     meant at protecting learners.  A learnership guide for unemployed
     people was published in all the languages. The department has embarked
     on a massive distribution of those guidelines.


     With respect to the issue of finances, the department indicated that
     although there was an improvement in the area of financial management
     by SETAs, there was still more to be done.   DOL had developed and
     published revised grant regulations to address the issue of surpluses.
     There was a concern around the issue of companies that develop plans
     that are not implemented.  That resulted in some SETAs having to hold
     monies against such plans indefinitely. The revised grant regulations
     now does away with this problem.


     The department was in the process of devising a programme that will
     culminate in the improvement of corporate governance within the SETAs.
     The programme is being developed in conjunction with the University of
     South Africa and funded by the National Skills Fund.


     With respect to the funding of learnership programmes on the  Expanded
     Public Works Programmes (EPWP), the Department of Public Works and the
     Construction SETA had approached DOL for funding of EPWP learnerships.
     These funds were allocated from the National Skills Fund (NSF).  The
     Ministers of Labour and Public Works had met to discuss issues which
     they should raise with Treasury relating to the concerns raised by the
     private sector with respect to levies and how to maximise EPWPs.


     The Committee expressed its concern around the issue of an exit
     strategy, and the after-care of learners who graduated from
     learnerships.


4.          Presentations by Sector Education and Training Authority


           4.1   Public Service SETA (PSETA)


            The briefing by PSETA was on the following:


            *     Mission
            *     Scope of coverage;
            *     Re-certification;
            *     ETQA;
            *     Skills planning; and
            *     Learnership implementation


           The mission of PSETA commits it to co-ordinate and facilitate
           delivery of appropriate learning programs to improve transverse
           skills in the public service.


           PSETA had done a lot in the major areas to up-skill employees in
           the 18.1 learnerships and to ensure that there were appropriate
           programmes in place for those employees to be better skilled.
           The SETA had had a problem with public service departments that
           were spending huge monies of their training budget on allowing
           employees to attend private sector short courses that were not
           credited with PSETA, as well as spending on attendance to
           conferences.  With respect to the latter, the Director-General
           in the Department of Public Service and Administration was
           tasked with a project of coming up with policy that will
           regulate the attendance of conferences by public servants.
           PSETA alluded to the fact that it was still experiencing a great
           difficulty in getting departments to spend more of their 1%
           training budget especially in relation to 18.1 learnerships.
           The SETA had, however, developed clear guidelines to assist
           departments in approaching 18.1 learnerships.


      PSETA acknowledged that not much was done in the identification and
           development of appropriate courses for junior management and
           officials at lower levels.  They also acknowledged that they
           were currently focusing on the area.  The SETA was doing lot of
           work in the skilling of senior management and middle management
           in terms of their competencies.  However, while these have been
           a focus of work carried out by PSETA and SAMDI, there was a
           concerted effort to pay attention to junior management through
           the development of qualifications at NQF 4 and 5.


           With respect to the concern that was raised by the Committee
           around the mindset of public servants, PSETA in partnership with
           the South African Management Development Institute (SAMDI) had
           developed a comprehensive induction and orientation course that
           would assist both new and existing employees in orientating them
           to the new ethos within public service, as well as keeping with
           the principles of Batho Pele.


           In relation to its status, PSETA expressed a view that the fact
           it had been a unit within the Department of Public Service and
           Administration (DPSA), had posed challenges on its
           accountability and resulted in it being unable to perform as
           expected.  The SETA was currently in the process of registering
           as a public entity.  The setting up of process would be
           finalised by November 2005.  However, the legal status would
           enable it to receive appropriate funding to ensure that it meets
           the NSDS requirement and overcome problems around accountability
           and governance.


           PSETA had received a certificate of establishment for 2005 –
           2010 and could apply to be established as a legal entity.  It
           has submitted a proposal to Treasury to get a dedicated grant to
           fund PSETA.  There was a need to ensure that each department
           utilized the allocated skills levy appropriately and
           effectively.


           With respect to the roll out of 18.2 learnerships, PSETA could
           only fund 4000 learners due to the funding received from the
           NSF.  The first phase of the project was rolled out in the
           Eastern Cape, Northern Cape, Mpumalanga and  North West
           provinces.  Allocation of learners was done as per the needs
           identified by the provinces.  The qualification on the 18.2
           learnerships was currently rolled out will be completed by the
           end of March 2006.  PSETA was in the process of approaching the
           NSF to fund the second phase which will include the other four
           provinces. This will enable the PSETA to meet the GDS targets.


           The South African Qualifications Authority  together with PSETA
           do quality assurance on training provided.  Regular reports are
           done and it is ensured that the training provided is valid and
           meets the needs.


           The issue of exit opportunities for learners had been raised
           with DOL and DPSA.  The SETA is looking at ensuring that when
           unemployed youth are brought into learnerships, the question of
           vacancy requirements, as well as scarce skills requirements are
           considered.  PSETA is in a process of putting up a clear policy
           on how to deal with the retention and recruitment of these
           learners into permanent appointments after training.  The issue
           of skills shortage is dealt with as part of the Skills Database
           Project which is massively undertaken in the public service as
           part of the Governance and Administration Cluster.  A commitment
           had been made to the President, as part of the national
           strategy, the project will be up and running by January 2006.
           PSETA is also looking at long term strategy to deal with
           training of professionals in the public service.  The
           recruitment of foreign professionals is a short term strategy.


           The public service is perceived as having made progress in the
           implementation of employment equity, especially at senior
           management level.  The two areas which are identified as lagging
           behind were females in management positions and employment of
           people with disabilities in the public service.  Government and
           in particular the DPSA had an active recruitment campaign to
           increase the number of people with disabilities in the public
           sector, and PSETA was committed to ensuring that at least 4% of
           all learners were people with disabilities.


           The question of infrastructure development for public servants
           is a programme that was dealt with through the GNA.  PSETA
           acknowledged that there was a backlog in this area.


           The Committee expressed its view on the importance of linking
           skills development processes in order to improve performance in
           the public service.  PSETA was looking at ensuring that skills
           development was in line with the performance management systems
           within the public service.
           Regarding the issue of collaboration amongst SETAs,  PSETA has
           an agreement with the ISETT SETA to implement an NQF level 4
           learnership on systems development.  There were also learnership
           agreements with the Health and Welfare SETA around auxiliary
           nursing healthcare, and the ETDP around Facilitators and
           Assessors.


           The DOL emphasised on the importance of SETAs to work together,
           as well as the different spheres of government.  The NSDS II
           does emphasise on this work collaboration.  The issue around the
           physical presence of SETA in provinces could be addressed by
           this collaboration.  The PSETA had targeted to meet the 10 000
           target set by the Growth and Development Summit (GDS).  PSETA
           was concerned that learnerships were not used to do practical
           experience.


           The PSETA board had identified the issue of exit opportunities
           for learners as a priority and would like to ensure that people
           were linked to vacancies.


           The Committee noted the problem of scarce skills in the country.
            However, PSETA alluded to the fact that the recruitment of
           foreign professionals was used as a short- term strategy, there
           was a need to put a long- term strategy to deal with
           professionals in the public service.


           The Committee expressed concern at the public service lagging
           behind in the implementation of employment equity.  The lack of
           women managers and the employment of people with disabilities
           were identified as areas where less progress was made.  It was
           suggested that provisions should be made to ensure that training
           in SETAs include people with disabilities.


           The issue of work collaboration is spelt clearly in the 2005-
           2010 NSDS.  The issue of each SETA having an office in each city
           was seen as costly.  Fostering inter-SETA relations could be a
           solution to the matter.  It was also proposed that DOL
           provincial offices should look at whether the Sector Skills
           Plans (SSP) were linked to the Integrated Development Plans
           (IDP).


  4.2 Finance, Accounting Services Sector Education and Training Authority
           (FASSET)


           FASSET is responsible for ensuring that appropriate learnerships
           are available in the financial sector.  The SETA has 22
           registered learnerships.  In terms of cross-sectoral
           learnerships, 21 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) were signed
           with other 21 SETAs.  The SETA exceeded its target of 3, 000
           learner in learnerships for the first five years.  These were
           learners that were previously employed and unemployed.  100% of
           learners who completed their learnerships were formally employed
           or furthering their studies.  A great deal of work was done in
           terms of driving the concept of signing previously disadvantaged
           individuals into FASSET learnerships.


           The SETA had been involved in a number of social development
           projects.  The purpose of these projects was to meet the high
           skills needs within the sector.  However, all these were in line
           with the NSDS equity targets in terms of beneficiaries, i.e 85%
           Black, 54% women and 4% Disabled.  Each project is measured on
           an ongoing basis and measured against the agreed objectives and
           deliverables. Examples of these social projects included Science
           and Maths school project, Guarantee Trust Holdings (GTH) work
           readiness programme, Thuthuka and CIMA Tirisano learnership
           project.  The level of training offered by these projects ranged
           from Grade 12, where support was provided to learners in
           subjects such as Higher Grade Mathematics, English and
           Accounting, as well support to graduate and post graduate level
           students.


           The Education Upliftment Project  (EUPEC), supported by the NSF,
           had assisted in fast tracking transformation and driving
           participation in the skills development initiative in the
           sector.  The project also provides support for the School of
           Accounting at the University of Fort Hare in the Eastern Cape.
           The NSF supports the Thuthuka project in the Eastern Cape.  The
           SAICA had also assisted in the implementation and delivering of
           those projects.   However, the DOL has allocated R75m to extend
           the project to Limpopo and Kwazulu-Natal.


           Almost 2000 Workplace Skills plans were received and over 1000
           workplaces were accredited.  36% of SMMEs participated in
           claiming grants and attended interventions.  Over R147 m was
           spent on training.


            Challenges


           Proactive communication to all stakeholders remains a high focus
           area at FASSET.  Part of that include Continuous Professional
           Education (CPE) training sessions.  This plays a vital role in
           ensuring high levels of awareness, support and participation for
           all initiatives. However, the issue of the regional
           representation of the SETA remains a concern to the Committee.


           Transformation and diversity remains a challenge in the
           financial sector.  FASSET’s efforts in addressing inequalities
           were stifled by insufficient numbers of previously disadvantaged
           individual matriculants with higher grade Mathematics coming to
           the system.  Even where black matriculants have received
           relatively high symbols, training institutions claimed that
           learners did not have expected level of knowledge of Mathematics
           and Accounting.  In addition, poor proficiency in English
           language, lack of computer knowledge and facilities, as well as
           inadequate career guidance continued to inhibit access into the
           sector.  The Committee wanted to know the relationship between
           the FASSET and the Department of Education, especially in
           relation to the demand of Maths and Science.  The high numeracy
           required by the sector also serves as a barrier to entry,
           although Matriculation results have improved in recent years.


           FASSET is committed towards changing the profile of the sector,
           especially in relation to issues such as the number of qualified
           Black Chartered Accountants.  The marketing strategy of the SETA
           in schools and universities runs in conjunction with
           professional bodies in the sector, as well as the Association
           for the Advancement of Black Accountants (ABASO).  The latter is
           quite active in rural areas.


           ABET training is offered to all employees who are currently
           within the sector.  Such training is funded by FASSET in a form
           of a grant.


           The impact of the R500 000 remuneration ceiling levy exemption
           on SME participation and assistance pose a challenge.


           The Committee was concerned at the Department of Finance and the
           South African Revenue Services (SARS) which were not paying
           levies, although they were one of the large sectors that were
           benefiting from FASSET.


       4.3  Services (Services SETA)


           The SETA has almost 107, 588 employers on its database.  60% of
          member companies are levy-paying and 40% non-levy paying.  The
          SETA had registered 54  learnerships with the South African
          Qualifications Authority (SAQA).  The GDS targets were exceeded
          by
           300%.  In addition, targets of registered learners was exceeded
          in line with the Service Level Agreements (SLAs), as well as
          disability targets on learnerships.

           The highlights of SSETA activities during the previous financial
          year included the following:


          *      Over 600 Skills Development Facilitators (SDFs) were
     trained.


          *      The development and registration of the small business
                 qualification for SMMEs.


          *      The roll-out of an employee assistance programme in
                 response to a  a holistic view to skills development.


          *      The formation of an inter-sectoral Disability Forum.
          *      Accreditation of 1089 service providers and ISO
                 accreditation of SSETA as an organisation.


          *      The successful implementation of the NSF funded domestic
                 worker skills development project.


                 Opportunities facing Services SETA in implementing NSDS
                 2005-2010 were noted as follows:

          *      A more targeted approach to skills development with focus
                 on   scarce and critical skills.

                 *     Collaboration and strategic partnerships at national,
                 provincial and international levels, including NEPAD
                 secretariat.


          *      A more focused support to large and medium firms in the
                 sector towards skills
                 development.


          *      Linking learnerships and placement within broader EPWP
                 framework through
                 partnership agreements linked to demand side of strategies.


           Challenges facing SSETA in implementing NSDS 2005-2010 were
           noted as follows:


            • Inclusion of employment equity criteria for large and medium
              firms in the sector
              for 10% mandatory grant component, as well as improved board
              profile regarding employment equity.
            • Learnership funding specifically with drop income due to tax
              amendments.
              Fast tracking certification partners for all industries.
            • Disability target and profile in the sector.
            • Providing skills development support and initiatives to
              approximately 100 000 non-levy paying employers in the
              sector.


      4.4   Chemical Industries SETA (CHIETA)


           The SETA has 54 registered learnerships.  CHIETA was mentioned
           amongst one of the SETAs which were announced as an excellent
           performing SETAs by the Minister.  The SETA had done very well
           particularly in terms of its management of funds.


           1 867 people in the 18.2 category entered learnerships in the
           chemical industries sector.  A further 1 878 workers were
           registered in the 18.1 learnerships.  Out of the 1 466 GDS
           target that was set for the SETA, 3 812 people were trained.
           That exceeded the target by 115%.


           As part of the contribution towards national objectives of
           growth, employment and poverty alleviation, 4 040 unemployed
           learners completed ABET Level 4 skills programmes aligned to the
           chemical operations NQF level 1 learnership.  2 033 learners
           employed by SMMEs participated in ABET skills programmes.  163
           HIV/Aids workplace co-ordinators were trained and supported.
           Customised business development initiatives were implemented for
           20 SMMEs for sustainability.


           CHIETA acknowledged that although 43 disabled people benefited
           from their training, this is the area which not much was done.
           One of the reason could be attributed to nature of the sector.
           However, the SETA had encouraged the training of the disabled on
           skills such as IT, switchboard, etc. The SETA also acknowledged
           that more needed to be done to attracting youth to the sector.


           In terms of marketing itself, CHIETA road and radio shows were
           conducted.  Staff were also deployed throughout the country,
           including the rural areas where they visit schools and educate
           school children about the sector.  The SETA did acknowledge that
           there was a need to engage in a vociferous manner in
           advertisements so as to market itself.


           Recognition of prior learning is seen by CHIETA as important,
           especially to people who although they did exceptionally well in
           technical work, but could not progress to higher positions.


           CHIETA had performed exceptionally well under the NSDS 1.
           However, for it the new strategy, NSDS II would require it to
           rethink the way in which products and services could be
           delivered.  It also necessitates a greater accountability of
           funds expended, quality of training provision, involvement of
           marginalised communities, information gathering, interpretation
           and dissemination, and directed social development approach.
           The strategy also calls for stakeholder involvement at all level


      4.5   Food & Beverage (FOODBEV) SETA


           The  function  of  the  SETA  is  to  promote,  facilitate   and
           incentivise  skills  development  in  the  food   and   beverage
           manufacturing sector.  The SETA had successfully helped  in  the
           establishment of a sector Employment and Skills Development Lead
           Employer  (ESDLE)  and  the  FOODBEV  learnership  agency.   The
           highlights of the SETA included the following:

            • The NSDS targets were exceeded by 54%.
            • The SETA had unqualified reports every year until closing of
              the NSDS 1.
            • A positive audit report was received by SAQA and re-
              accreditation as an ETQA body.

           The low lights were listed as follows:


            • The delay in the re-certification hindered forward planning.
            •  Funding of learnerships was restricted due to limited
              funding.
            • Difficulty in reaching the more rural areas.
            • Difficulty in achieving NSDS targets for the disabled.
            • Uncertainty over spill-over effects of merger of primary and
              secondary agriculture SETAs.
            • Delay in announcing the NSF funding window.
            • Closing off of the hugely successful NSF funded Hlumani
              project.

           Funding required for many NSDS targets and momentum created
           around learnerships was noted as a challenge.

           The Committee noted the weakness in the linkage between
           provinces and rural areas as a concern.  However, the
           possibility of the presence of each SETA in all the provinces
           would be costly.  This matter could be addressed by the
           collaboration between the SETAs.  A proposal made was that
           provincial labour centres could be used to servicing the SETAs.

  4.6 Manufacturing and Engineering SETA

      Fifty percent of the income on levies come from big companies.  A lot
      of improvements were done since the appointment of a new Chief
      Executive Officer.   Part of the improvements included the following:

            • Enormous increase in learner intake due to announcement of
              enticing discretionary grants.
            • Huge intake of unemployed learners.
            • Increase in payment of discretionary grants.
      • Huge successful SMME initiative resulting in sponsored training for
        11 000 employees in small and medium companies.
            • Successful ABET project with ABET learners also from SMME
              companies.

      With respect to the SETA contribution to growth, employment and
      poverty alleviation, 4 581 unemployed learners were registered.  Out
      of the latter, 3 477 were black, 1 017 female and 71 people with
      disabilities.  620 unemployed learners had completed learnerships.
      Out of the 6 669 apprentices registered, 3 608 were black, 302 female
      and 69 disabled.  All 4 498 apprentices that were registered and
      qualified were absorbed in the industry.


      Challenges of the NSDS 11 were listed as follows:


      • Aligning the strategy to uniqueness and diversity of the
        manufacturing sector.
      • Low target for non-levy paying companies versus levy exemption of
        small companies.
      • Delays in the announcement of NSF funding window.


         5. Recommendations


      (1)   Work collaboration among the SETAs should be enhanced.


         2) The DOL should do more research on the profile of service
            providers.


         3) The DOL should look into the issue of SETA boards and their
            contribution.


         4) The DOL should monitor the functions of the Standard Generating
            Bodies and their representation.


      Report to be considered.


11.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land  Affairs  on
      the  Annual  Reports  and  Financial  Statements  for  2004/5  of  the
      Department of Agriculture and its Public Entities,  dated  8  November
      2005:

                                EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. BACKGROUND

The Constitution of South Africa (Act  No.  108  of  1996)  recognises  that
Legislative Authority has  an  important  role  to  play  in  the  oversight
function in overseeing the performance of Departments and Public Entities.

Section 65 of the Public Finance  Management  Act  requires  that  Ministers
table the annual reports for the Department and Public  Entities  for  which
they are responsible by 30th September each year.

On the 30th September 2005, the Department of Agriculture and  its  Entities
namely,  Land  Bank,  National  Agricultural   Marketing   Council   (NAMC),
Onderstepoort Biological Products (OBP), Perishable Products Export  Control
Board (PPECB), and Agricultural Research Council (ARC) tabled  their  2004/5
Annual Reports and Financial Statements to Parliament in  terms  of  Section
65(1)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No. 1 of 1999).

Upon the referral by the  National  Assembly,  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
Agriculture scheduled extended briefing sessions with  the  Department,  and
its entities to  present  their  Annual  Reports  and  Financial  Statements
including the report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements  for
2004/5.

2. OVERVIEW OF PRESENTATION  ON  DEPARTMENTAL  AND  PUBLIC  ENTITIES  2004/5
   ANNUAL REPORTS

After welcoming and accorded a platform to  officials  from  the  Department
and public entities the Chairperson, Ms Nhlengethwa ,  in  her  introductory
remarks indicated that the main purpose of  the  sessions  were  to  provide
platform to the officials to brief Members on the contents of 2004/5  annual
reports submitted to Parliament in terms of Public Finance  Management  Act.
The presentations generally focused  on  2004/5  targets,  achievements  and
challenges, and audited Financial Statements ending at 31st March 2005.

1.  Department of Agriculture

The  first  report  annual  report  presented  was  of  the  Department   of
Agriculture. The Chief Operations Officer and  Programme  Mangers  presented
the report. The main focus of the presentation was  on  2004/5  targets  and
achievements related to programmes such as Administration,  Farmer  Support,
Agricultural Trade, Economic Research, Agricultural Production,  Sustainable
Resources, Regulatory Services, Communications and Programme planning.

The audit committee  report,  baseline  over  the  Medium  Term  Expenditure
Framework (MTEF)  period,  budget  allocation  per  programme  and  economic
classification, actual expenditure in previous and current  financial  year,
transfer payments, and Human Resource matters were also  highlighted.  Major
departmental activities were structured  to  correspond  with  the  priority
areas set in the Strategic Plan

2.2  Land Bank

The second  annual  report  presented  was  of  the  Land  Bank.  The  Chief
Executive Officer, Mr Alan Mukoki presented the annual  report  and  audited
financial statements of the Bank. The main focus of the presentation was  on
the vision, mission, evolution of the Bank since  1998,  approach,  external
environment,  operational  review,  loans  to  emerging   farmers,   AgriBEE
support, financial review and turnaround strategy.
3. Primary Agriculture Education & Training Authority (PAETA)

NOTE: PAETA does not usually report to the  Committee  but  reports  to  the
Portfolio Committee on Labour. However, the committee took a  decision  that
the Entity should also present to Agriculture and Land Affairs Committee  as
it is dealing with training in the Agricultural Sector. The Chief  Executive
Officer, Mr Michiel van Niekerk presented the report. The main focus was  on
targets and key  achievements,  such  as  Learnerships,  Skills  programmes,
ABET, HIV / Aids,  Quality  Assurance,  National  Skills  Fund  and  audited
financial statements.

4.  National Agricultural Marketing Council (NAMC)

NAMC annual report was  the  fourth  to  be  presented.  The  Council  Vice-
Chairperson, Ms Dora Ndaba presented the report. The report focused  on  the
legislative mandate of the  council,  the  relevance  of  the  NAMC  in  the
deregulated marketing environment, the activities for 2005/6 in  support  of
the objectives  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture,  increase  support  to
agricultural activities  in  the  emerging  sector,  budget  utilization  of
2004/5, the actual expenditure, audited statement and audit opinion.

5.  Onderstepoort Biological Products (OBP)

OBP was the fifth entity to  report.  The  Managing  Director,  Dr  Makuleni
presented. The presentation  outline  focused  on  introduction,  governance
report, the company performance  for  2004/5,  human  resource  report,  the
financial performance for 2004/5, and audit opinion.

6.  Perishable Products Export Control Board (PPECB)

The PPECB also appeared before the committee. The Chief  Executive  Officer,
Mr Neels Hubinger presented the report  which  focused  on  the  legislative
mandate,  governance  and  structures,  the  purpose,  business  model   and
strategic  emphasis;  elaboration  on  the  annual  report;  the   financial
statements for 2004/5, and audited financial statements.

7.  Agricultural Research Council (ARC)

The ARC was the last institution to appear before the committee.  The  Chief
Executive  Office,  Dr  Tau-Mzamane  assisted  by  the   Senior   Management
presented the report which  centred  on  the  ARC  structure,  the  Council,
Research  and  Development,  Sustainable  community  development,  Corporate
support services, Human  resource  overview,  Information  &  communications
Technology overview, and financial overview.

2. COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

Based on 2004/5 annual reports and audited financial  statements  presented,
the Committee has generally observed that:

    • The 2004/5 annual reports of the Department of Agriculture and  Public
      Entities have  provided  information  on  service  delivery  and  have
      reported on the financial statements,  management  and  audit  reports
      against the  performance  targets  and  budgets  as  outlined  in  the
      strategic / business plans and Estimates of National Expenditure.


    • Audit  opinion,  the  financial  statements  fairly  present,  in  all
      material respects, the financial positions of the Department  and  its
      Entities at 31 March 2005 and the result of their operations and  cash
      flows  for  the  year  then  ended,  in  accordance  with   prescribed
      accounting practice and in a manner required  by  the  Public  Finance
      Management Act, 1999 (Act No.1 of 1999).

    • The tabling of 2004/5 annual reports and financial statements  of  the
      Department and Entities to Parliament by the Minister  of  Agriculture
      and Land Affairs has complied with  the  requirements  of  the  Public
      Finance Management Act.

1. REPORT

The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land  Affairs  having  considered
the Annual Reports and Financial Statements for 2004/5 of the Department  of
Agriculture and the Public Entities to reporting to the Minister during  the
extended briefing sessions, reports as follows:

2. ANNUAL REPORTS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR 2004/5 OF THE  DEPARTMENT  OF
    AGRICULTURE AND ITS PUBLIC ENTITIES

On the 1st November 2005, the Committee completed its oversight work on  the
reports of the Department and the public entities  namely,  the  Land  Bank,
Khula  Land  Credit  Facility,   Ncera   Farms   (Pty)   Limited,   National
Agricultural   Marketing   Council,   Onderstepoort   Biological   Products,
Perishable Products Export Control Board and Agricultural Research Council.

 1. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

The Chief Operating Officer, Mr Mabombo  and  programme  managers  presented
the  2004/5  annual  report  and  audited  financial   statements   of   the
department. The main focus of the presentation was  on  2004/5  targets  and
achievements related to programmes such as Administration,  Farmer  Support,
Agricultural Trade, Economic Research, Agricultural Production,  Sustainable
Resources, Regulatory Services, Communications, and Programme planning.

The  audit  committee  report,  baseline  over  the  MTEF   period,   budget
allocation per programme and economic classification, actual expenditure  in
previous and current financial year, transfer payments, and HR matters  were
also  highlighted.  Major  departmental  activities   were   structured   to
correspond with the priority areas set in the Strategic Plan.

The period under review included: adjustment of  operational  plans  because
of 2004 general elections; the approval of the new  departmental  structure;
the Departure of the Director-General,  Ms  Bongiwe  Njobe  on  28  February
2004; the  outbreak  of  animal  diseases;  working  relations  between  the
Department of Agriculture and Department of Land Affairs; the  alignment  of
the agricultural public entities and the Department of Agriculture;  mandate
given by the State of the Nation Address, such as, the  Agricultural  Credit
Scheme, the AgriBEE and the  Comprehensive  Agricultural  Support  Programme
(CASP).

The activities of the Department are organised in nine programmes:

Programme 1: Administration

The  programme  provides  the  department  with  political   and   strategic
leadership  as  well  as  management  and  administration  services.  Actual
spending for the period under review is R169 838 million that 12.2%  of  the
total budget.

Programme 2: Farmer Support and Development

The   programme   promotes   stability,    competitiveness,    growth    and
transformation in the agricultural sector by developing  policies  governing
farmer settlement, food security, rural development, the registration of co-
operatives and agricultural risk and disaster  management.  Actual  spending
for the period under review is R330 044 million that is 23.8% of  the  total
budget.

Programme 3: Agricultural Trade and Business Development

The  programme  develops  policies  governing   access   to   national   and
international markets and promotes black economic empowerment (BEE)  in  the
sector. Actual spending for the period under review is R26 759 million  that
is 1.9% of the total budget.

Programme 4: Economic Research and Analysis

The  programme  provides  the  necessary  information  for  developing   and
monitoring the agricultural sector. Provides timely,  accurate  agricultural
economic and statistical information  to  relevant  stakeholders  and  other
interested parties to  improve  decision-making.  Actual  spending  for  the
period under review is R16 108 million that is 1.2% of the total budget.

Programme 5: Agricultural Production

The   programme   promotes   agricultural   research,    productivity    and
sustainability. Objective is to provide national  leadership  for  increased
sustainable  agricultural  productivity,   genetic   resources   management,
research, technology development  and  transfer.  Actual  spending  for  the
period under review is R368 496 million that is 26.6% of the total budget.

Programme 6: Sustainable Resources Management and Use

The programme develops, implements and monitors policies for the  management
and use of land and water resources in agriculture. Actual spending is  R143
219 million for the period under review, this is 10.3% of the total  budget.


Programme 7: National Regulatory Services

The programme develops and monitors  risk  management  strategies,  policies
and legislation for food safety and for the  control  of  animal  and  plant
diseases. For the period under review, actual spending is R246  666  million
that is 17.8% of the total budget.

Programme 8: Communication and Information Management

The  programme  manages  and  co-ordinates  communication,   education   and
international   relations.   Provide   effective   internal   and   external
communication and information management through  the  implementation  of  a
proper strategy and a structured plan. Actual spending by the programme  for
the period under review is R83 405 million and 6.0% of the total budget.

Programme 9: Programme Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation

The  programme  consolidates  and   supports   strategic   and   operational
management in the department. Actual spending for 2004/5 is R2.306  million,
which approximately 0.2% of the total budget.

The total allocation to Department for 2004/5 is R1  449  391  billion.  The
total actual spending for the same period is R1  386  841  billion  that  is
95.7% of the  total  budget.  The  report  reflects  under-spending  of  R63
million that is 4.3% of the total budget.

Audit opinion the financial  statements  fairly  present,  in  all  material
respects, the financial position of the  Department  of  Agriculture  at  31
March 2005 and the results of its operations and cash  flows  for  the  year
then ended, in accordance with prescribed accounting  practice  and  in  the
manner required by the Public Finance  Management  Act,  1999  (Act  No1  of
1999), as amended.

MATTER OF EMPHASIS:

Attention is drawn to the control  over  fixed  assets,  the  audit  reveals
various cases where assets could not be physically  verified  or  traced  to
the asset register at the national office and other regional offices.

COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

The committee CONSIDERED THE  ANNUAL  REPORT  and  expressed  the  following
concerns:

     a) The outbreak of animal  diseases  in  Eastern  Cape,  Western  Cape
        Limpopo and KwaZulu-Natal.
     b) The intergovernmental relations challenges.
     c) Information flow and management between three spheres government.
     d) Training and lack of support for emerging farmers.
     e) The role of played by Extension  Officers  in  some  areas  is  not
        visible.
     f) Agricultural co-operatives and the registration process.
     g) Implementation plans of Provincial departments and Districts


RECOMMENDED THAT the follow up meeting with the  Department  of  Agriculture
is necessary to discuss the  Comprehensive  Agricultural  Support  Programme
(CASP) funding.

AND AGREED to accept the report.

2.2  LAND BANK

The Chief Executive  Officer,  Mr  Alan  Mukoki  presented  the  annual  and
audited financial statements of  the  Land  Bank.  The  main  focus  of  the
presentation was on vision, mission,  evolution  of  the  Bank  since  1998,
approach,  external  environment,  operational  review,  loans  to  emerging
farmers, AgriBEE support, financial review and turnaround points.

During 2004/5 the Bank has recorded successes in relation to:

     a) Raising levels of investment in  the  natural  environment  through
        agriculture and by adding value to the contributions of the  rural,
        provincial and local government agricultural stakeholders.
     b) Raising rural awareness levels and empowering communities to create
        new social business networks to facilitate productive  partnerships
        amongst  small-scale  farmers  through  the  Step  –Up  product  by
        creating credit histories for the unbankable.
     c) Effectively delivering on its undertakings,  often  in  partnership
        with other commercial and development finance institutions.
     d) Fostering and strengthening a regional approach to delivery.
     e)  Achieving  on  the  ground  outcomes   and   promote   sustainable
        agriculture.

Apart from successes, Land Bank faces specific challenges relating to:

     a)  Improving  access   for   various   categories   of   agricultural
        entrepreneur and meeting a variety of  needs  with  the  innovative
        thinking required to meet the challenges of limited access to  land
        ownership and collateral.
     b) Matching service capacity with outreach- the Bank must ensure  that
        it offers excellent and cost-effective service to all clients.
     c)  Maintaining  sound  financial  performance  and  credit  rating  –
        balancing  outreach  and  quality  service  with   imperatives   of
        sustainability.
     d) The Bank has to continue to grow into the space created by the Land
        and Agricultural Development Act (Act No.  15  of  2002)  and  make
        creative use of the opportunities created by the Act.

Turnaround Strategy:  since  1998,  the  Bank  was  accorded  a  development
mandate, the focus of its  activities  have  altered  to  embrace  both  the
commercial farming enterprises and the emergent farming  enterprises  across
agricultural value chain. For the Bank to deliver  on  the  mandate  it  was
obliged update and strengthen its financial controls. As a consequence,  the
Land  Bank  has  developed  a  Turnaround  Strategy   embracing   its   core
activities, including, but not limited  to  short  –term,  medium-term,  and
long-term outputs and outcomes.

 The Audit opinion reflects that the financial statement fairly present,  in
all material respects, the financial position  of  the  Land  Bank  and  the
Group at 31 March 2005 and the results of its operations and cash flows  for
the year ended in accordance with  South  African  Statements  of  Generally
Accepted Accounting Practice, and in  the  manner  required  by  the  Public
Finance Management Act (Act No.1 of 1999).

MATTERS OF EMPHASIS:

Computer system: there are still deficiencies in the  banking  loan  module,
as well as certain inadequacies  in  either  logical  or  manual  mitigating
controls, which remain unresolved.

Fruitless and wasteful expenditure: the Land Bank was assessed by the  South
African Revenue Services in 2004 financial year for  PAYE  of  R10  million,
penalties of R665 210 and interest of R2.9  million  relating  to  employees
tax  that  was  incorrectly  calculated  and  not  deducted  from  employees
earnings. The  total  PAYE  not  recovered  from  employees,  penalties  and
interest amounting to R13 606 849 is  regarded  as  fruitless  and  wasteful
expenditure.

Submission of the financial statements: Section 55  of  the  Public  Finance
Management Act, 1999 (Act No. 1 of 1999) as amended by Act No. 29  of  1999)
requires the financial statements to be  submitted  to  the  Auditor-General
within two months after the  financial  year-end,  by  31  March  2005.  The
financial statements were signed by the accounting authority  and  submitted
for audit purposes on 31 May 2005.

COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

THE COMMITTEE DELIBERATED THE REPORT and expressed the following concerns:

     a) Creation of an environment for the empowerment of the  historically
        disadvantaged.
     b) Participation by previously disadvantaged South Africans within all
        levels of the value chain in the agricultural sector.
     c) Credibility of the Bank amongst the emerging farmers needs  special
        attention.
     d) Borrowing and the ability to repay.
     e) Lack of training and development to land reform beneficiaries.
     f) Access to information and products of the Bank to rural villages.

The Committee accepted the report.

2.3 PRIMARY AGRICULTURE EDUCATION & TRAINING AUTHORITY
   (PAETA)


The Chief Executive Officer, Mr Michiel van  Niekerk  presented  the  2004/5
annual report and audited financial statements.  The  primary  objective  of
PAETA is t to create and promote  opportunities  for  social,  economic  and
employment  growth  for  farming  communities,  in  conjunction  with  other
stakeholders  in  primary  agriculture,  through   relevant,   quality   and
accessible education, training and development.

The main focus of the presentation was on targets and key achievements  such
as Learnerships, Skills programmes, ABET, HIV  /  Aids,  Quality  Assurance,
National Skills Fund Projects.
Total revenue for  2004/5  amounted  to  R93  108  million.  The  amount  is
constituted by the Skills Development income, the  Skills  Development  levy
interest, the National Skills Fund income; donations for  special  projects;
and investment income. Total expenditure amounted to R90 697 million,  as  a
result of Employer grant  and  project  expenses,  Administration  expenses,
National Skills Fund expenses and Special project expenses.

Auditor-General’s note in terms of qualifications, matters of  emphasis  and
significant matters was none.

Key challenges for AgriSETA for 2005/6 and beyond:

      • Extensive support to the Agricultural Land reform processes  in  an
        integrated manner via a large- scale strategic NSF project.
      • With financial support roll-out ABET programmes to at least 10  000
        per annum.
      • To capacitate learning centres (especially  Agricultural  Colleges)
        into Centres of Excellence.
      • High quality, relevant and in-depth agricultural  and  agricultural
        processing research.
      • To create infra-structural linkages with the secondary component to
        make down-stream activities more accessible to small farmer.
      • The impact on Extension and Mentoring services.

COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

The committee interrogated the report and raised a concern that:

     a)  The  location  of  Agricultural  Colleges  to  the  Department  of
        Education needs to be  considered  (by  Agriculture  and  Education
        Departments);
     b) Transformation of the higher echelons of the entity.


The Committee accepted the report.

2.4  NATIONAL AGRICULTURALl MARKETING COUNCIL (NAMC)

The National Agricultural Marketing Council (NAMC) is a  schedule  3  public
entity established in terms of Marketing of Agricultural Products  Act  (Act
No. 47 of 1996). The core mandate of the NAMC is to  do  investigations  and
advise  the  minister  of  Agriculture  and  Land  Affairs  on  agricultural
marketing policies and their application, and  to  co-ordinate  agricultural
marketing policy in relation to national economic,  social  and  development
policies and international trends and developments.

Funding to the council during the year under review amounted to R11 162  000
million. The  budget  was  made  up  of  transfer  from  the  Department  of
Agriculture with R10 601 000 million and  interest  and  other  amounted  to
R561 000.

The actual expenditure amounted  to  R11.1  million  that  was  made  up  of
personnel expenditure, administration, professional services, provision  for
audit fees. There was a surplus of R1.7 million which has been approved.


Audit opinion


The financial statements fairly  present,  in  all  material  respects,  the
financial position of the NAMC at 31 March  2005  and  the  results  of  its
operations and cash flows for the year then ended, in a manner  required  by
the Public Finance Management Act.

COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

The Committee considered the report and  expressed  the  following  concerns
that:

   a) The Council does not have a strategy to deal with enhancement  of  the
      first economy and responding effectively  to  the  challenges  of  the
      second economy.
   b) Lack of proactive role by the council to ensure that South  Africa  is
      not a victim used as a dumping zone.
   c) The council should consider employing marketing officers, to deal with
      domestic and international marketing.
   d) It was not clear as to why it took so long for the council to  disband
      the Wool Board.
   e) There is no strategy in place to for the council  to  be  accessed  by
      emerging farmers.

FURTHER REQUESTED THAT:

     a) The council to provide a report in relation to the  time  taken  to
        disband the Wool Board.
     b) The  council  provide  a  report  on  the  breakdown  of  personnel
        expenditure.


2.5 ONDERSTEPOORT BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS (OBP)

Onderstepoort  Biological  Products  Limited  is  a  bio-technical   company
manufacturing vaccines and related products for global  animal  health  care
industry.  The  company  was  established  in  terms  of  the   Ondertepoort
Biological Products Incorporation Act (1999).

The company is entirely self-financing and  derives  its  revenue  from  the
sale of vaccines and related biological products. Since inception  in  2000,
the  company  has  consistently  shown  a  positive  growth  in  sales.  The
contribution of export sales since then  has  risen,  while  the  growth  in
profits has also increased.

The company reported a non-tax revenue of  R69.7  million  for  2003/4,  and
that was  projected  to  grow  over  the  MTEF  period,  which  was  largely
attributable to the projected increase in sales of vaccines  in  the  export
market.

For the period under review  the  company  reported  net  revenue  of  R77.4
million and  increase  of  R7.7  million  compared  to  previous  year.  The
increase was due to operational cash flow,  cash  invested  in  three  major
banks, cash was retained for upgrade of facilities.

Audit opinion

The financial statements fairly  present,  in  all  material  respects,  the
financial position of the Company at 31 March 2005 and the  results  of  its
operations and cash flows for the year then ended  in  accordance  with  the
requirements of by the South  African  Companies  Act  of  1973,  and  other
reporting requirements set out in  the  Public  Finance  Management  Act  of
1999.

COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS
The committee considered the report and expressed appreciation of  the  good
work done and encouraged the company to:

     a) Strengthen personal contacts with the emerging farmers;
     b) Continue visiting provinces on regular basis to end the diseases;
     c) Extend more services to the SADC region and the continent.

FURTHER RECOMMENDED:

That the Committee shall undertake an oversight visit  in  the  new-year  to
the Head office of the company to oversee the renovated facility

2.6 PERISHABLE PRODUCTS EXPORT CONTROL BOARD (PPECB)

The Perishable Products Export Control Board was  established  in  terms  of
the Perishable Products Export Control Board Act (Act  No.9  of  1983).  Its
purpose is to ensure that  perishable  products  intended  for  export  from
South Africa  meets  international  quality  standards.  Activities  include
inspections and  quality  control,  and  providing  technical,  development,
market intelligence and information services. The Board  is  funded  by  its
own revenue and does not receive transfers from government.

For the period under review, the total  amounted  to  R91  248  418  million
which was derived from among others the volume,  levy,  customised,  SA  PIP
and other related matters. The total expenditure amounted  to  R95  410  166
million which comprised of  people,  operations,  technology,  building  and
other matters. The statement reflects a shortfall of R4.1 million  while  in
2004 a surplus of R2.4 million was recorded.

Audit opinion

The financial statements fairly  present,  in  all  material  respects,  the
financial position of the Board at 31 March  2005  and  the  result  of  its
operations and cash flows for the year then ended in a  manner  required  by
the Public Finance Management Act of 1999, except a note in  the  director’s
report  which  listed  areas  of  non-compliance  with  the  Public  Finance
Management Act  (Act No. 1 of 1999).

COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

The Committee considered the report and expressed the following concerns:

     a) The Employment Equity Plan of the Board must be fast-tracked;
     b) The bulk (about 70%)  of  the  budget  is  utilised  for  personnel
        expenditure;
     c) The Board needs  to  consider  the  possibility  of  labelling  the
        products in terms of branding in the second economy

AGREED to accept the report and the financial statements as presented;

AND RECOMMENDED THAT, the Board should provide the committee  input  on  how
institutions  such  as  NAFU  and  AgriSA  can  be  included  as   part   of
transformation process.
2.9 Agricultural Research Council (ARC)

The Agricultural Research Council (ARC) is a public  entity  listed  in  the
Public Finance  Management  Act  (Act  No.  1  of  1999).  The  ARC  renders
multidisciplinary services addressing national agricultural  priorities.  It
provides a scientific base and  technology  transfer  capacity  to  national
agricultural industry in South Africa. The ARC was established in  terms  of
the Agricultural Research Act (Act No. 86 of 1990). It is  one  of  the  ten
publicly funded science and  technology  institutions  that  constitute  the
National System of Innovation (NSI).

The  mandate  of  the  ARC  includes  conducting  research,  developing  and
transferring technology. In so doing it  promotes  the  agricultural  sector
industry, thereby contributing to the quality  of  life  of  the  people  of
South Africa. This mandate is  funded  through  a  Parliamentary  Grant  and
allocated as part of  the  Science  vote.  The  secondary  mandate  includes
programmes  or  services  required  by  the   Department   of   Agriculture,
Department of Science and Technology (DST), the  Provincial  Departments  of
Agriculture and other industry customers. The ARC, in its responsibility  to
conduct  research,  develops  technologies  in  response   to   agricultural
priorities as identified through national policy.

On Research and Development, the activities of the ARC have been aligned  to
address major government priorities such as  integrated  rural  development,
natural resource  management,  food  security,  and  trade  development  and
support.

On Sustainable Rural  Livelihoods,  in  the  past  year  the  ARC  has  been
involved in a wide range  of  activities  –  from  production  projects  and
research  programmes,  to  equipment  testing  and  trials.  The   extensive
training it has conducted spanned from conservation and  cotton  farming  to
pest management and beekeeping.

The  services  provided  by  Corporate  support   services   are   operation
transaction  based  and  include  finance,  information  technology,   human
resources, facilities management,  legal,  management  of  corporate  public
relation events  and  travel.  The  highlights  for  the  year  include  the
following: development of a  service  desk  focusing  on  improving  service
delivery, the upgrading of the Information  Technology  which  had  a  major
impact on improving the communication infrastructure of the ARC.

On Human resource, the year was a period characterised by stable  industrial
relations and a 4.7% growth in the total workforce. The ARC  maintained  its
target of investing 3% of its labour cost in human resource development  and
also claimed  the  skills  grants  due.  Employment  Equity,  a  subject  of
constant focus, still presents some  challenges  even  though  the  ARC  has
succeeded in appointing candidates from designated groups.

In  this  period,  employees  benefited  from  a   range   of   professional
development and training programmes. To tackle the  shortage  of  scientists
in the  research  disciplines,  the  HR  division  has  come  up  with  some
innovative knowledge-transfer and mentoring programmes. In the coming  year,
the  focus  is  to  be  on  succession   planning,   career-path   planning,
performance evaluation frameworks  and  aligning  of  policies  with  latest
labour developments.

On Information and communication technology,  the  effective  management  of
information is crucial to organization  that  generates  such  a  volume  of
knowledge. In the year under review, the ARC developed a  new  ICT  strategy
and has established a number of new systems.

During the year under review, the ARC has committed a total  amount  of  R45
million towards capital infrastructure  and  renewal,  R25  million  towards
Information technology  upgrade  and  R27  million  towards  human  capacity
development.

Revenue from external funding at R219.3 million  increased  by  3.3%.  Total
remuneration costs increased  by  11.1%  largely  due  to  action  taken  to
address the remuneration levels of staff in ARC  which  has  lacked  behind.
The corrective action will improve the ability of the  ARC  to  attract  and
retain core scientific. Capital expenditure totalled R22.7  million.  During
2004/5 the ARC has committed a total budget of R44 million  to  address  the
infrastructure needs.

Audit opinion: The financial statements  fairly  present,  in  all  material
respects, the financial statements of the ARC  at  31  March  2005  and  the
results of its operations and cash flows for the year  then  ended,  in  the
manner required by the Public Finance Management Act, 1999  (Act  No.  1  of
1999) as amended.

MATTER OF EMPHASIS:

The report reflects non-compliance with the PFMA, with regards  to  internal
controls and submission of financial statements.

COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

While the committee accepted  the  annual  report,  it  also  expressed  the
following concerns:

     a)  The  ARC  strategy  in  disseminating  information  especially  to
        emerging farmers (and in the rural areas).
     b) The state of readiness by the institution to combat the  developing
        bird flu around the world, in the event it reaches the country.
     c) The technology transfer of skills and development.
     d) Participation by the institution in NEPAD activities.
     e) The challenges  posed  by  the  Climate  Change  the  readiness  to
        respond.
     f) The non-repairing of the facilities belonging to the ARC.

IT WAS AGREED THAT the ARC must provide written responses other questions.

FURTHER REQUESTED THE ARC TO:

      • Provide the committee  with  resource  challenges  that  makes  the
        institution not being able to fulfil its mandate.
      • The Committee indicated to do all it can to assist the institution;
        and
      • Strengthen networking with all Universities in South Africa.

3.  CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Having considered the 2004/05 Annual Reports  and  Financial  Statements  of
the Department  of  Agriculture  and  its  Public  Entities,  the  Portfolio
Committee recommends that:

      • A follow up meeting with the Department of Agriculture is  required
        to discuss the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme  (CASP)
        and MAFISA funding  and  the  problems  experienced  at  provincial
        levels;


      • While the Committee agrees that during the past year (2004/05)  the
        Department has made remarkable progress on various issues, such  as
        transformation of the  sector  at  all  levels,  by  ensuring  that
        agriculture  is  becoming  inclusive,  competitive  and   alleviate
        poverty. Much, however, remains to be done to  create  an  enabling
        environment to achieve the country’s strategic goals; and



      • The Committee extends special appreciation  to  the  Department  of
        Agriculture and all associated entities for  attending  the  annual
        report hearings and hoping matters of concern would be attended.

12. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture  and  Land  Affairs  on
   the Annual Reports and Financial Statements for 2004/05 of the Department
   of Land Affairs and its Public Entities, dated 8 November 2005:

          EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.  BACKGROUND

The Constitution of South Africa (Act No. 108 of 1996) recognises  that  the
Legislative Authority has an important role in the  processes  of  oversight
function in overseeing the performance of Departments and  public  entities.
Annual reporting is a mechanism by which department and associated  entities
account to Parliament on their activities.

Section 65 of the Public Finance  Management  Act  requires  that  Ministers
table the annual reports for the Departments and public entities  for  which
they are responsible by 30th September each year.

On the 30th  September,  the  Department  of  Land  Affairs  and  associated
entities namely, Commission on Restitution of Land Rights, Bala Farms  (Pty)
Limited, and KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama Trust Board, Khula Land  Reform  Credit
Facility, and Ncera Farms tabled their reports in terms of Section  65(1)(a)
of the Public Finance Management Act (Act No.1 of 1999).

Upon the referral by the  National  Assembly,  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
Agriculture and Land Affairs scheduled extended briefing sessions  with  the
Department of Land Affairs and associated public entities to  present  their
reports and financial  statements  including  the  report  of  the  Auditor-
General on Financial Statements for 2004/05.


2. OVERVIEW OF ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE  DEPARTMENT  AND  PUBLIC  ENTITIES  FOR
2004/05

The main purpose of  the  extended  briefing  sessions  were  to  provide  a
platform to departmental officials to  brief  Members  on  the  contents  of
2004/05 annual reports submitted to Parliament in terms  of  Public  Finance
Management Act. The presentations focused on  2004/5  targets,  achievements
and challenges, and audited Financial Statements ending at  31  March  2005.


2.1 Department of Land Affairs

The Director-General, Mr Glen Thomas presented the annual report.  The  main
focus of the presentation was on strategic  objectives,  performance  review
highlights in relation to Land Restitution, Land  Redistribution,  and  Land
Tenure,  Land  Planning  and  Information,  improved   governance   of   the
Department, and financial review for 2004/05.

2.2 Commission on Restitution of Land Rights

The Chief Land Claims Commissioner, Mr Tozi Gwanya presented the  commission
report on the 7th June. The main focus was on the  strategic  objectives  of
the Commission which include: providing  equitable  redress  to  victims  of
racial land dispossession in terms of the restitution Act No. 22 of 1994  as
amended; provide access to rights in  land,  including  land  ownership  and
sustainable development; to foster national  reconciliation  and  stability;
and  improve  household   welfare,   underpinning   economic   growth,   and
contributing to poverty alleviation.


2.3 Bala Farms (Pty) Limited

The Chief Finanacial Officer, Ms Sarah Choane presented the progress  report
on deregistration on the 5th April. Bala  Farms  is  a  state-owned  company
created by the former Bophuthatswana Administration to  buy  and  administer
farms outside the homeland territory. The company is being  deregistered  in
line with the department’s land policy. A new deadline of 31 March 2005  was
set. Properties which have not  been  disposed-off  by  that  date  will  be
transferred to the Department of Land Affairs for disposal.

The department does not provide any financial  assistance  to  the  company.
The company generates its own revenue from interest  earned  on  investments
and on the leasing of properties, and from the sale of  land.  Total  income
in 2003/04 was R1.3 million, with a net profit of R0.5 million.


2.4 KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama Trust Board

The Board member, Adv Robin Raubenheimer presented the report. The  KwaZulu-
Natal Ingonyama Trust Board was established in terms  of  the  KwaZulu-Natal
Ingonyama Trust Act (1994) as amended. The Board,  Chaired  by  His  Majesty
the King (or his nominee) and eight other members appointed by the  Minister
of Agriculture and Land Affairs, came into operations  in  October  1998  to
administer the affairs of Ingonyama Trust.

2.5 Khula Land Reform Credit Facility

The third annual report was of Khula. The General Manger, Mr  George  Mothoa
presented the report. The focus of the presentation  was  on  progress  made
since  the  last,  prospects,  challenges,  inequitable  Provincial   spread
Portfolio mix, capacity building and financial statements.

2.6 Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd

The fourth annual report presented was of Ncera Farms.  The  Chairperson  of
the Board, Mr Tommy Marais presented the report. The main focus was  on  the
establishment of the Service Centre, services to be rendered by the  centre,
progress made,  the  new  Board  appointed  by  the  Minister,  and  audited
financial statements.
3. COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

Based on 2004/05 annual reports and audited financial statements  presented,
the Committee has generally observed that:

      • The 2004/05 annual reports of the Department of  Land  Affairs  and
        associated entities have provided information on  service  delivery
        and reported on financial statements, management and audit  reports
        against the performance targets and  budgets  as  outlined  in  the
        strategic  plans  /  business  plans  and  Estimates  of   National
        Expenditure.
      • In  terms  of  Audit  opinions,  the  financial  statements  fairly
        present, in all material respects, the financial  position  of  the
        department and its entities at 31 March  2005  and  the  result  of
        their operations and  cash  flows  for  the  year  then  ended,  in
        accordance with prescribed accounting practices  and  in  a  manner
        required by the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No.  1  of
        1999).


      • Tabling of 2004/05 annual reports and financial statements  of  the
        Department of Land Affairs and public entities to Parliament by the
        Minister of Agriculture and Land  Affairs  has  complied  with  the
        requirements of the Public Finance Management Act.

1. REPORT

The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs,  having  considered
the Annual Reports and Financial Statements for 2004/05  of  the  Department
of Land Affairs and the public entities reporting  to  the  Minister  during
the extended briefing sessions, reports as follows:

2. ANNUAL REPORTS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  FOR  2004/05  OF  DEPARTMENT  OF
  LAND AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC ENTITIES

On the 1st of November 2005, the Committee completed its oversight  work  on
the reports of the Department of Land Affairs and the  associated  entities,
namely, the Commission on Restitution  of  Land  Rights,  Bala  Farms  (Pty)
Limited, and the KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama Trust Board.

2.1 DEPARTMENT OF LAND AFFAIRS

The Director-General, Mr Glen Thomas presented the annual report.  The  main
focus of the presentation was  on  performance  review  highlights  for  the
period 1 April 2004 and 31 March 2005 targets and  achievements  related  to
programmes such as Land Restitution, Land Redistribution, Land  Tenure,  and
financial  review  per  programme  expenditure  (that  is,   Administration,
Surveys and Mapping, Cadastral Surveys, Restitution,  Land  Reform,  Spatial
Planning and Information, and Auxiliary and Associated Services.

First, the Department of Land Affairs derives its mandate  from  Section  25
of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Act, 1996  (Act  108  of
1996), which protects property rights while placing  an  obligation  on  the
State  to  implement  land  reform.  Therefore,  the  Department   has   the
responsibility of  providing access to land and extend rights in land,  with
particular emphasis on the previously disadvantaged communities.

Expenditure per programme for 2004/05

Programme 1: Administration

The programme provides strategic and  logistical  support  in  the  form  of
executive  and  corporate  services.  For  the  period  under   review   the
expenditure of the programme amounted to R192 018 million  that  is  97%  of
the R198 447 million budget.

Programme 2: Surveys and Mapping

The objective of the programme is to  enhance  planning  and  monitoring  of
land  reform,  national  infrastructure  and  sustainable   development   by
providing accurate, up to date and accessible  maps  and  other  geo-spatial
information. For the period under review the  expenditure  amounted  to  R65
597 million that is 95% of the R68 993 million budget.

Programme 3: Cadastral Surveys

Key objective of the programme is to develop and  maintain  a  high  quality
cadastral survey  system  in  order  to  support  and  facilitate  all  land
development  including  land  reform.  For  the  period  under  review   the
programme expenditure amounted to R79 044 million that is  98%  of  the  R80
336 million budget.

Programme 4: Restitution

Key  objective  of  the  programme  is  to  have  persons   or   communities
dispossessed of property after 19 June 1913, as  a  result  of  past  racial
discriminatory laws and practices, restored  to  such  property  or  receive
just and equitable compensation.

The overall target of 74% has been achieved, 59 345 claims  settled  by  the
end of financial year, 20 351 claims outstanding. 6 536 settled  claims  are
rural, while 52 809 are urban. There was a 68% increase  in  the  number  of
claims settled in 2004/5 in relation to 2003/4.  A  total  of  10  520  land
claims were settled in the financial year. A total of 207 527 hectares  were
awarded in 2004/5 financial year. For the period under review the  programme
expenditure amounted to R1 182 780  billion  that  is  99.8%  of  the  total
budget.

Programme 5: Land Reform

Programme focus is to ensure that sustainable benefits  of  economic  growth
accrue to  previously  disadvantaged  communities,  groups  and  individuals
through the provision of land rights to  achieve  increased  income  levels,
productive land use and  well-planned  human  settlements.  For  the  period
under the review, the programme expenditure amounted  to  R453  653  million
that is 96% of the total budget of R472 753 million.

Programme 6: Spatial Planning and Information

The programme aims  to  establish  an  effective  and  efficient  system  of
spatial planning, land use management and  spatial  information  to  support
development and land reform in South Africa. For the  period  under  review,
the programme expenditure amounted to R15 180 million that  is  86%  of  the
total budget of R17 722 million.

Programme 7: Auxiliary and Associated Services

The programme provides auxiliary services and services associated  with  the
departmental aims through its sub-programmes. For the period  under  review,
the programme expenditure amounted to R2 624 million  that  is  32%  of  the
total budget of R8 224 million.

The total allocation to the Department was R2 031  882  billion.  The  total
actual spending for the same period was R1 990 899 billion that  is  98%  of
the total budget. The report reflects under-spending by 2% of the budget.

Audit opinion

The financial statements fairly  present,  in  all  material  respects,  the
financial position of the Department of Land Affairs at 31  March  2005  and
the results of its operations and cash flows for the  year  then  ended,  in
accordance with the Public Finance Management Act (Act No.  1  of  1999)  as
amended.

Matters of emphasis:

      • Forensic investigation into the  Regional  Land  Claim  Commissions
        (RLCCs); and
      • Internal control weaknesses

      COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

The Committee interrogated the report intensely  and  raised  the  following
concerns:

     a) The lack of sufficient capacity within the Department.
     b) Relations between the spheres of government in relation to planning
        and implementation of government programmes and projects.
     c)  The  challenges  imposed  by   implementation   of   Comprehensive
        Agricultural Support Programme (CASP).
     d) High land prices especially when the Government becomes  a  willing
        buyer.
     e) There is no mechanism and data in place to monitor farm evictions.
     f) The non-application of the expropriation  as  a  means  to  acquire
        land.
     g) Municipalities selling land to foreigners.
     h) Amalgamation of Extension of  Security  of  Tenure  Act   &  Labour
        Tenants Act have their own challenges;
     i) People evicted in most cases do not have legal support.
     j) Strategic partners in some projects have a major share holding.

WHILE THE COMMITTEE ACCEPTED the report, it also  commended  the  Department
on the expenditure patterns compared to the previous years.

AND FURTHER RECOMMENDED THAT the department must  table  the  implementation
plan of the Land Summit recommendations.


2.2  COMMISSION ON RESTITUTION OF LAND RIGHTS

The  Chief  Land  Claims  Commissioner  and  the  Chief  Financial  Officer,
presented the Annual Report:

a)    Strategic Objective and Mandate of the Commission
To provide equitable redress to victims  of  racial  land  dispossession  in
terms of the restitution Act No. 22 of 1994 as amended;
To  provide  access  to  rights  in  land,  including  land  ownership   and
sustainable development;
Foster national reconciliation and stability; and
Improve household welfare, underpinning  economic  growth,  contributing  to
poverty alleviation

b)    Financial Perspective: Details of Expenditure

Transfer Payments

*     Land Acquisition       R 489 554 million;
*     Financial Compensation R 505 286 million; and
*     Development Grants          R 23 774 million

Compensation of Employees         R79 617 million

Goods and Services                R80 590 million

Capital Assets                    R3 405 million

TOTAL                  R 1.1 billion

c)    Total Financial Commitments for all claims settled to date

Land Acquisition       R1.7 billion
Financial Compensation R 2.4 billion
Restitution Grants           R 0.316 billion
Settlement Planning Grant    R 0.142 billion

Total Transfer Payments      R4.6 billion (Land  Acquisition  is  linked  to
restitution grants for purposes of sustainable  development.  This  amounted
to R2.1 billion for claims settled to date).

d)    Funding of Restitution Programme

The funding of restitution programme has demonstrated the political will  to
support land reform in general and restitution in particular. President,  in
the  State  of  the  Nation  Address  gave  a   three-year   extension   for
finalization of the outstanding land claims.  Minister  of  Finance  in  the
Budget Speech of  22  February,  announced  R  6  billion  increase  on  the
restitution budget over the next three years.

e)    Critical Issues: Customer Perspective

Financial Compensation as a form of redress

      • Attractive to poor to address poverty related needs;
      • Does not offer lasting solutions to poverty;
      • Does not contribute to resolving the problem of skewed ownership;
      • Leads to family disputes and fraud.

Land Restoration

      • 887 093 hectares have been delivered by restitution to date;
      • More than 172 769 households have benefited;
      • Resettlement on restored land is problematic as  the  establishment
        of  human   settlement   is   a   long   process   involving   bulk
        infrastructuire (water, roads, electricity, housing etc);
      •  Re-skilling  of  restitution  beneficiaries  is  a  long  process,
        especially for highly commercial agriculture;
      • Rely on Provincial Department of Agriculture for capacity  building
        and training of claimants;
      • Meetings were held with AgriSA  to  discuss  mentorship/development
        programs, but not much has come out of the general agreement;
      •  More  post-settlement  support  needed  for  claimants   including
        technical  assistance,  financial  services,  project   management,
        entrepreneurship, business training;
      • Some traditional Leaders wrongfully believe that land  restored  to
        the claimant community is  their  personal  property.  This  matter
        still needs to be addressed  with  the  Leadership  of  Traditional
        leaders;
      •  The  Commission  is  speaking  to  NGOs  about  their  support  to
        restitution beneficiaries so that they can make optimal use of  the
        restored land;
      • There is  an  increasing  number  of  people  who  would  like  the
        Restitution Act to be amended to allow for re-opening so  that  new
        land claims can be lodged. Minister has ruled re-opening out mainly
        for the following reasons:

     a) Most urban claimants want financial compensation, which defeats the
        main aims of land redistribution;
     b) Restitution was intended to be a symbolic apology by new democratic
        government to the victims of racial land dispossession;
     c) The cut-off dates were to ensure certainty and economic stability;
     d) The claims lodged require R 17 billion to settle, re-opening  would
        attract too many new claims, which the state find it  difficult  to
        afford; and
     e)  Those who still want land can be referred  to  other  land  reform
        programmes of government.

Process MAP for Settlement of claims include the following stages:

      • Lodgment and registration of claims;
      • Validation (acceptance criteria)
      • Claimant verification (ID books, family trees, affidavits etc)
      • Valuation of land rights  lost  (use  of  independent  Professional
        Valuers);
      • Negotiations (landowners, claimants and other stakeholders);
      •   Options   assessment   (financial   compensation,    restoration,
        feasibility studies);
      • Referral (Minister or Land Claims Court)
      • Implementation of Restitution Award (land  use  plans,  development
        plans etc).

All the stages have different sub-processes. Rural claims take  much  longer
to process than urban claims. Commission agreed to shorten the cycle by  for
rural claims from  three  years  to  one  year.  Procurement  of  goods  and
services still  takes  a  long  time  and  thus  delaying  for  example  the
appointment of Service Providers for some  of  processes  such  as  claimant
verification or valuations. The introduction of Supply Chain  Management  by
Department of Land Affairs will help  to  address  procurement  issues.  The
issue  of  determining  just  and  equitable  compensation,  in  line   with
Constitution, is still a  challenge  in  some  cases,  given  the  collusion
between Valuers and Landowners.

In Mpumalanga, the Commission has noticed the over-statement of land  values
in some of the Badplaas farms. Legal steps have been taken to correct  this.
Landowners still continue  demanding  high  prices  for  land.  The  booming
economy and Land reform may have contributed to the increase in  demand  for
land  which  may  influence  the  increase  in   land   prices.   Government
intervention may be necessary for stabilizing land prices. This may  include
introducing:

      • Ceiling on the size of land ownership;
      • Ceiling on land prices;
      • Land tax based on size of land owned; and
      • Pursuit of expropriation

Packaging of  settlement  of  claims  with  highly  commercial  agricultural
projects,  such  as  sugar  cane,  forestry,  citrus,  banana  etc  requires
business modelling, hence the use of Strategic Partnerships.  Commission  is
working closely with some Municipalities.

F) Corporate Governance Perspective: Balanced Scorecard

 State is the shareholder hence the Commission  is  tabling  the  report  to
Parliament. The same report will be shared with Provincial  Governments  and
Municipalities. Commission held its statutory  (section  5  of  Restitution)
Commissioners meetings this year where discussion among others on:

      • Implementation Plan (High drive 2008) which was  presented  to  the
        Committee on the 18 March 2005;
      • Strategic Planning for settling outstanding claims;
      • Review progress reports from each RLCC;
      • Budget and expenditure review;
      • Risk management (Risk register and Risk Management Committee);
      • Staffing of the Commission.

     g) Land Claims Court Cases

      •  Mashilane  Community  vs  Minister  (LCC  No.  74/2003).  Aventura
        Blydepoort & Swadini, Court held that the Minister  must  take  the
        administrative decision to finalize the claim;
      • Mhlangu N vs Minister (SCA No. 572/2003). SCA decided that the  LCC
        should adjudicate on the validity of the claim;
      • Mandla C Khumalo vs Minister (LCC No.  109/99).  Court  decided  to
        give restitution award in favour of the claimant;
      • Richtersveld Community vs Alexkor and Government (LCC No.  151/98).
        Constitutional Court confirmed finding of SCA, awarding  land  plus
        mineral rights and precious stones to the community;
      • JMC Prinsloo and Botha Famity Trust vs Ndebele  Ndzundza  community
        decided to accept the validity  of  the  claim  and  confirmed  the
        decision of the Land Claims Commission.

COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

THE COMMITTEE CONSIDERED THE REPORT AND NOTED:

     a) The progress made by the Commission despite  the  difficulties  and
        enormous challenges and problems;
     b) The Committee will continue supporting the Commission when ever  it
        is possible;
     c) On the other hand, the Commission must also  avail  information  to
        the committee in relation bottle necks;
     d) The issue of Districts and  Local  Municipalities  in  relation  to
        sound financial management needs to be attended;
     e) The role and contribution of Strategic partners in the  restitution
        process needs to be considered to ensure that beneficiaries do  not
        loose out in such relationships;
     f) The non-utilization of the Expropriation by the Commission  despite
        being constitutional in terms of Section 25(2) of the  Constitution
        of the Republic;
     g) The uncooperative role  played  by  organised  agriculture  in  the
        restitution process; and
     h) The role played by unscrupulous valuers in relation to land  prices
        in the country.

AND THEREFORE, THE COMMITTEE AGREED  to  adopt  the  Annual  Report  of  the
Commission.

FURTHER AGREED THAT:

     a) In the provinces, there are still many  practical  challenges  that
        need to be addressed;
     b) The people who missed the 31 December 1998 deadline, can  in  terms
        of the Section 6(2)(b) of the Act, make  use  of  other  Government
        programmes such as the Redistribution and Land Tenure.

2.3 BALA FARMS (PTY) LIMITED

Bala  Farms  (Pty)  is  a  state-owned  company  created   by   the   former
Bophuthatswana administration  to  buy  and  administer  farms  outside  the
homeland territory. The company is  being  deregistered  in  line  with  the
Department’s land reform policy. A new deadline of 31 March  2005  was  set.
Properties  which  have  not  been  disposed-off  by  that  date   will   be
transferred to the Department of Land Affairs for disposal.

On progress on the properties remaining, the company reports that 4  farming
units consisting of 7 farm portions had to be transferred to the  identified
beneficiaries. Portions 41, 64, 83 of farm Grootfontein  115  JO  have  been
transferred to Department to complete the  disposal  process,  as  this  was
delaying de-registration. Portions 22 of farm Blaauwbank  127  JO  has  also
been transferred.

On the remaining properties, the company reports  that  Portion  2  of  farm
Logaga 124 KP has been disposed of. Portion 14 of farm De Putten 56  JO  has
been transferred free of charge to beneficiary community.

Deregistration Process meant that first, all assets and liabilities  had  to
be liquidated or ceded to the Department. All debts were  settled  including
an amount of R1.5 million owed  to  the  North  West  (Loan  was  originally
provided by Agricor). The last payments by the company were made on 9  March
2005 and a cession of all existing  claims  in  favour  of  or  against  the
company had to be issued as a contigent. All outstanding lease rentals  were
collected and pro rata payments for remaining periods  of  the  leases  were
paid over to beneficiaries.

Second, a Certificate of compliance  has  to  be  issued  by  South  African
Revenue (SARS). A dispute with SARS regarding the money owed to  or  by  the
company took longer to resolve  than  anticipated.  Nevertheless,  this  was
resolved in March 2005 after after excellent co-operation  with  SARS  staff
and in depth analysis of all matters relating to VAT  and  Income  Tax.  The
final results have been incorporated into the financial  statements  of  the
company for 2004/5 financial year. The final certificate will be  issued  to
the Registrar of Companies after the 2005 audit  has  been  completed.  SARS
was requested to cancel the company’s registration for PAYE, SDL & VAT.

Third, relevant resolutions had to be taken  by  the  Board,  that  is,  the
deregistration  of  the  Company;  the   transfer   of   shareholding   from
Chairperson  of  Company  to  the  Department;  the  payment  of  the   pre-
deregistration  dividend  of  R  15.3  million  declared  and  paid  to  the
Department on 23 March 2005; and the application of deregistration was  sent
to the Registrar on 30 March 2005.

Finally, accounting, auditing and legal matters had  to  be  satisfied.  All
bank accounts have been  closed  subsequent  to  the  payment  of  the  pre-
deregistration dividend; the financial statements  were  compiled  in  March
2005; the Auditor-General has commenced with the final  audit  of  financial
statements. Once the audit is complete, the statements will be  lodged  with
SARS. The Registrar of Companies will then in a position to  deregister  the
company because the company will hold  no  further  liabilities  for  Income
Tax, VAT, PAYE or SDL.

The company has ceased its operations and the final  deregistration  is  now
in the hands of the Auditor-General, the South African Revenue  Service  and
the Registrar of Companies.



Audit opinion


The financial statements fairly  present,  in  all  material  respects,  the
financial position of Bala Farms (Pty) Ltd at 31 March 2005 and the  results
of its operations and cash flows for the year  then  ended,  in  the  manner
required by the Public Finance  Management  Act  (Act  No.  1  of  1999)  as
amended and the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No. 61 of 1973)

COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

The Committee considered AND ACCEPTED THE  REPORT  AND  FURTHER  APPRECIATED
the  work  done  by  the  Company  and   the   Department   for   completing
deregistration  process  within  stipulated  time  and  for  complying   the
instruction.
2.4 KWAZULU-NATAL INGONYAMA TRUST BOARD

The KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama Trust Board was  established  in  terms  of  the
KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama Trust Act (1994) as amended. The Board,  Chaired  by
His Majesty the King (or his nominee) and eight other members  appointed  by
the Minister of Land  Affairs,  came  into  operation  in  October  1998  to
administer the affairs of the Ingonyama Trust.

The core business of the trust is to manage  its  2.7  million  hectares  of
land, spread throughout KwaZulu-Natal, for the material benefit  and  social
well-being of individual tribe members. Activities undertaken by  the  board
include: transferring townships to local authorities;  granting  permissions
to occupy (PTOs);  granting  servitudes;  issuing  leases;  identifying  and
transferring land for state domestic purposes; registering assets;  minerals
administration; restructuring state forests; compiling asset registers;  and
developing a land tenure information system.

The Board has granted 130 leases covering 10 000 hectares,  which  generates
revenue of about R600 000 a year. A further 12 leases are  being  processed,
covering 1 684 hectares with an estimated revenue of R145 000 per year.  The
leases cover land for diverse uses, such as shopping  centers,  game  parks,
residential    developments,    lodges,     petrol     filling     stations,
telecommunication  base  stations,   sugar   cane   farming,   grazing   and
aquaculture projects.

A total income of R12.5  million  was  earned  for  2004/5,  through  rental
income, royalty income other incomes derived from investment, grant  in  aid
receipts.  Expenses amounted to R12.5 million as a result of  administration
and other expenses  including  provisions.  The  net  income  for  the  year
amounted to R3.7 million.

The following programmes will be implemented over the medium term:

         • Finalizing the transfer  of  KwaZulu-Natal  townships  to  local
           authorities,  establishing  township  registers  and   upgrading
           tenure rights;
         • Extending the security of tenure on  trust  land  and  providing
           rental income to communities living on trust land;
         • Concluding the registration of all vested assets in the name  of
           the trust, which involves the consolidation and registration  of
           titles for each traditional authority area (the trust  currently
           holds 1 478 titles); and
         • Finalizing the transfer of  land  used  for  state  purposes  to
           relevant government Departments and municipalities.

      Audit opinion:


The Auditor-General did not express an opinion on the  financial  statements
because of the significance of the matters.

EMPHASIS OF MATTER: without further qualifying the audit opinion,  attention
is drawn to the following matters:

         • Contingent liability arrear rates – Municipalities
         • Internal audit and audit committee
         • Weaknesses in internal control; and
         • Non-compliance to the PFMA


      COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

While the committee accepted the report, it was concerned about  the  issues
raised by the Auditor-General.

AND RECOMMENDED THAT:

         • The issues be referred to Standing Committee on Public  Accounts
           (SCOPA) for further interrogation;
         • The Department of Land Affairs must also  provide  responses  on
           the issues.

2.5 KHULA LAND REFORM CREDIT FACILITY

Khula Land Reform Empowerment Facility is a  Section  21  Company  that  was
formed by Khula Enterprise Finance  Limited  in  2003  as  mandated  by  the
Department of Land Affairs, to advance monies received from donors  for  the
establishment of commercially viable projects on redistributed land.
Khula Enterprise Finance established in 2003.  Since  it  is  a  Section  21
Company, Khula enterprise Finance Limited cannot benefit  from  the  company
in terms of the Companies Act, and therefore Khula Land  Reform  Empowerment
Facility is not considered to be a subsidiary of its founding company.

Khula Land Reform Empowerment Facility earns its revenue from  loan  funding
advanced and through grants received mainly  from  the  Department  of  Land
Affairs, Department of Environmental Affairs and the European Union.

Audit opinion: The financial statements  fairly  present,  in  all  material
respects, the financial position of  the  company  at  31  March  2005,  the
results of its operations, changes in equity and cash  flows  for  the  year
then ended,  in  accordance  with  South  African  Statements  of  Generally
Accepted Accounting Practice, and in manner required by the  Public  Finance
Management Act of 1999, as amended.

COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

THE COMMITTEE CONSIDERED the report and expressed the following concerns:

     a) The funds are channelled through commercial Banks, and there is  no
        mechanism to monitor whether rates charged are not exorbitant.
     b) The projects  funded  by  the  Entity  are  not  visible  in  other
        provinces.
     c) The relationship between Khula and Land Bank is not clear  although
        the goal is one.
     d) The relationship  with  Sector  Education  and  Training  Authority
        (Agriculture SETA) is not clear.

The Committee accepted the report.
2.6 NCERA FARMS (PTY) LTD

Ncera farms (Pty) Limited is a public company listed under  schedule  3B  in
terms of the PFMA as amended, with the Department as the  sole  shareholder.
It is situated in the Eastern Cape on state-owned land  of  approximately  4
000 hectares, and is dedicated  to  assisting  small  and  emerging  farmers
through providing various services to the surrounding rural  communities  in
the form of advice, extension services, training and so on.

Government transfers to the company over the MTEF period  are  projected  at
R2.4 million, R2.5 million and R2.7 million.

Budget allocation for 2004/5 is constituted of Transfer from the  Department
of Agriculture of R2 240 million, plus own revenue raise of R1 016  million.
Total funds available R3 256 million. The actual expenditure for 2004/5  was
R2 831  million.  The  expenditure  relates  to  personnel,  administrative,
veterinary  and   medicine   cost,   maintenance,   transport,   water   and
electricity, and security services.


Internal Audit Report


The report of the Internal Audit and Financial Statements was  reviewed  and
revealed no problems with regard  to  internal  control  or  cases  of  non-
compliance to the requirements of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999.

COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

The Portfolio Committee interrogated the report  intensely  and  raised  the
following concerns:
   a) Management fees were too high for example,  personnel  expenditure  is
      19.9 %, administrative 10.8% and management  fees  36%  of  the  total
      budget.
   b) Sustainability of the farms where the Department is withdrawing;
   c) The welfare of workers in the project;
   d)  The  optimum  utilization  of  the  Service  Centre  by   surrounding
      communities; and
   e) Effective transfer of skills to beneficiaries.

The COMMITTEE accepted the annual report;

AND REQUESTED TO BE provided with a full report  on  the  profitability  and
activities to take place in the Enterprises.


3. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Having considered the 2004/05 annual reports  and  financial  statements  of
the Department of Land  Affairs  and  its  public  entities,  the  Portfolio
Committee recommends that:


    • While the committee accepted the reports presented, the Department  of
      Land Affairs makes transfer payments to Provincial Governments,  Local
      Authorities and community based legal entities on the basis of  Agency
      Agreements. The  purpose  of  such  transfers  is  to  facilitate  the
      implementation  of  projects  such  as  infrastructure,  tenure,   and
      agricultural support arising from the restitution  and  redistribution
      of land to beneficiaries.


    • The Department  of  Land  Affairs  must  remain  accountable  for  the
      expenditure of  such  transfer  funds.  Compliance  in  terms  of  the
      Division of Revenue Act needs to be examined to  assess  whether  that
      the nature of these transactions does not fall within the ambit of the
      law so that those institutions who do not comply, necessary mechanisms
      could be taken to rectify the situation.


    • The Committee extends  special  appreciation  to  Department  of  Land
      Affairs and all associated entities for attending  the  annual  report
      hearing sessions and  requesting  all  matters  of  concern  would  be
      attended.

 13. Report of the Portfolio Committee on  Foreign  Affairs  on  the  Annual
     Report of the Department of Foreign Affairs 2004/05, dated  9  November
     2005:

      The Portfolio Committee  on  Foreign  Affairs  having  considered  the
      Annual Report of the Department of Foreign Affairs  2004/05,  referred
      to it, reports that it has completed its deliberations thereon.

14. Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on Study Tour to
   Mozambique, dated 8 November 2005:

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having undertaken a study tour
   to Mozambique from 31 July – 03 August 2005, reports as follows:


1. Introduction


  The Standing Committee on Public Accounts undertook a study tour to the
  Mozambican Parliament. The purpose of the study tour was to obtain
  insight into the procedural operations of the Public Accounts committee
  and the Finance committee in the execution of their oversight of public
  finance management.


  It was also the Committees intention to gain an understanding of the
  audit process followed in Mozambique. In the Committees interaction the
  Committee sought to determine the style, approach and methodology of
  their engagement with the executive, their system of dealing with and
  prioritization of audit reports and their progress in performance
  auditing.


  The interaction allowed the delegation to gain first hand knowledge of
  the management and conduct of the Public Accounts Committee in the
  handling of their general state of accounts and its interaction with
  other relevant committees and stakeholders such as the Administrative
  Tribunal, assigned with auditing functions.


  Furthermore, the committee sought to establish links with Mozambican
  public representatives and institutions at national level.


2. Delegation


  The Delegation consisted of the following members:


  African National Congress


  Dr G Koornhof
  Mr D Gumede
  Ms L Mabe
  Mr R Mofokeng
  Ms L Mashiane


  Democratic Alliance


  Ms A Dreyer


  United Democratic Movement


  Mr G Madikiza


  United Christian Democratic Movement


  Mr B Pule


  Committee Secretary accompanying the Delegation


  Mr G Dixon


  Office of the Auditor-General


  Ms N Hlasa
  Ms Z Keto


3. Courtesy visit to the SA High Commission in Mozambique


  The delegation paid a courtesy visit to the South African High
  Commissioner, Ms Thandi Lujabe Rankoe, who briefed the Committee on South
  African / Mozambican relations and Bi-lateral Agreements between the two
  countries.  The report, attached as Annexure A, is included for the
  record.


  The First Secretary Consular, Ms NC Nyamande, briefed the committee on
  labour movements between the two countries, including visa control and
  border post detention centres.


  Amongst the issues highlighted were:


      A. Deportation problems such as the unavailability of funds to assist
         people awaiting deportation. (e.g accommodation, food, medication)


      B. Difficulty with regard to the verification of SA Citizens, due to
         the fact that they enter Mozambique without the proper
         documentation.


         (Please see the attached report for further information)


4. Meeting with the Planning and Budget Committee Chairperson in the
  Mozambique Parliament


  The Mozambican Parliament was in recess at the time of the visit and the
  Chairperson, Mrs Virginia Verdeia, kindly took time out of her
  constituency work to assist the delegation. The Mozambican Parliament
  sits for 90 days per year. The 1st Semester is from 01 March to 10 May.
  The recess is until 15 October. The second semester is from mid-October
  to the first week in December.


  The Mozambican Parliament is composed of eight specialized commissions.
  They are:


     i. Planning and Budget
    ii. Social Affairs, Gender and Environment
   iii. Economic Activities and Services
    iv. Defence and Public Order
              v. Agriculture, Regional Development, Public Administration
                 and Local Government
    vi. Internal Relations
   vii. Legal Affairs and Human Rights
  viii.  Petitions


  The Planning and Budget Committee was the closest committee that fit the
  description of a public accounts committee in Mozambique.


  The majority party, FRELIMO, chairs the Planning and Budget Committee.
  Ten FRELIMO members and five members of the RENAMO Electoral Union
  proportionally represent the Committees membership.


  The oversight role of the Planning and Budget Committee is more in line
  with South Africa’s Joint Budget Committee, than the South African system
  of SCOPA and Auditor-General.  The Mozambican system uses the Planning
  and Budget committee to oversee the approval of the Budget and the
  Judiciary body known as the Administrative Tribunal to investigate the
  financial statements submitted by government departments.


   1. Planning and Budget Committee’s Oversight Role


  The Ministry of Finance prepares a budget proposal known as the Plano
  Economico e Social (PES), the English translation is the “Economic and
  Social Plan”, by the end of September of each year and tables this state
  budget to Parliament.  This budget proposal is debated and approved by
  Parliament during its second session from October to December.


  During the budget drafting process, before September, the Planning and
  Budgeting Committee conducts oversight visits of the various Provinces
  during the constituency period.  Their focus is to evaluate the execution
  of the first semester’s budget.  Provinces discuss with the Planning and
  Budget Committee proposals they have for the new budget, problems that
  they have experienced and issues that need addressing. This preparatory
  work allows this committee to analyse the budget proposal submitted by
  the Ministry of Finance at the end of September.  During this period of
  oversight visits, the other committees in Parliament conduct similar
  visits in order to address the budget proposals in their areas of
  competence.


  During the second semester deliberations, from October to December, the
  Planning and Budget Committee can call Ministers to discuss the proposals
  made.  Each Committee, including the Planning and Budget Committee, will
  revise the proposal in its respective area.  The reports on the budget
  proposal are tabled and discussed in the plenary session of Parliament.


  It must be noted that the Planning and Budget Committee does not
  interrogate each department’s audited financial statements or accounts.
  According to law, a court of law known as the Administrative Tribunal
  performs this function. The Planning and Budgeting Committees main focus
  is the global picture of the general state of the accounts, produced by
  the Ministry of Finance.


5. The Administrative Tribunal and the Oversight of Financial Management


  The Administrative Tribunal is a judicial body that has the
  responsibility of auditing the financial institutions. Its function is
  equivalent to that of the Auditor-General of South Africa but it plays a
  further multi-functionary role in the oversight of public finances.


  The Administrative Tribunal inter alia focuses on the following issues
  with regard to public finances:
- It performs the audits of the financial statements
- It interrogates the audited financial statements
- It administers government contracts


  5.1 Auditing of financial statements


  There are three types of audits:
- Prior inspections
- Audits of departments
- General account


  5.2 Prior inspections


  The Administrative Tribunal reviews the governments contract proposals
  for a specific activity.  Procurement contracts are assessed according to
  legislation and compliance with regulations.  The Administrative Tribunal
  also expresses an opinion on the necessity of the specific activity.


  5.3 Audits of departments


  Each state institution prepares its financial statements, which are
  accounts on the execution of the budget.  These financial statements are
  sent to the Administrative Tribunal which interrogates the statements and
  expresses an opinion on them.


  The Administrative Tribunal possesses the required skills level to assess
  the accounts and is tasked with this process by law.  After the review,
  the Administrative Tribunal has the power to investigate and report
  financial misconduct and can impose sanctions and mete out punishment to
  offending officials. The legal experts follow up on the legal and
  financial sanctions that should be taken.  There are three sanctions
  applicable:    - Disciplinary procedures
                                  - Criminal procedures
                                  - Financial procedures


  The ability to impose criminal and financial sanctions is considered a
  strength of the system.  The Administrative Tribunal works hand in hand
  with other judiciary bodies to investigate the person/s responsible for
  mismanagement and to determine the applicable charge. Disciplinary
  procedures are left to the Ministry of Finance to implement.


  5.4 General Account


  The General Account is prepared by the Minister of Finance and is sent to
  the Administrative Tribunal.  The Administrative Tribunal prepares a
  report or opinion on the General Account.  The Administrative Tribunal
  has no decision-making powers in regard to the General Account but
  expresses an opinion and tables it to Parliament.


  The National Treasury Directorate in the Ministry of Finance assesses the
  review.  The Ministry of Finance uses the information in preparation for
  the tabling of the report to Parliament.


  The Administrative Tribunal’s involvement in this process is similar to
  the Auditor-General of South Africa’s external audit of accounts.  The
  Ministry of Finance’s report is referee to the Planning and Budget
  Committee.  The Administrative Tribunal strongly criticizes the
  administration of the state accounts and the Planning and Budget
  committee often has to call both the Administrative Tribunal and Ministry
  of Finance to investigate the difference of opinion.  The Planning and
  Budget committee has the final opinion with regard to the general
  account.


6. Ministry of State Administration


  The Ministry of State Administration was established in 1995.  Its
  function is to control the activities of the Ministries particularly in
  terms of local municipalities.  Initially it did not have enough staff to
  carry out its functions effectively.  The Ministry of State
  Administration was re-organized and in 2004 its complement was increased
  to effectively carry out its mandate.


  Its investigations reveal that there was a relaxed attitude to the
  adherence to rules and regulations pertaining to the budget and human
  resources.  In several instances the departments and institutions did not
  follow rules or know that these rules existed.


  The Ministry of State Administration now has inspectorate teams carrying
  out inspections on two provinces per month.  In addition each Ministry
  carries out sector specific inspections such as in labour, health,
  education, etc.


  The Ministry of State Administration is presently revising the concept of
  inspections.  The issue is whether to specialize on specific portfolios
  or do inspections on a global scale with regard to the legal framework
  applicable for financial management, human resources and implementation
  of ministerial policy


7. Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Administration and Local Government


  The Committee is composed of 15 MPs proportionally represented by ten
  FRELIMO and five RENAMO Electoral Union members.  The committee is
  divided into three sub-groups composed of:


      - Agriculture
      - Regional development
      - Public administration and local government
  The committee’s involvement in the budget process is to conduct visits to
  institutions and investigate their plans for the budget.  The committee
  conducts oversight visits to determine the extent of work already carried
  out.  The committee reports and expresses an opinion on those
  observations.


8. Ministry of Finance


  Organization of the Ministry


  The Permanent Secretary is a recent appointment.  The Prime Minister
  based on the Minister’s proposals appoints the Permanent Secretary.  The
  appointee fulfills the role of technical and administrative functions and
  works with the Minister.


  8.1 National Directorates


  Planning and Budgeting:  Preparation of budget
  Public Accounts:  Follow-up execution of budget and prepares a quarterly
  report.  At the end of the year the Permanent Secretary prepares the
  General Account.


  National Treasury:


      i. Financial planning
     ii. Make payments
    iii. 3 months financial report
     iv. Management of debt
      v. Responsible for international relations
     vi. Oversee Public Enterprises
    vii. Central Bank


  The Ministry also has a General Directorate of finances that acts as the
  internal audit body.


9. Conclusion


  The Administrative Tribunal’s role has a number of advantages in terms of
  oversight. It is equipped with the legal framework to assess the
  financial statements, investigate maladministration and prosecute
  offenders. It gives the exercise of overseeing the expenditure of public
  finances the power to enforce its findings and resolutions.


  The Auditor-General system and the court system have strengths and
  weaknesses that should be discussed.  The major shortcoming of the court
  system is that there is a distance between the interaction of the
  Planning and Budget committee and the Administrative Tribunal.
  The Planning and Budget Committee proposed further interaction with SCOPA
  at the Southern African Development Community Organisation of Public
  Accounts Committees (SADCOPAC) level.  It is in favour of brainstorming
  the most suitable system for oversight of public finances in Southern
  Africa.


  Thanks and appreciation


  In most instances the Committee achieved the purpose of the tour by
  obtaining comparative insight into the operations, procedure and
  methodology of the Public Accounts, Audit and Finance Committees in the
  execution of the oversight and monitoring of public finance management.
  The interaction with the Planning and Budget committee was fruitful and
  we established favourable links with the members of the committee.


  One of the challenges the delegation had to face related to the apparent
  differences between the Portuguese system and the Westminster system of
  government. The interaction was often disjointed and common ground had to
  be established before a fruitful discussion could commence. The language
  barrier posed another challenge, however, the translator provided by the
  South African High Commission was of tremendous help in regard to
  understanding the concepts used in Mozambique.


  The Committee extends its thanks and appreciation to the Mozambique
  Chairpersons of the Planning and Budget committee, the Portfolio
  Committee on Agriculture, Administration and Local power, the National
  Treasury, the Ministry of Public Administration for affording the
  Committee the time out of its busy schedules.  The Committee further
  acknowledges the invaluable assistance rendered by the High Commission to
  the success of the tour.
  The initial study tour proposal included a visit to the Kenyan
  Government.  Due to the Kenyan Parliamentary recess, this leg is
  postponed until further notice.






  [SEE ANNEXURE - scan hardcopies From pages 2733 – 2754]








  Report to be considered.



                          TUESDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 15 November
         2005:


          i) Patents Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
             75)
National Assembly:

The Speaker

1.    Messages from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly


           1) Message from National Council of Provinces to National
              Assembly


         Bill, as amended, passed by National Council of Provinces on 15
         November 2005 and transmitted for consideration of Council’s
         amendments:


              i) Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain
                 Laws Bill [B 25D – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76)

2.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

    (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Housing for consideration and report. The Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing
             Finance Corporation Limited for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2004-2005.
(2)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Labour
           for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements of Vote 17 is referred to the
           Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 – Department of
             Labour for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 17 for 2004-2005
             [RP 113-2005].

    (3)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration:

          a) Government Notice No 763 published in Government Gazette No
             27846 dated 05 August 2005: Correction Notice to amend
             Government Notice No 533 published in Government Gazette No
             27641 dated 10 June 2005 to substitute the word “Calitzdorp”
             for “Ladysmith”.


          b) Government Notice No 767 published in Government Gazette No
             27846 dated 05 August 2005: Notice of List of Protected Tree
             Species, made in terms of section 15(3) of the National
             Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).


          c) Government Notice No 780 published in Government Gazette No
             27859 dated 01 August 2005: Rates and charges, made in terms
             of section 11 of the Water Research Act, 1971 (Act No 34 of
             1971).


          d) General Notice No 1391 published in Government Gazette No
             27877 dated 05 August 2005: Publication of draft Forestry Laws
             Amendment Bill for comment.


    (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration. The Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Veterinary Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005.


    (5)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and the Joint Monitoring Committee on the
         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women for
         consideration and report:


          a) Special Report from the South African Women Entrepreneurs – A
             burgeoning force in our economy for 2005.


    (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 22 is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 – Department of
             Defence for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 22 for 2004-2005
             [RP 159-2005].
     (7)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of
         Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons
         for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund
             (UYF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


    (8)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry. The Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Group Annual Financial Statements of the National Empowerment
             Fund for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Micro Finance
             Regulatory Council (MFRC) for the year ended 31 December 2004.


    (9)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister of Education dated 25 October 2005 to
             the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
             65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1
             of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
             Report of the Education Labour Relations Council for 2004-
             2005.


    (10)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government and the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report of the Auditor-General on the Submission of Financial
             Statements by Municipalities for the financial year ended 30
             June 2005 [RP 221-2005].


    (11)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent
         Auditor on the Financial Statements are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) National Treasury Consolidated Financial Information for the
             year ended 31 March 2005, including:


             (i) Report of the Auditor-General on the Consolidated
                  Financial Information of National Departments, National
                  Revenue Fund, State Debt and Tax and Loan Accounts of the
                  National Treasury (“Department”) for the year ended 31
                  March 2005;


             (ii)      Report of the Auditor-General on the Consolidated
                  Financial Information of Constitutional Institutions,
                  Schedule 2, 3A and 3B Public Entities and Trading Accounts
                  (“Entities”) for the year ended 31 March 2005.


    (12)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
             Fund (UIF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


    (13)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and the Standing Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Letter from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
             Development dated 26 October 2005 to the Speaker of the
             National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public
             Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining
             the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the Legal Aid
             Board for 2004-2005.


          b) Letter from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
             Development dated 26 October 2005 to the Speaker of the
             National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public
             Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining
             the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the South
             African Law Reform Commission for 2004-2005.


    (14)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs and the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs
             dated 27 October 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
             in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management
             Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the
             tabling of the Annual Report of Inala Farms for 2004-2005.


    (15)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Sport and Recreation and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister of Sport and Recreation dated 28
             October 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms
             of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
             Annual Report of Boxing South Africa for 2004-2005.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries Sector
         Education and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2004-2005, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2004-2005 [RP 90-2005].

2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
         Inspectorate for 2004-2005 [RP 125-2005].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
      National Council of Provinces, as joint co-chairpersons, present the
      First Report of the Joint Coordinating Committee on the African Peer
      Review Mechanism dated 15 November 2005 as follows:

      1.    Introduction

President Mbeki formally submitted South Africa to a peer review process
under the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) on 28 September 2005.

The APRM is an African-owned and driven initiative that seeks to improve
governance and national management.  It is voluntarily acceded to by the
Member States of the African Union as an African self-monitoring mechanism.
 The main purpose of the APRM is to encourage participating Member States
to ensure that their policies and practices conform to the agreed
political, economic and corporate governance values, codes and standards.
It further seeks to ensure that the mutually agreed objectives in socio-
economic development elaborated in the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) are achieved.

The process of self-assessment and review would take approximately nine
months to complete (October 2005 to July 2006) and is divided into five
stages:

   1. Stage One:  A review of the country in terms of the four areas of  the
      questionnaire.  The Draft Self-Assessment Report and  Draft  Programme
      of Action on key  issues  identified  during  the  self-assessment  is
      developed for submission to the  APR  Secretariat.   The  Draft  Self-
      Assessment Report and Draft Programme of Action are sent to Parliament
      for comment (December 2005), before finalisation (February 2006).  The
      Secretariat develops an Issue  Paper  based  on  the  country’s  self-
      assessment  report  and  programme  of  action  and  background  paper
      prepared  independently  by  the  APR  Secretariat.  (October  2005  -
      February 2006).  The Issue Paper will highlight the key issues in  the
      country for the furtherance of democracy, good governance  and  socio-
      economic development.
   2. Stage Two:  Visit by the APR Team for extensive consultations with all
      stakeholders.  The country also consults widely to build consensus  on
      how to respond  to  the  Issue  Paper.   These  consultations  include
      Parliamentarians.  Parliament may also have an opportunity  to  submit
      comments on the Issue paper to  the  APR  Secretariat  and  the  Focal
      Point.  (February 2006 - April 2006).
   3.  Stage  Three:   The  APR  Team  develops  its  report  based  on  the
      consultations conducted with Government,  Parliament,  civil  society,
      business sector community groups etc., country self-assessment report,
      and programme of action, Issue Paper  and  responses  thereto.  (April
      2006 - May 2006).


   4. Stage Four:  The APR Team submits its report to the  APRM  Secretariat
      and the APR Panel.  After deliberation by the  Panel,  the  report  is
      submitted to the  APR  Forum  for  consideration  and  formulation  of
      actions. (May 2006 – June 2006).


   5. Stage Five:  Public tabling of the report and related  actions.   This
      occurs six months after consideration of the report by the APR  Forum.
      (June 2006 – December 2006).

The  Country  Self-Assessment  for  the  African   Peer   Review   Mechanism
Questionnaire forms  the  basis  of  South  Africa’s  self-assessment.   The
questionnaire is divided into four sections containing specific  objectives,
questions and indicators.  The Sections of the questionnaire  are  Democracy
& Good Political Governance, Economic Governance and  Management,  Corporate
Governance and Socio-economic Development.


   1. Background

In South Africa, the Minister of Public Service and Administration has  been
appointed as South Africa’s Focal Point for the process.  The Minister  will
be responsible for the overall management of the process and  will  chair  a
National Peer review Governing Council  comprising  five  Ministers  of  the
South African government and ten civil society representatives.

On  16  August  2005  the   Acting   Minister   for   Public   Service   and
Administration, Hon. Dr. EG  Pahad  invited  Parliament  to  participate  in
South Africa’s self assessment and peer review process.

After extensive discussions to  determine  the  most  suitable  location  of
Parliament within the country  process,  the  Presiding  Officers  concluded
that it is imperative that the role of Parliament reflects and  upholds  the
democratic principles of  separation  of  powers  and  independence  of  the
legislature.   Furthermore  the  Constitutional  mandate  of  Parliament  to
maintain  oversight  of  Executive  authority  and  to   facilitate   public
involvement in its processes must be respected.

Parliament is playing an active and independent role in  the  country  self-
assessment  and  review.   This  includes   proactive   responses   to   the
questionnaire to be submitted to the  Focal  Point.   Parliament  will  also
comment on the final self-assessment report and the programme of action  and
make contributions to the country response to the Issues Paper  prepared  by
the APRM  Secretariat.   Parliament  should  also  have  an  opportunity  to
comment on the Country Report issued by the  APR  Team.   The  Parliamentary
processes will be underpinned by a robust public  involvement  campaign  and
public debate on issues and reports to be reviewed.

One of the primary objectives of Parliament’s involvement in South  Africa’s
Peer Review process is to facilitate public awareness and  ensure  effective
public participation.

   2. Structure

Given the short timeframe for the completion  of  the  review  process,  the
Speaker of the  National  Assembly  and  the  Chairperson  of  the  National
Council of Provinces established joint committees  in  order  to  streamline
the Parliamentary  processes.   With  due  consideration  to  the  expertise
required to further the work for Parliament’s APRM  process,  the  Presiding
Officers appointed Members of Parliament to the following joint committees:

3.    Joint Coordinating Committee on the African Peer Review Mechanism

 ❑ Speaker of the National Assembly (Joint Chairperson)
 ❑ Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces (Joint Chairperson)
 ❑ Mr O Bapela
 ❑ Ms F Hajaig
 ❑ Mr DJ Sithole
 ❑ Mr TS Setona
 ❑ Mr J Seremane
 ❑ Ms S Vos
 ❑ The Chairperson of each of the Joint Ad-hoc Committees

The following Joint Ad-hoc Committees based on  the  four  sections  of  the
questionnaire:

a) Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Democracy & Good Political Governance


 ❑ Mr R Baloyi (Chairperson)
 ❑ Ms H Mgabadeli
 ❑ Ms S Camerer
 ❑ Mr P Nefolovhodwe
 ❑ Dr P Mulder
 ❑ Ms Nkabinde
 ❑ Mr J Sibiya


b) Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Economic Governance & Management

 ❑ Mr V Smith (Chairperson)
 ❑ Mr Nkem Abonta
 ❑ Mr M Lowe
 ❑ Mr L Greyling
 ❑ Ms F Mahomed
 ❑ Ms J Semple
 ❑ Ms H Lamoela[1]

c) Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Corporate Governance

 ❑ Ms B Hogan (Chairperson)
 ❑ Ms S Seaton
 ❑ Mr L Labuschagne
 ❑ Mr V Gore
 ❑ Mr I S Mfundisi
 ❑ Ms H Bogopane Zulu
 ❑ Mr MA Sulliman

d) Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Socio-economic Development
 ❑ Mr R Mohlaloga (Chairperson)
 ❑ Ms L M Mashiane
 ❑ Mr SJ Njikelana
 ❑ Ms C Dudley
 ❑ Ms S Kalyan
 ❑ Ms U Roopnarain[2]
 ❑ Ms NF Mazibuko

Dedicated administrative, research and committee support staff  assist  each
joint committee.


     5. Mandate of Joint Committees

The Joint Coordinating Committee was established to inter alia:

 ❑ Develop a broad programme for the Joint Ad-hoc Committees that  parallels
   the roadmap for the review process emanating  from  the  broader  country
   process.  This includes Parliament’s response to  the  APR  Questionnaire
   during the Self-Assessment process, Parliament’s  comment  on  the  Draft
   Self-Assessment Report and Programme of Action submitted to Parliament by
   the Focal Point, Parliament’s Comment on the Issues Paper prepared by the
   APR Secretariat, Parliament’s comment on the Country Report  prepared  by
   the APR Team.
 ❑ Liaise with the Peer Review Governing Council  and  the  Focal  Point  as
   required.
 ❑ Oversee, coordinate and provide direction to the work of  the  Joint  Ad-
   hoc Committees.
 ❑ Present reports to Parliament.
 ❑ Submit Parliamentary reports to the Focal Point as necessary.

The Joint ad hoc Committees were established to inter alia:
 ❑ Identify key  strategic  issues  for  a  Parliamentary  response  to  the
   specific sections of the peer review questionnaire.
 ❑  Develop  detailed  work  programmes   including   public   participation
   activities.
 ❑ Draft a Parliamentary response under the thematic  section  of  the  peer
   review questionnaire for which the committee was established.
 ❑ Comment on the Draft Country Assessment Report  and  Draft  Programme  of
   Action.
 ❑ Comment on the Issues Paper developed by the APRM Secretariat.
 ❑ Submit reports to the Coordinating Committee.

     6. Process & Progress

The Joint Coordinating Committee and the Joint ad hoc Committees  have  held
regular meetings  to  discuss  Parliament’s  approach  to  the  peer  review
questionnaire and  to  develop  work  programmes.   The  Joint  Coordinating
Committee will continue to meet weekly.  The Joint ad  hoc  Committees  will
meet at least once or twice a week.  Hearings and Committee meetings may  be
conducted away from the seat of Parliament.  A  draft  Parliamentary  Report
is expected by mid-February 2006.

Parliament’s  APRM  process  is  supported  by  a  comprehensive  media  and
communications  strategy.   This  includes  print   and   electronic   media
incorporating community radio  broadcasts  in  all  official  South  African
languages, radio and  television  talk  shows  and  interviews  and  popular
information materials.

The following progress is noted:

 ❑ The Joint ad hoc Committees are  involved  in  independent  research  and
   networking activities and the collection of secondary data.

 ❑ The Joint ad hoc Committee  on  Socio-economic  Development  held  public
   hearings from 7-9 November 2005.  Other Joint ad hoc Committees  plan  to
   hold public hearings between November 2005 and January 2006.

 ❑ The Minister for Public Service and Administration made  a  statement  in
   the National Assembly on 13 October 2005.  This was followed by a  debate
   in the National Assembly.

 ❑ The Presiding Officers addressed letters to the  Speakers  of  Provincial
   legislatures informing them of the APRM  process,  Parliament’s  role  in
   South Africa’s self  assessment  and  peer  review  and  encouraging  the
   support and participation of the provinces.

 ❑  The  Presiding  Officers  addressed  letters  to  the  Speakers  of   18
   municipalities (two in each province) informing them of the APRM  process
   including Parliament’s role in  the  process.   Municipal  Speakers  were
   encouraged  to  identify  suitable  municipal  structures  to  facilitate
   Parliament’s engagement with  local  communities  on  the  issues  to  be
   reviewed.

 ❑ The Joint Coordinating Committee met with the Focal Point  and  the  APRM
   Country Support Mission led by Professor A Adedeji  at  Parliament  on  9
   November 2005.  The meeting exchanged views on the implementation of  the
   APRM, particularly focusing  on  the  approach  that  the  South  African
   parliament had adopted and the Parliamentary process envisaged.   It  was
   agreed that future coordination between the Parliamentary APRM structures
   and the National Peer Review Governing Council be  encouraged  to  ensure
   exchange of perspectives and heightening a quality  country  process  and
   outcomes.

     7. Recommendations
   1) To ensure the success of Parliament’s involvement in the  peer  review
      process, members of the Joint Coordinating Committee and Joint ad  hoc
      Committees should, as far as  possible,  be  temporarily  relieved  of
      their other Parliamentary duties.


   2) Chief Whips,  leaders  of  political  parties,  Portfolio  and  Select
      Committee Chairpersons should, as far as possible, relieve members  of
      the Joint Coordinating Committee and  Joint  ad  hoc  Committees  from
      their political and other tasks in order for  them  to  advance  their
      APRM programmes as much as possible before the festive season.

Where necessary, the Joint Coordinating Committee and the Joint ad hoc
Committee members should be allowed to attend relevant meetings during
Parliamentary recess.  Only such an approach will enable Parliament to
fulfil the APRM mandate within the limited timeframe we have.

National Assembly


1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Labour on the Annual Reports and
  Financial Statements 2004/2005 of the Department of Labour and Entities,
  dated 15 November 2005:

   The Portfolio Committee on Labour, having considered and examined the
   Annual Reports of the Department of Labour (DOL), the National Economic
   Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC), National Productivity Institute
   (NPI), Commission for Conciliation, Mediation & Arbitration (CCMA),
   Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF), Compensation Fund, Umsobomvu Youth
   Fund, Health & Welfare Sector Education & Training Authority (SETA),
   Insurance SETA, Transport SETA, Secondary Agriculture SETA, Primary
   Agriculture SETA, Diplomacy, Intelligence, Defence and Trade SETA
   (DIDTETA), Bank SETA, Tourism & Hospitality SETA (THETA), Finance and
   Accounting Services SETA (FASSET), Wholesale & Retail (W&R) SETA, Energy
   SETA (ESETA), Construction SETA, Local Government & Water SETA (LG&W),
   Mining Qualifications Authority (MQA), Chemical Industries SETA (CHIETA),
   Media, Advertising, Publishing, Packaging SETA (MAPPP), Services SETA and
   Information Systems, Electronics and Telecommunications Technology SETA
   (ISETT), reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

2.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and   Constitutional
   Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office  of  Mr  I  W  O  M
   Morake, a Magistrate at Lichtenburg Magistrate Court, dated  14  November
   2005:

    The Portfolio Committee for  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
    having considered the report on the provisional suspension from  office
    of Magistrate Mr I W O M Morake, tabled by the Minister for Justice and
    Constitutional Development in terms  of  section  13  (3)  (b)  of  the
    Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993), reports as follows:


            1. The Portfolio  Committee  noted  from  the  report  that  the
               Minister provisionally suspended Mr Morake from office on  16
               September 2005 in terms of the section  13  (3)  (a)  of  the
               Magistrates Act, 1993.  The  report  of  the  Minister  which
               indicates reasons for the provisional suspension  was  tabled
               in Parliament  on  16  September  2005,  in  compliance  with
               section 13 (3) (b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.


            2. The Portfolio Committee invited Mr Morake on  the  3  October
               2005 to  submit  written  representations  to  the  Committee
               regarding the recommendation of  the  Magistrate  Commission.
               The Committee received a response from  Mr.  Morake.  In  his
               presentation, Mr Morake denied the allegations and  requested
               the committee hold in abeyance a decision to confirm  or  not
               to confirm his provisional suspension, pending the outcome of
               an application in  terms  of  Section  174  of  the  Criminal
               Procedure Act, which was to be head on the 27 October 2005.

            3. The Committee was informed that the Section  174  Application
               was unsuccessful.

            4. The Portfolio Committee noted that Mr Morake  is  accused  of
               stealing monies which were handed  to  him  in  his  official
               capacity on two occasions at the office  by  members  of  the
               public. These monies were to be paid over to other members of
               the public during the period between 27 June 2003 and 1  July
               2003 and again between 23 April 2004 and 14 March  2005.  The
               amounts involved are R500.00 and R5 000.00.

            5. In terms  of  section  13(4)(c)  of  Magistrates  Act,  1993,
               Parliament must,  as  soon  as  reasonably  possible  pass  a
               resolution as to whether or not the provisional suspension of
               the  magistrate  is  confirmed.   The   Portfolio   Committee
               considered the allegation to be of a  serious  nature  as  to
               make it inappropriate for Mr Morake to perform the  functions
               while the inquiry referred to in section 13 (3)  (e)  of  the
               Magistrates Act, 1993 is being held and therefore  recommends
               that the National Assembly resolve to confirm the provisional
               suspension of Mr. Morake in terms of section 13  (3)  (c)  of
               the Magistrates Act, 1993.

            6. The Committee further recommends that a  progress  report  in
               respect of the  inquiry  of  the  Magistrates  Commission  be
               tabled in accordance with the provisions of  section  13  (3)
               (f) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

        Report to be considered.

3.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and   Constitutional
   Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Mr K Suliman, an
   Additional Magistrate at Durban Magistrate Court, dated 14 November 2005:


      The Portfolio Committee for Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having considered the report on the provisional suspension from office
      of Magistrate Mr K Suliman, tabled by the  Minister  for  Justice  and
      Constitutional Development in terms of  section  13  (3)  (b)  of  the
      Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993), reports as follows:


     1. The Portfolio Committee noted from the  report  that  the  Minister
        provisionally suspended Mr Suliman from office on 22 August 2005 in
        terms of the section 13 (3) (a) of the Magistrates Act,  1993.  The
        report of the Minister which indicates reasons for the  provisional
        suspension  was  tabled  in  Parliament  on  23  August  2005,   in
        compliance with section 13 (3) (b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.


       2.  The Portfolio Committee invited Mr Suliman on the 29 August  2005
          to submit written representations to the Committee  regarding  the
          recommendation of the Magistrate Commission. The Committee did not
          receive a response to the invitation.

       3. The Portfolio Committee  noted  that  Mr  Suliman  is  accused  of
          indecent assault/crimen injuria  in  that  he  allegedly  sexually
          assaulted his colleague, Ms N V Khumalo.
       4. In terms of section 13(4)(c) of Magistrates Act, 1993,  Parliament
          must, as soon as reasonably  possible  pass  a  resolution  as  to
          whether or not the provisional suspension  of  the  magistrate  is
          confirmed. The Portfolio Committee considered the allegation to be
          of a serious nature as to make it inappropriate for Mr Suliman  to
          perform the functions while the inquiry referred to in section  13
          (3) (e) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 is being held  and  therefore
          recommends that the  National  Assembly  resolve  to  confirm  the
          provisional suspension of Mr. Suliman in terms of section  13  (3)
          (c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

       5. The Committee further recommends that a progress report in respect
          of  the  inquiry  of  the  Magistrates  Commission  be  tabled  in
          accordance with the provisions  of  section  13  (3)  (f)  of  the
          Magistrates Act, 1993.

      Report to be considered.

4. The Portfolio Committeee on Environmental Affairs and  Tourism  on  using
   2004/05 Annual Reports of the Department  of  Environmental  Affairs  and
   Tourism and its  Public  Entities’  as  Oversight  Mechanism,  dated   15
   November 2005:


                              EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. BACKGROUND

The  constitution  of  South  Africa  (Act  108  0f  1996)  recognises  that
Legislatures have important role to play in overseeing  the  performance  of
Departments  and  Public  Entities.  Section  65  of  the   Public   Finance
Management Act requires that Ministers table  the  annual  reports  for  the
Department and  Public  Entities  for  which  they  are  responsible  by  30
September each year.

On the 6th September 2005,  the  Department  of  Environmental  Affairs  and
Tourism  and  its  Statutory   Bodies   namely,   South   African   National
Biodiversity Institute, Greater St Lucia Wetlands Authority,  South  African
National Parks, South African Tourism and  South  African  Weather  Services
tabled their 2004/05 Annual Reports and Financial Statements  to  Parliament
in terms of the of Sections 65(1)(a) of the Public Finance  Management  Act,
1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

Upon the referral by  the  National  Assembly  on  30  September  2005,  the
Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism scheduled  extended
briefing session on  the  11th  of  October  2005  with  the  Department  of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism and its Public Entities to  present  their
annual reports and Financial Statements including the Report of the Auditor-
General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

2.OVERVIEW OF THE PRESENTATION ON DEPARTMENTAL AND PUBLIC  ENTITIES  2004/05
ANNUAL REPORTS

After welcoming and according a platform to officials  from  the  Department
and Public Entities to  introduce  themselves,  the  Chairperson,  Mr  Langa
Zita, then indicated in his  introduction  that  the  main  purpose  of  the
meeting was to provide platform to the officials  from  the  Department  and
Public Entities to brief members of the contents of 2004/05  annual  reports
submitted to Parliament in terms  of  Public  Finance  Management  Act.  The
presentations  generally  focused  on  2004/05  targets,  achievements  and,
audited Financial Statements ending at 31 March 2005.



The  first  2004/05  annual  report   presented   was   of   Department   of
Environmental Affairs  and  Tourism.  The  Acting  Director  General,  Ms  J
Yawitch presented the report The main  focus  of  the  presentation  was  on
2004/05  targets  and   achievements   related   to   programmes   such   as
Administration, Environmental Quality and  Protection,  Marine  and  Coastal
Management,  Tourism,   Biodiversity   and   Conservation,   Auxiliary   and
Associated Services, audit committee report, baseline over the MTEF  period,
budget  allocation  per  programme  and  economic   classification,   actual
expenditure in previous and current financial year, transfer  payments  and,
HR matters.

The second 2004/05 annual report presented was  of  South  African  National
Parks. The Chief Executive Officer, Dr David Mabunda presented  the  report.
The  presentation  focused  on  vision  and  mission  statements,   business
architecture, conservation, Tran frontier  conservation,  tourism  business,
people and conservation, operations and management,  expanded  public  works
programme,  staff  and  employment   equity   statistics,   black   economic
empowerment and financial report.

The third 2004/05 annual report presented was of the South  African  Weather
Service. The Acting Chief Executive Officer, Mr  JN  Nphepya  presented  the
report. The presentation focused on vision, mission, key focus  areas,  long
term goals, implementation of recap plan, achievements in terms of  services
improvement, total staff  complement,  management  and  professional  staff,
commercial income and revenue highlights and, audit report comments.

The fourth 2004/05 report presented was of South African Tourism. The  Chief
Executive  Officer,  Mr  Moeketsi   Mosola   presented   the   report.   The
presentation focused on 2004 overview, foreign  tourists  arrival  in  South
Africa, growth of tourist arrival, arrival from Africa  and  Europe,  global
tourism growth, comparison between South Africa and Australia  and,  tourism
sector GDP growth.

The fifth 2004/05 annual report presented  was  of  South  African  National
Biodiversity Institute. The presentation  focused  on  vision  and  mission,
2004/05 key achievements, targets for 2005/06 and 07 and 2004/05  highlights
related  to  education  programme,  learners   visitor   statistics,   audit
committee report and, income and expenditure

The final 2004/05 annual report  presented  was  of  the  Greater  St  Lucia
Wetland Park. The Chief Executive Officer, Mr Andrew Zaloumis presented  the
report. The presentation focused on vision and  mission  of  the  authority,
strategy,  and  achievements  related  to   socio   economic   environmental
development,  tourism  development,  park   management   and   conservation,
research, regulatory matters and audited financial statement

3. COMMITTEE OBSEVATIONS AND IMPRESSIONS

Based on the presentation of 2004/05 annual reports  and  audited  financial
statements; the committee has generally observed that:

    ❑ The 2004/05 annual reports of the Department and Public Entities  have
      clearly provided information on service delivery and have reported the
      financial  statements,  management  and  audit  reports  against   the
      performance targets and budgets as outlined in their  strategic  plans
      and Estimate of National Expenditure

    ❑ In terms of the audit committee  opinions,  the  financial  statements
      fairly present, in all material respects, the financial  positions  of
      the Department and its Public Entities at 31 March 2005 and the result
      of their operations and  cash  flows  for  the  year  then  ended,  in
      accordance with prescribed  accounting  practice  and  in  the  manner
      required by the Public Finance  Management  Act,  1999  (Act  No.1  of
      1999).

4. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Having considered the 2004/05 Annual Reports  and  Financial  Statements  of
the  Department  of  Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism  and  its   Public
Entities,  the  Portfolio  Committee  recommends  that;  during   the   2006
Parliamentary Committee period:

4.1.The Department of Environmental Affairs  and  Tourism  should  come  and
brief members on the findings of draft Asbestos study  report  and  approved
regulation by the cabinet, 2006/07 Strategic Plans  and  Budget  Allocation,
mechanisms to be put in place to ensure that BEE and,  programs  related  to
Genetically Modified Organism and Mari Culture

4.2. South African National Parks should come and brief members on  elephant
management strategy; implementation of transfrontier conservation  programme
and, mechanisms put in place  to  ensure  the  management  of  the  park  in
accordance with the Protected Areas Act (57 of 2003)

4.3. South African Weather Service should come and brief members of its  re-
capitalisation plan, strategies to reduce  the  impact  of  adverse  weather
conditions on vulnerable communities and,

4.4. South African Tourism should  come  and  brief  members  on  Evaluation
Report on Short Left Campaign, Eco Tourism, Action  Plans  and  preparations
for 2010, Strategic Plans and 2006/07 Budget Allocation

4.5. South African National Biodiversity Institute  should  come  and  brief
members on 2006/07 Business Case, Strategic  Plans  and  Budget  Allocation,
progress made in respect of the Greening of the  Nation  Project,  Succulent
Karoo Ecosystem Program and its  success  in  meeting  the  socio  -economic
goals of the country

4.6. Greater St Lucia Wetland Park should come and brief members  on  action
to be taken ensure the promotion of broad –based black economic  empowerment
in new tourism industry in the park, status  of  all  the  existing  poverty
alleviation  projects  and  their  impact   on   poverty   alleviation   and
sustainable job creation.

1. REPORTING

The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs  and  Tourism  having  used
2004/05 Annual Reports  of  the  Department  of  Environmental  Affairs  and
Tourism and its Public Entities as Oversight Mechanism during  the  Extended
Briefing Session, dated 11 October 2005, Reports to Parliament as Follows:

2. PRESENTATION ON 2004/05 ANNUAL REPORTS AND  FINACIAL  STATEMENTS  OF  THE
   DEPARTMENT AND ITS PUBLIC ENTITIES

On the 11 October 2005 the Department of Environmental Affairs  and  Tourism
and its Public Entities namely, South African National Parks, South  African
Weather Service, South African Tourism, South African National  Biodiversity
Institute and, Greater St Lucia Wetland Park presented their 2004/05  annual
reports and financial statements to the Portfolio  Committee  as  tabled  to
Parliament in terms of Sections 65(1)(a) of the  Public  Finance  Management
Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), as amended (PFMA)



   1. DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM

The Deputy Director General, Ms  J  Yawitch  presented  the  2004/05  annual
report and audited financial statement of the department.   The  main  focus
of the presentation was on  2004/05  targets  and  achievements  related  to
programmes such as Administration,  Environmental  Quality  and  Protection,
Marine and  Coastal  Management,  Tourism,  Biodiversity  and  Conservation,
Auxiliary and Associated Services, audit  committee  report,  baseline  over
the  MTEF   period,   budget   allocation   per   programme   and   economic
classification, actual expenditure in previous and current  financial  year,
transfer  payments  and,  HR  matters.  Some  of  the   major   departmental
achievements reported during the period under review included:

    ❑ Drafting of Uniform National and Provincial Budget Structure

    ❑ Establishment of National Environmental Advisory Forum,

    ❑  Finalisation  of  Environmental  Management   Cooperation   Agreement
      Guidelines and Environmental Impact Assessment Register and Database

    ❑ Completion  of  Thor  Chemical  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  and
      coasting

    ❑ Finalization of Climate Change Response Strategy  and  development  of
      draft asbestos regulations

    ❑ Completion of draft report on proposal for rehabilitation  of  fishing
      harbours

    ❑ Drafting of new policy framework for the white shark cage  diving  and
      boat based whale watching industry

    ❑ Revision and amendment of the 4x4 regulations and  promulgation  of  2
      new Marine Protected Areas.[3]

3.SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL PARKS

The Chief Executive Officer, Dr David  Mabunda  presented  the  report.  The
presentation  focused   on   vision   and   mission   statements,   business
architecture, conservation, Tran frontier  conservation,  tourism  business,
people and conservation, operations and management,  expanded  public  works
programme,  staff  and  employment   equity   statistics,   black   economic
empowerment and financial report. The main 2004/05 achievements reported  by
the Chief executive officer relate to progress made in respect of:

    ❑ Completion of Giriyondo border post

    ❑ Opening of 28 bed rest camp in March 2005 at Sendilingsdrif

    ❑ Completion of planned tourism infrastructure in Mapungubwe

    ❑ Pre-grading of all Kruger accommodations and camps sites in  Addo  and
      Storms River Mouth

    ❑  Launching  of  public-private  partnership  between   South   African
      national parks, the department of environmental affairs  and  tourism,
      the Department of Education and Pick ‘n Pay for the implementation  of
      kids in the parks programme



   4. SOUTH AFRICAN WEATHER SERVICE

The Acting Chief Executive Officer, Mr JN Nphepya presented the report.  The
presentation focused on vision, mission, key focus areas, long  term  goals,
implementation  of  recap  plan,   achievements   in   terms   of   services
improvement, total staff  complement,  management  and  professional  staff,
commercial income and revenue highlights and,  audit  report  comments.   In
the opinion of the Acting Chief Executive Officer, the main  achievement  of
the South African Weather Services  during  the  2004/05  financial  periods
included:

    ❑ Deployment of the Umtata Weather Radar

    ❑ Establishment of 5 automatic Weather Stations in the Eastern Cape

    ❑ Implementation of Weather Data Capturing Programme

    ❑ Improvement of longer term forecasting ability

    ❑ Completed the air borne monitoring campaign

    ❑ Received an international award for rainfall enhancement

    ❑ Filled all time scales  with  new  forecasting  suite  of  products  –
      addressing all timescales

    ❑ Reduced  the  impact  of  adverse  weather  conditions  on  vulnerable
      communities

    ❑ Used new high resolution weather satellite

    ❑ Introduction of an aviation display system[4]

5. SOUTH AFRICAN TOURISM

The Chief Executive  Officer,  Mr  Moeketsi  Mosola  presented  the  2004/05
annual report of the South African  Tourism.  The  presentation  focused  on
2004 overview, foreign tourists arrival in South Africa, growth  of  tourist
arrival, arrival from Africa and Europe, global tourism  growth,  comparison
between South Africa and Australia and, tourism sector GDP growth.  Some  of
the major achievement of the  South  African  Tourism  reported  during  the
2004/05 financial period included:

    ❑ Recording of highest number of foreign tourism arrivals

    ❑ Growth of foreign tourism arrival across all  the  regional  portfolio
      except Europe

    ❑ Growth of South African Tourism as compared to Australia

    ❑ Successful roll out of short left campaign with the aim of  persuading
      more South African to travel within their own country

    ❑ Development of a comprehensive guide to graded  products  as  well  as
      aggressive business tourism strategy and action plan

    ❑ Negotiated a three-year sponsorship contract for the emerging  tourism
      entrepreneur of the year award with ABSA.

    ❑ Successfully gained market share in France  while  lost  significantly
      in Netherlands and Germany

    ❑  The tourism GDP figures have been  modelled  using  WTO  figures  and
      foreign direct spend in South Africa[5]

6. SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY INSTITUTE

The Director of Biodiversity Policy and Program, Ms Kristal  Maze  presented
the   2004/05 annual report of the Institute. The  presentation  focused  on
vision and mission, 2004/05 key  achievements,  targets  for  2005-  07  and
2004/05  highlights  related  to  education  programme,   learners   visitor
statistics, audit committee report  and,  income  and  expenditure  The  key
achievements and programme highlights presented to the committee included:

    ❑ Transfer of key management posts to Pretoria

    ❑ Opening of a new biodiversity centre in Pretoria

    ❑ Opening of visitor facilities in lowveld, Walter sisulu  and  Pretoria
      national botanical garden

    ❑ Initiation of greening of the nation project

    ❑ Initiation of municipal capacity program in eastern cape

    ❑ Establishment of  succulent  karoo  ecosystem  programme  coordination
      unit

    ❑ Initiation of one-stop biodiversity information system

    ❑ Launching of grasslands bioregional programme.

    ❑ Rehabilitated 65 wetlands and created 1749 jobs

    ❑  Managed  the  working  for  programme  on  behalf  of  Department  of
      Environmental Affairs and Tourism[6]

    ❑ Facilitated garden based environmental education programme.[7]

7. GREATER ST LUCIA WETLAND PARK

The final 2004/05 annual report  presented  was  of  the  Greater  St  Lucia
Wetland Park. The Chief Executive Officer, Mr Andrew Zaloumis presented  the
report. The presentation focused on vision and  mission  of  the  authority,
strategy,  and  achievements  related  to   socio   economic   environmental
development,  tourism  development,  park   management   and   conservation,
research,  regulatory  matters,  audit  committee  report  and  summary   of
financial performance, income statement and employment equity. According  to
the Chief Executive Officer, the main achievements of the  park  during  the
period under review included:

    ❑ Spending of R17. 9 M on Park Development and Implementation  of  Alien
      Clearing Plan

    ❑  Creation  of  330  jobs  in  tourism  and  related   industries   and
      Establishment of 7 Agricultural Gardens

    ❑ Implementation of Communication strategy

    ❑ Appointment of branding team and completion of brand architecture

    ❑ Translocation of 700 units  of  warthog,  oribi,  giraffe,  white  and
      black rhino, buffalo and wild dog

    ❑ Initiated Lubombo  tourism  and  reached  agreement  on  location  and
      process for the development of Bhangazi heritage site

    ❑ Development of drama into a training tool for  broader  community  and
      park employees. [8]

8. COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS

Based on 2004/05 annual reports and audited financial statements  presented;
the committee has generally observed that:

    ❑ The 2004/05 annual reports of the Department and Public Entities  have
      clearly provided information on service delivery and have reported the
      financial  statements,  management  and  audit  reports  against   the
      performance targets and budgets as outlined in their  strategic  plans
      and Estimate of National Expenditure

    ❑ In terms of the audit committee  opinions,  the  financial  statements
      fairly present, in all material respects, the financial  positions  of
      the Department and its Public Entities at 31 March 2005 and the result
      of their operations and  cash  flows  for  the  year  then  ended,  in
      accordance with prescribed  accounting  practice  and  in  the  manner
      required by the Public Finance  Management  Act,  1999  (Act  No.1  of
      1999).



    ❑ The tabling of 2004/05 annual reports and financial statements of  the
      Department and Public Entities to Parliament on the 6  September  2005
      by Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism has complied with the
      requirements of Public Finance Management Act.[9]

   9. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Having considered the 2004/05 Annual Reports  and  Financial  Statements  of
the  Department  of  Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism  and  its   Public
Entities,  the  Portfolio  Committee  recommends  that;  during   the   2006
Parliamentary Committee period:

9.1.The Department of Environmental Affairs  and  Tourism  should  come  and
brief members on the findings of draft Asbestos study  report  and  approved
regulation by the cabinet, 2006/07 Strategic Plans  and  Budget  Allocation,
mechanisms to be put in place to ensure that BEE and,  programs  related  to
Genetically Modified Organism and Mari Culture.

9.2. South African National Parks should come and brief members on  elephant
management   strategy;   implementation   of   trans-frontier   conservation
programme and, mechanisms put in place to ensure the management of the  park
in accordance with the Protected Areas Act (57 of 2003)

9.3. South African Weather Service should come and brief members of its  re-
capitalisation plan, strategies to reduce  the  impact  of  adverse  weather
conditions on vulnerable communities and,

9.4. South African Tourism should  come  and  brief  members  on  Evaluation
Report on Short Left Campaign, Eco Tourism, Action  Plans  and  preparations
for 2010, Strategic Plans and 2006/07 Budget Allocation

9.5. South African National Biodiversity Institute should come and brief
members on 2006/07 Business Case, Strategic Plans and Budget Allocation,
progress made in respect of the Greening of the Nation Project, Succulent
Karoo Ecosystem Program and its success in meeting the socio -economic
goals of the country

9.6.Greater St Lucia Wetland Park should come and brief  members  on  action
 to be taken
ensure the promotion of broad  –based  black  economic  empowerment  in  new
 tourism
industry in the  park,  status  of  all  the  existing  poverty  alleviation
 projects and their impact
on poverty alleviation and sustainable job creation.

5. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism
   on the Proposed Exclusion of Portion 89 (a portion of portion 63  of  the
   farm Groenkloof 358 J.R, in extent 4484m2 from  the  Groenkloof  National
   Parks situated  in  the  Administrative  District  of  Pretoria,  Gauteng
   Province, dated 11 November 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and  Tourism,  having
      considered  request  for  approval  by  Parliament  of  the   Proposed
      Exclusion of  Portion  89  (a  portion  of  portion  63  of  the  farm
      Groenkloof 358 J.R, in extent  4484m2  from  the  Groenkloof  National
      Parks situated in the Administrative  District  of  Pretoria,  Gauteng
      Province, tabled in terms of section 2(3) of the National  Parks  Act,
      1976. (Act No 57 1976), referred to it, recommends that the house,  in
      terms of   section 2(3) of the National Parks Act, 1976, approves  the
      said request.


      Request to be considered.


6. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism
  on Oversight  Visits  conducted  in  KwaZulu-Natal,  Pondoland  and  Coega
  Development Corporation, dated 8 November 2005:

                              EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. BACKGROUND

As part of conducting its oversight functions, a  multiparty  delegation  of
the Portfolio Committee  on  Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism  conducted
oversight  visits  to  Kwa-Zulu  Natal,  Pondolond  and,  Coega  Development
Corporation from the 30TH of January  to  the  3rd  of  February  2005.  The
overall objectives of the oversight visits  were  to:  assess  the  economic
impact in Kwazulu-Natal of the banning  of  4x4  vehicles  on  the  beaches;
monitor the implementation in Pondoland of  Eco-tourism  strategies,  nature
conservation, job creation and, assess the long-term  impact  of  the  Coega
development projects on the environment, industrial development,  rail-road,
shipping transport and poverty alleviation. A multiparty delegation  of  the
Committee under the leadership of an Acting-Chairperson Mr. M I Moss  (ANC),
included; Ms MM Ntuli (ANC), Ms R Ndzanga (ANC), Ms J Chalmers (ANC)  Mr.  A
Mokoena (ANC), Mr. J Combrink (ANC), Ms. J Semple (DA) Ms  C  Johnson  (NNP)
Ms C Zikalala (IFP), Mr. LW Greylling (ID), and committee secretary, Mr.  TM
Manele.

2. FINDINGS

During the visit the delegation of the committee received briefing  sessions
from the KZN MEC of Arts, Culture and Tourism, the Chief  Executive  Officer
of the South African Association for Marine  and  Biological  Research,  the
Chief Executive Officer  of  Ezemvelo  KZN  Wildlife,  the  Pondoland  Chief
Director and Acting Head of the Department of Economic Affairs and  Tourism,
the Executive Mayor of OR Tambo District Municipality, the  Manager  of  the
Coega Development Corporation, and the Traditional Leaders  and  Eco-Tourism
Operators.

During the meeting the KZN MEC of  Arts,  Culture  and  Tourism,  the  Chief
Executive  Officer  of  the  South  African  Association  for   Marine   and
Biological  Research,  and  the  Chief  Executive  Office  of  Ezemvelo  KZN
Wildlife the delegation was briefed on the progress made in respect  of  the
banning of 4x4 vehicles on the Durban beaches.

The  achievements  reported  included  promulgation   of   new   regulations
controlling and prohibiting recreational use of  off–road  vehicles  in  the
coastal zone under specific circumstances, permission  of  recreational  use
of  off-road  vehicles  in  designated  recreational  use  areas   and   the
commissioning of a scientific study to consider management implications  for
successful implementation of a  provincial  strategy  for  recreational  use
–areas in the coastal zone of Kwazulu Natal.

Some of the beach access and management considerations  recommended  in  the
study  included:  consideration  for  vehicular  traffic  of  existing   and
appropriate beach access ramps; the availability of  safe  vehicle  parking,
along with associated pedestrian access and  facilities  to  be  taken  into
account when determining the need for ORV parking  and  recreational  travel
on the beach; provision of adequate vehicular access for shore patrols;  law
enforcement; search and rescue issues; property protection, and  control  of
litter and sanitation.

During the meeting with the Chief Director and the Head  of  the  Department
of Economic Affairs and Tourism in Pondoland, the delegation was briefed  on
the challenges  and  barriers  impacting  on  eco-tourism  development.  The
barriers mentioned include lack of  institutional  capacity  and  budget  to
deal with lands claims, the need to educate local communities on  government
legislation, the need to incorporate local  knowledge,  skills  transfer  in
developing poverty alleviation projects, streamlining legislation  in  terms
of the Wild  Coast,  and  the  developing  risk  management  strategies  and
coordination of Wild Cost. Besides challenges reported,  the  delegation  of
the committee was also briefed about the status of  European  Union  poverty
alleviation projects such as community owned and operated  tour  operations,
and the development of tourism accommodation facilities.

Some  of  the  opportunities  reported  included   community   consultation,
workshops and support on the construction of the proposed N2 Toll road.  The
eco-tourism challenges  mentioned  related  to  the  need  to  link  poverty
alleviation projects with  intergraded  development  planning  and  ensuring
that local knowledge and skills transfer are facilitated in the  development
of community based poverty alleviation projects, a review of the  status  of
land demarcation and the role of land claims commission. There is a need  to
ensure that consultants who are contracted to  develop  poverty  alleviation
projects facilitate knowledge transfer  and  training  for  the  communities
whose projects are intended to benefit.  During the meeting  with  officials
of the Coega Development Corporation, the delegation of  the  committee  was
briefed on business activities of the corporation, including the  industrial
development  zone,  investment  incentives,  and  skills  development,  have
contributed to job creation and the alleviation of poverty,

3. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
    ❑ The Department of Environmental Affairs and  Tourism  must  brief  the
      committee on the mechanisms that will be used to ensure compliance  on
      the banning of 4x4 vehicles on the KZN beaches.
    ❑ The OR Tambo  District  Municipality  must  ensure  that  all  poverty
      alleviation projects funded by the European Union  and  Department  of
      Environmental Affairs and  Tourism  are  linked  with  the  Integrated
      Development Planning (IDP).
1. REPORTING

As part of conducting its oversight functions, A multi party delegation of
the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism conducted  an
oversight visit from 30th January to 3rd February 2005 to Kwa-Zulu  Natal,
Pondolond, and the Coega Development Corporation.
   1. OBJECTIVES

The overall objectives of the oversight visits were to: assess the  economic
impact in Kwazulu-Natal of the banning  of  4x4  vehicles  on  the  beaches;
monitor the implementation in Pondoland of the eco-tourism strategy,  nature
conservation, job creation, and assess the long-term  impact  of  the  Coega
development projects on the environment, industrial development,  rail-road,
shipping transport and poverty alleviation

   2. DELEGATION

A Multiparty delegation of the Committee under the leadership of an  Acting-
Chairperson Mr. M I Moss (ANC), included; Ms MM Ntuli (ANC),  Ms  R  Ndzanga
(ANC), Ms J Chalmers (ANC) Mr. A Mokoena (ANC), Mr. J Combrinck  (ANC),  Ms.
J Semple (DA) Ms C Johnson (NNP) Ms  C  Zikalala  (IFP),  Mr.  LW  Greylling
(ID),  Mr.  J  Durand,  Parliamentary   Liaison   Officer,   Department   of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism and, Committee Secretary, Mr. TM Manele.

   3. REPORTING

Having conducted an oversight visits in  Kwa-Zulu  Natal,  Pondolond  and,
Coega development corporation, from the 30TH of  January  to  the  3rd  of
February 2005,  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Environmental  Affairs  and
Tourism, reports to Parliament as follows:

1. OVERSIGHT VISIT IN KZN

On the 30th of January 2005, the delegation of the committee had briefing
sessions with the KZN  MEC  of  Arts,  Culture  and  Tourism,  the  Chief
Executive Officer  of  the  South  African  Association  for  Marine  and
Biological Research and, the  Chief  Executive  Office  of  Ezenvelo  KZN
Wildlife. The delegation of the committee was  briefed  on  the  progress
made in respect of banning of 4x4 vehicles on  the  Durban  beaches.  The
achievements  reported   included   promulgation   of   new   regulations
controlling and prohibiting recreational use of off –road vehicles in the
coastal zone under specific circumstances, permission of recreational use
of off-road  vehicles  in  designated  recreational  use  areas  and  the
commissioning of scientific study to consider management implications for
successful implementation of a provincial strategy for  recreational  use
–areas in the coastal zone of Kwazulu Natal.

The MEC of the Department of Arts, Culture and Tourism, the  Hon.  Narend
Singh, welcomed  the  delegation.  In  his  opening  statement,  the  MEC
indicated that in January 2002, the Minister of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism promulgated new  regulations  controlling  the  use  of  off-road
vehicles in the  coastal  zone  of  South  Africa.  The  new  regulations
according  to  the  MEC  provided  for  a  general  prohibition  on   the
recreational use of off-road vehicles (ORV) in  the  coastal  zone  under
specific circumstances. The regulations specify that recreational use  of
ORVs can only take place in designated recreational use areas  (RUA)

The MEC  further  emphasized  that  the  legislation  pertaining  to  the
restriction on the use of recreational vehicles on South African  beaches
was published in December 2001 and subsequent amendments were promulgated
to the extent that no vehicles at all  were  allowed  in  South  Africa’s
coastal  zone.  Possibilities  existed,  however,  for  the  granting  of
licenses  in  certain  instances.  Amendments  to  the  legislation  were
proposed and circulated for  comment  in  2004.  Most  notable  in  these
amendments were the proposed removal of the sections that allow  for  the
designation by the Director General of recreational use areas,  which  in
Kwazulu Natal had largely been identified.

Initially legislation had allowed for the recognition and designation  of
certain areas of the coastal zone for recreational use including the  use
of vehicles, provided that it would not result in significant harm to the
environment and would not seriously affect  the  rights  of  the  general
public to enjoy the coastal zone. The original act made provision for the
identification of recreational use areas and KZN has gone a long  way  to
providing  a  methodology.  This  methodology  has  the  support  of  the
scientific community and was,  in  fact,  developed  by  members  of  the
community deeply involved in coastal and marine research. The  delegation
of the  committee  was  then  briefed  on  the  strategic  assessment  of
recreational use areas for off-road vehicles in the coastal zone  of  KZN
and the position of Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife.

   1. STRATEGIC ASSESSMENT STUDY


The Chief Executive Officer of the South African Association for Marine  and
Biological Research, Dr Mark Penning, briefed the delegation on a  strategic
assessment of recreation use areas for  off-road  vehicles  in  the  coastal
zone of Kwazulu Natal.  According to the Chief Executive Officer,  the  main
objectives of the study were to collate and map information relevant to  the
designation of ORV recreational use areas in the coastal zone of the KZN  as
specified by the new regulation, and to  justify,  both  scientifically  and
socially, the sitting of ORV recreational use areas to be defined  in  terms
of size, locations and usage and formed part of a  provincial  strategy  for
the management of ORV in the coastal zone of KZN.

The study  identified  seven  coastal  attributes  or  characteristics  with
spatial  dimensions  that  immediately  disqualified  an  area  from   being
considered for a RUA.  The seven  attributes  identified  include  any  area
outside  the  hard  sand  of  the  intertidal  zone;  fragile,  rare,  relic
vanishing  vegetation;  wildlife  sanctuaries   and   reserves;   unsuitable
physical attributes  of  beaches  or  natural  barriers;  areas  of  fragile
natural features or scientific  interest;  areas  of  potential  beach  user
conflict, and unidentified or unexplored key ecological processes.

The  study  made  recommendations  on  scientific,  access  and   management
considerations on effective implementation of  provincial  strategy  on  the
management of ORV in the  coastal  zone  of  KZN.  Some  of  the  scientific
considerations proposed included; no new ORV  access  points  to  the  beach
should be considered; areas where erosion or other soil or  resource  damage
will occur as a result of ORV accessing the beach should not  be  considered
for RUA; the availability convenience,  conservation  logic  and  safety  of
existing vehicle parking and pedestrian access and facilities must be  taken
into  consideration  when  determining  the  need  for   ORV   parking   and
recreational travel on the beach itself  only  existing,  appropriate  beach
access ramps should be considered for vehicular traffic.

The beach access consideration  proposed;  RUA  should  not  be  established
where enforcement and monitoring of ORV use on the beaches  are  inadequate;
the  public  services  involved  in  the  management  of  beaches  must   be
considered but service access onto  the  beach  should  not  necessarily  be
opened for public  vehicle  access;  adequate  vehicular  access  for  shore
patrols,  law  enforcement,  search  and  rescue,  property  protection  and
control of litter and sanitation will  be  required  at  beaches;  equitable
access to all user groups must be considered when proposing a  RUA  and  its
management

The  management  consideration  proposed  included;  Only  areas  that  were
subjected  to  significant  historical  ORV  usage  at  the  time   of   the
implementation of 2002  regulation  should  be  considered  for  RUA;  Where
sensitive areas or sites exist within a designated RUA, a buffer  protection
zone should be declared. This buffer zone must be between  the  normal  high
water mark and  the  edge  of  the  sea  or  20  m  from  the  nearest  dune
vegetation, and 100m from the nearest bank of an estuary; Beach  areas  with
hazardous  conditions  for  ORV  use  should  not  be  considered  for  RUA.
Environmental impact assessments should comment on beach slope,  grain  size
beach width and length, and beach access point.

   2. POSITION OF BEACH DIVERS

The Chief Executive Office of Ezemvelo KZN  Wildlife,  Mr.  Cedric  Coetzee,
briefed the delegation on the position of beach  driving.  The  presentation
focused on the recognition of the value of beaches  in  providing  ecosystem
services that are unique and diversified, biological  filters  and  nutrient
recycling. According to beach drivers  the  principles  of  disallowing  the
driving on  the  Durban  beaches  should  include  areas  where  driving  is
necessary  outside  of  the  vanishing  vegetation,  wildlife   sanctuaries,
unsuitable  physical  attributes,  areas  of  scientific  interest  and  key
ecological  processes.  The  management  consideration   proposed   in   the
scientific beach assessment study should include case-by-  case  evaluation,
effective enforcement and compliance, regular environmental  monitoring  and
provision of adequate resources.

3. OVERSIGHT VISIT IN PONDOLAND


During the meeting with the Chief Director and Head  of  the  Department  of
Economic Affairs and Tourism in Pondoland, the  delegation  was  briefed  on
the challenges  and  barriers  impacting  on  eco-tourism  development.  The
barriers mentioned include lack of  institutional  capacity  and  budget  to
deal with lands claims, the need to educate local communities on  government
legislation, the need to incorporate local  knowledge,  skills  transfer  in
developing poverty alleviation projects, streamlining legislation  in  terms
of  the  Wild  Coast  and  developing   risk   management   strategies   and
coordination of Wild Coast. Besides challenges reported, the  delegation  of
the committee was also briefed about the status of  European  Union  poverty
alleviation projects such as community owned and operated  tour  businesses,
and the development of tourism accommodation facilities.

3.1.  POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND CAPACITY BUILDING PROJECTS

The Acting Head of the Department of Economic  Affairs,  Environment  and
Tourism, Prof Jeff Peires, briefed the delegation of the committee  on  a
joint European Union and Department of Environmental Affairs and  Tourism
programme to support to the Wild Coast.
The briefing focused on development  planning,  project  development  and
investor  mobilization,  transaction  advisors,  operational  support  to
programme tourism assets, and training.

3.1.1 INTERGRATED CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT PLANNING

This  programme  is  supporting  two  local  municipal  coastal  planning
exercises in the Mbizana and Quakeni local  municipalities.  These  pilot
initiatives combine  EIA’s  tourism  plans  land-use  plans  and  tourism
project identification. These products are being successfully  integrated
into the IDP’s and SDF of these local municipalities.  These  initiatives
are also being carefully coordinated with  the  broader  wild  coast  and
supported by ABSA and government. It  is  intended  that  this  level  of
planning will be extended to the Port ST  Johns  area  in  the  remaining
period of implementation. The  integrated  conservation  and  development
planning is also supporting two local planning initiatives at Msikaba and
Mbotyi, designed to demonstrate more detail land use planning in  coastal
Nodes.

3.1.2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTOR MOBILIZATION

The core business of this programme is tourism enterprise development and
the facilitation of communities into the tourism sector. The programme is
supporting the development of community owned tourism enterprise  with  a
high level of private sector participation.

3.1.3. TRANSACTION ADVISORS

The core objective of this programme is to assist in  the  implementation
of project development, investor  mobilization,  integrated  conservation
and development planning, and support of communities entering into  joint
ventures with  the  private  sector.  The  programme  is  busy  with  the
appointment  of  transaction  advisors  who  will  support   communities’
financial, tourism business and legal requirements.

3.1.4. OPERATIONAL SUPPORT TO PROGRAMME TOURISM ASSET

This programme is directly  supporting  the  development  of  10  coastal
lodges and a number of village-based tourism  facilities.  The  programme
has a  specific  support  activity  tom  the  enterprise  which  includes
supporting some of the direct coasts associated with  insurances,  public
liability and security and working  with  community  trusts  and  tourism
businesses to set up the management  systems  and  to  build  the  skills
necessary  for  the  community’s  participation  in  sustainable  tourism
enterprise.

3.1.5. SKILLS DEVELOPMENT AND TRAINING

This programme has trained 21 700 youth in various  life  skills,  2  646
adults in hard skills relating  to  tourism  enterprise,  328  adults  in
natural resource management,  and  3  364  adults  in  environmental  and
tourism awareness. In addition, 150 learners have successfully  graduated
from two hospitality and conservation learnerships.

3.1.6. TRAINING AND STRATEGIC CONSIDERATION

In support of all the stated programmes, a work-based training  programme
has been developed to provide building  skills  to  the  community  owned
tourism enterprise, camp managers, front  office  staff,  catering  staff
housekeepers and security. In his concluding  remarks,  the  acting  head
indicated there have a considerable number of  planning  and  development
initiatives in the wild coast area over the past 20 years, largely ad hoc
in nature. These have happened against a  background  of  absence  of  an
integrated conservation and tourism, a weak legislative base, a  lack  of
coordination between departments  of  government  and  across  levels  of
government, the relatively high  risk  profile  of  the  Wild  Coast  for
private sector investment, and a shortage of hard skills in various areas
of governance.

     7. EU WILD COAST TOURISM PROJECT

Some of the poverty alleviation projects presented to the  delegation  of
the committee include:
    ➢ Mzamba Tours –  an  existing  community  owned  and  operated  tour
      business  in  Mzamba.  This  programme   is   currently   providing
      mentorship support to the business and facilitating linkages of the
      business to other similar private  sector  enterprise  in  the  KZN
      South coast area.
    ➢ Mzamba Trust – this programme is providing legal and  developmental
      technical assistance to the trust in their deliberations  with  sun
      international  on  the  land  claim  over  the  wild  coast  casino
      development area.
    ➢ Mzamba Craft Center- This  project  works  closely  with  OR  Tambo
      District Municipality and  local  municipalities  in  planning  and
      unfolding gateway development,  including  review  of  the  current
      booking office and facility for the horse and hiking trail and  the
      possible development of tourism accommodation facilities.
    ➢ Amadiba Adventures- This  project  involves  a  decision  taken  by
      ACCODA trust to continue with AA as a community owned and  operated
      tourism venture.  A private sector  mentorship  support  to  AA  is
      being negotiated as part of  the  Mtentu  concession  process.  The
      programme will now be investigating,  facilitating  and  supporting
      implementation of a new campsite up the Mtentu gorge to add to  the
      current facilities at Kwanyana for the trail operation.
    ➢  Mzamba  to  Mkambti  –  through  this   project,   an   integrated
      conservation and development planning has been done  together  with
      Mbizana local municipality the Provincial  Department  of  Economic
      Affairs,  Environment  and  Tourism.  The  planning   and   project
      identification processes are currently being incorporated into  the
      Integrated Development Planning and Skills Development Forum.

According to the Acting Head of the Department of  Economic  Affairs  and
Tourism, some of the problems affecting the successful implementation  of
the above-mentioned poverty alleviation projects is the under-development
of economic activity  in  an  area  of  extreme  poverty,  difficulty  in
securing optimal development in  the  right  places,  significantly  high
levels of unauthorized/ illegal development, high level of degradation of
the critical  natural  resource  base,  and  difficulty  in  implementing
strategic national government  policy  in  areas  such  as  environmental
management and economic empowerment. The delegation of the committee  was
then informed that the European Union programme is  currently  developing
clarity  in  the  areas  of  land  rights,  land  use   rights,   project
development, local municipal  planning,  development  responsibility  and
the participation of empowered communities in tourism enterprise.

4. MEETING WITH EXECUTIVE MAYOR OF OR TAMBO MUNICIPALITY

On the 2nd of February  2005,  the  delegation  of  the  committee  met  the
Executive  Mayor  of  OR  Tambo  Municipality,  Ms  Zoleka  Capa.   In   her
interaction with the  delegation  of  the  committee,  the  Executive  Major
indicated that local municipalities are often left  behind  with  regard  to
policy implementation such as  the  proposed  N2  toll  road,  the  proposed
Xolobeni mining and nature conservation. She further emphasized a  need  for
national government to consult district municipalities when  visiting  local
communities. She further dispelled the  complaints  that  the  community  of
Pondoland was not consulted about  the  proposed  construction  of  N2  toll
road.

The delegation of the committee was informed by the Executive Mayor that  in
order  to  ensure  sufficient  public  consultationm   the   Department   of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism conducted workshops among the  members  of
the  community  and  that  during  these  workshops  no  member   from   the
communities was  against  the  construction  of  the  N2  toll  road.  While
acknowledging the socio-economic benefits of the  construction  of  N2  Toll
road, the Executive Mayor stated that the challenge  facing  eco-tourism  in
Pondoland related to the need to use local knowledge of the  people  in  the
community projects, the need to design  and  implement  poverty  alleviation
projects such as crafting project for women, linking  community  development
projects with integrated development  planning  (IDP)  at  local  government
level, reviewing the status of land demarcation and the role of land  claims
commission. The other challenge the Executive  Mayor  mentioned  related  to
the use of consultants in developing community related  poverty  alleviation
projects  and  the  lack  of  knowledge  transfer  and  training   for   the
communities which the projects are intended to benefit.

5. COEGA DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION

On the 3 February 2005, the delegation of the committee  visited  the  Coega
Development Corporation. The Acting  Manager,  Mr.  M  Mopoma,  briefed  the
delegation of the Committee on the  Coega  development  projects.  The  main
focus of  the  presentation  was  on  services  related  to  the  industrial
development zone, investment  incentives,  people  and  skills  development,
metals and metallurgical issues,  automotive  issues,  textile  issues,  and
information technology and logistics.

5.1. BRIEFING ON CORPORATION BUSINESS SERVICES

The Coega Development Corporation offers services to  the  community.  The
services offered provide assistance on  one  stop  service  to  investors,
environmental impact assessments, drawing  up  business  plans,  obtaining
finance, fast-tracking of applications through the administrative process,
technical  support  for  construction,   recruitment   and   training   of
construction team and workers for factory, and support for the  relocation
of key  personnel,  including  work  permits,  finding  accommodation  and
settling in.

5.2. INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE SKILLS DEVELOPMENT


The Coega  Development  Corporation’s  Industrial  Development  Zone  offers
services such as integrated deep- water  harbour  with  container  and  bulk
terminals, high- tech  communication  infrastructure,  customised  employee-
training program, low electricity costs. During the period under review,  it
was  reported  that  the  Coega  Development  Corporation  has  developed  a
comprehensive skills database for the Nelson Mandela Metro,  which  provides
Labour for the Coega Industrial Development Zone.

The investors coming into the zone draw  labour  from  a  screened  pool  of
people,  which  reduces  the  amount  of  time  and   resources   spent   on
recruitment. Using this database,  the  Coega  Development  Corporation  can
identify any skills gap well ahead of  construction  or  of  a  new  factory
coming  on  line.  The  skills  gaps  identified  are  then  filled  through
comprehensive training programmes which are funded  through  the  Department
of Labour.

      3. SPECIALIZED TRANNING
There are number of training institutions, including the University  in  the
Nelson Mandela Metro, that provide education and training for  investors  in
the Coega Industrial Development Zone. There is  also  specialized  training
for the Automotive Industry being managed by  the  Eastern  Cape  Automotive
Industry Development Council. It has  established  agreements  with  several
tertiary-educational institutions  in  the  Eastern  Cape  to  run  approved
courses and learnerships  to  develop  skills  required  by  the  automotive
industry.

5.4.  METAL AND METALURGICAL CLUSTER

The metal and metallurgical cluster provides  direct  rail  links  to  South
Africa’s mineral wealth, deep water harbours, road  transport  to  container
terminals for export, low energy costs, competitive land prices  and  access
to south Africa’s metallurgical  processing  skills  related  to  manganese,
chromium, platinum, gold, vanadium, aluminosilicates and vermiculite.

5.5. AUTOMOTIVE CLUSTER

The  automotive  cluster  provides  best   cost   solution   for   component
manufacturers, assemblers, original equipment suppliers and  auto  logistics
specialists wanting to invest in the southern Hemisphere. The  cluster  also
provides  project  benefits  such  as  a  skilled  and   highly   productive
workforce, logistic infrastructure, customized employee training  programmes
and  support  systems  including  a  training  college,  service  providers,
machine shops, electronics and robotics specialists
5.6 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

In order to  meet  the  challenges  of  information  technology,  the  Coega
Development  Corporation  has   installed   an   Information   Communication
Technology System that   integrates all processes and activities within  the
Coega Industrial Development Zone. A customer management solution  has  been
improved through the creation of a contact center.

6. MEETING WITH TRADITIONAL LEADERS AND ECOTOURISM OPERATORS

The operators raised concerns over the  funding  from  the  European  Union,
which was meant to assist in the development of  eco-tourism  operators  and
tourism in general in the area. It is alleged  that  consultants  spent  all
these funds. . Added to that was also the situation  of  no  protocol  being
followed in dealing with community activities  in  the  areas,  a  situation
that resulted in no consultation at all with  the  communities  affected  in
those areas.

7.    CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Having conducted on oversight visit to Kwa-Zulu Natal,  Pondolond,  and  the
Coega Development Corporation from  the  30TH  of  January  to  the  3rd  of
February 2005, the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and  Tourism
concludes and recommends as follows:

         • That  the  Portfolio  Committee  must  call  the  Department  of
           Environmental Affairs before it to provide  a  briefing  on  the
           latest eco-tourism and conservation plans for the Wild Coast;


Report to be considered.

7. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the  Medium  Term  Budget
   Policy StatementAppr 2005, dated 15 November 2005:


 1. INTRODUCTION
The Minister of Finance tabled  the  Medium  Budget  Policy  Statement  2005
(MTBPS 2005) on 25 October 2005 before Parliament.

On 26 October, the Committee in a joint sitting with  the  Select  Committee
of Finance was briefed on the MTBPS 2005  and  the  MTEF  forecasts  by  the
Minister of Finance,  the  Deputy  Minister  of  Finance  and  the  Director
General of the National Treasury. On  28  October,  the  Committee  received
further submissions from invited economists, as well  as  organized  labour.
These submissions dealt with a range of issues raised in the MTBPS 2005,  as
well as certain other related issues.

The Portfolio Committee on Finance considered and deliberated on the  Medium
Term Budget Policy Statements 2005, during several meetings.  The  Committee
also used the opportunity to review the specific recommendations it made  in
relation  to  Budget  2005/06,  on  the  extent  to  which  Government   and
specifically the National Treasury has addressed the issues.



 1. Thrust of Medium Term Budget Policy Statement

Infrastructural development is the major instrument, which will be  used  to
grow the economy, which National  Treasury  seeks  to  shift  to  a  steeper
trajectory. The MTBPS also reflects the continued commitment  of  government
to the development of a more robust industrial strategy and  a  fresh  focus
on redistribution.  However  capacity  constraints  continue  to  impact  on
expenditure. The shifting  emphasis  in  this  three-year  policy  statement
prepares the way for  government’s  “shared  growth  initiative,  under  the
leadership of the Deputy President Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka.

The reduction in the deficit enables much more creative policy  and  outlook
to be adopted while the tax to the  Gross  Domestic  Profit  ratio  reflects
continued awareness of the delicate balance between economic growth and  tax
range. The commitment to social security expenditure is underpinned  by  the
proposed allocation of nearly 20 percent of the total expenditure  excluding
debt service costs. Capital expenditure is set  to  increase  from  R18,  9-
billion to R39, 5-billion over the next  three  years.  The  critical  role-
played by provincial and local governments  in  service  delivery  are  also
addressed  with  continued  emphasis  on  education,   health   and   social
development.


 2. ACCELERATED AND SHARED GROWTH

The Committee supports the Government’s continued focus  on  the  objectives
it set out  in  its  medium  term  strategic  framework.  In  particular  it
commends the Government for the progress it has made over the last  year  in
realizing these objectives. The Committee looks  forward  to  engaging  with
the  outputs  of  the  Deputy  President’s  accelerated  and  shared  growth
initiative.

In this regard, the Committee  explored  the  issues  constraining  economic
growth in South Africa, which it had also pursued  during  its  hearings  on
Budget 2005/06. The Committee  notes  that  in  the  current  hearings,  the
shortage of appropriate skills  again  emerged  as  the  key  constraint  to
raising the rate of economic growth.

The continued emphasis on education as one of the  critical  instruments  to
address skills shortages, poverty  and  unemployment  is  reflected  in  the
increased  allocations  to  improve  resources  for  schools   and   support
education reforms  generally.  The  importance  of  raising  the  number  of
learners achieving higher-grade mathematics significantly  above  5  percent
was underpinned by the Minister of Finance. The Committee agrees  that  this
would impact positively on increasing many of the technical skills  such  as
engineering, which are key to South Africa’s growing economy.

The Committee appreciates that  a  range  of  short,  medium  and  long-term
strategies are required to address the issue of skills, and therefore  urges
Government to  pursue  the  priority  of  strengthening  and  improving  the
quality and allocative efficiency of education spending.

 3. ECONOMIC POLICY AND OUTLOOK

There was general agreement with the National  Treasury’s  economic  outlook
for the MTEF period.  Over this medium term it  is  expected  that  improved
service delivery and major public sector investments will  be  supported  by
further policy adjustments informed by accelerated growth measures.

The Committee notes the surge of continued growth  in  the  property  market
and demand for mortgages reflected in the growth  in  installment  sales  of
28.1 percent, which is partly the result of subdued inflation  and  the  low
interest rate prevailing. However the Committee  would  like  to  express  a
note of caution with regard  to  poorer  households,  which  may  have  tied
themselves into bonds that they will  not  be  able  to  afford  should  the
interest rate increase.

 1. Performance relative to emerging market peers

 [pic]



It is clear from the information presented in Table 2.1 of  the  MTBPS  2005
(p15) that the South African economy is benefiting from rapid growth in  the
world economy. The  Committee  also  notes  that  the  balance  of  payments
positions of the larger economies remains mixed. Thus if there  is  a  sharp
and sudden change in this position globally, then this could pose a risk  to
the sustainability of capital flows and exchange rates. The capital  inflows
are primarily portfolio investments and thus highly volatile.  Should  there
be any shock to emerging markets, these  portfolio  investments  could  exit
the country very rapidly. In this context the Committee was of  the  opinion
that  the  improved  export  performance  in  the  first  half  of  2005  is
encouraging. In  relation  to  emerging  economies,  particularly  those  in
Africa, South Africa is likely to move ahead positively in  the  second  and
third year of the medium term.

 2. Growth led by consumer spending

The MTBPS 2005 highlights the persistence of the exceptionally  high  levels
of household consumption expenditure, which in the first half of  2005  grew
by 6.3 percent and is likely to remain in that  range.  It  also  noted  the
vigorous investment in private residential buildings in the  first  half  of
2005. Clearly, consumer-led spending is one of the principal drivers of  the
current higher economic growth rate.

Two of the economists suggested that this is a significant weakness  of  the
current growth trend, and was likely to  pose  an  obstacle  to  efforts  to
drive growth to the 6 percent level. The  Committee  notes  that  growth  in
manufacturing continues to be muted, and consequently  imports  continue  to
rise rapidly. As observed in the Committee’s report on Budget 2005/06,  this
implies that South African manufacturers are  not  capturing  a  significant
portion of the benefit of the  consumption  boom:  instead  the  benefit  is
being  exported  via  the  growth  in  consumer  imports,  particularly   of
vehicles, electronic goods and textiles. However in the Committee’s  opinion
various indicators including new car  sales  at  27.3  percent  and  cements
sales by 10.2 percent in volume in the MTBPS point to economic growth.

 3. Accelerated growth employment and labour participation

Increased employment opportunities created by the  burgeoning  economy  will
accelerate the reduction in unemployment. The Minister of Finance  disagreed
with the view that the current  economy  was  fuelling  jobless  growth  and
referred to the labour  force  survey  data.  It  was  noted  that  the  ILO
confirms the methodology adopted in the current computations of employment.

The average wage settlements anticipated for  2005  are  expected  to  range
from 6-6.5 percent and this  would  indicate  lower  inflation  expectations
than those prevailing in 2004, which stood at  6,8  percent.  The  Committee
agrees that the data presented in the MTBPS 2005 shows a  growth  in  formal
sector  jobs.  However,  the  Committee  notes  that  the  decline  in   the
unemployment rate needs to be viewed with caution given the  rapid  increase
in the number of workers that are ‘not economically active’.  The  Committee
is of the view that the  challenge  of  accelerating  employment  among  the
youth is one, which an accelerated shared growth policy will address.
 4. Administered Price Index

The Committee  welcomes  the  release  of  the  Administered  Prices  Index.
However, the Committee is of the view that the inclusion of  petrol  in  the
index detracts from the usefulness of the index as a measure of  the  direct
impact that Government price setting has on inflation.

Although the price of petrol is administered by the Department  of  Minerals
and Energy, in the Committee’s opinion the price  setting  methodology  used
by the department does  not  fall  within  the  definition  of  administered
prices as defined by Statistics SA, namely:

An administered price can be defined as the price of  a  product,  which  is
set consciously by an individual producer or group of producers  and/or  any
price,  which  can  be  determined  or  influenced  by  government,   either
directly, or through one or other government  agencies/institutions  without
reference to market forces.

The Committee would like to engage National Treasury and  Statistics  SA  on
how changes in the fuel levy, RAF levy, the various excise  taxes,  the  NER
levy and similar taxes and levies impact upon inflation. It is not clear  to
the Committee why vehicle license fees (which are essentially  a  provincial
tax) are included in the Index, while other taxes and levies are excluded.

 4. FISCAL POLICY

Unplanned savings reflect weaknesses in the capacity of government to  spend
all of the available  resources,  which  also  contributes  to  the  deficit
reduction. However as acknowledged by the Minister of Finance  this  reveals
one of the critical vulnerabilities of government. This is the need for  the
state to strengthen its capacity so that  the  increasing  revenues  can  be
used to reduce poverty and increase quality services.

In the 2005-2006 budget tax revenue was kept well below 25  percent  of  GDP
however in the 2005 MTBPS the main budget revenue is expected to rise  above
this figure and approaches 26 percent towards the end  of  the  period.  The
increasing emphasis on accelerated growth and the continued  performance  of
SARS  to  produce  significant  increase  in  revenue   collections   beyond
projections may well account for this revision. However the economic  growth
is also performing better than expected.

The following two tables compare the baseline MTEF projections presented  in
the main budget framework for Budget 2005/06, and the  MTEF  projections  in
the main budget framework of the MTBPS 2005.

Table 1: Comparing Budget 2005/06 baseline to MTBPS 2005
[pic]



Table 2: Actual and percentage change between Budget  2005/06  baseline  and
MTBPS 2005



[pic]


 1. Significance of the deficit reduction

Table 2 shows that in  2005/06  the  Government  expects  total  revenue  to
increase by some R30 billion over the baseline figure  projected  in  Budget
2005/06. The government has decided to allocate the  R30  billion  in  extra
revenue to the reducing the deficit. None of the extra revenue collected  in
2005/06 is  being  used  to  finance  extra  expenditure.  Consequently  the
deficit declines from 3.1 percent project in Budget 2005/06 to 1 percent  in
the MTBPS 2005.

In 2006/07 and 2007/08, the Government expects total revenue to increase  by
some R31.6 billion and R34.4 billion respectively over the  baseline  figure
projected in Budget 2005/06. In these years, R14 billion and R11 billion  of
the extra revenue is used to reduce the deficit, while the balance of  R17.6
billion and R23.4  billion  goes  towards  funding  extra  expenditure.  The
consequence is real growth in total expenditure, and more moderate  deficits
than projected in Budget 2005/06.

The Committee agrees with Government that  if  the  extra  funds  cannot  be
utilized  effectively,  they  should  be  used  to  reduce  borrowing.  This
approach is also  consistent  with  the  fiscal  management  principle  that
suggests governments should seek  to  reduce  deficits  during  the  upswing
phase of the business cycle so as to create space  for  borrowing  when  the
business cycle enters the downswing phase.

In the Committee’s opinion the significant reduction in the deficit and  the
projected balanced budget underpins the urgency in developing strategic  and
additional capacitation in government to ensure  efficiency,  effective  and
equitable expenditure of revenue on prioritized service commitments. It  was
noted that the Minister was  not  averse  to  borrowing  if  this  could  be
justified by increased expenditure and even  allow  the  budget  deficit  to
rise to 3.5 percent, which is not unusual in other sound economies.

 2. Growth in non-interest expenditure

The Committee notes that despite the tremendous social needs, Government  is
clearly unable to spend the extra revenues on meeting those needs and  hence
in 2005/06 has decided to use all the extra revenues to reduce debt.

However, the Committee notes that the rate of growth  in  expenditure  could
have been far stronger if departments had had  the  capacity  and  plans  to
manage  extra  spending.  This  highlights  the  lack   of   skills   within
departments,  and  consequently  the  critical  importance   of   developing
management, and specifically project management skills  within  departments.
In the Committee’s view it is a serious matter that departments seem  unable
to utilize the funds available to reduce poverty.

 3. Growth in infrastructure spending
The Committee supports the Government in its efforts  to  increase  spending
on infrastructure. The Committee, however, urges Government to  pay  special
attention  to  allocative  efficiency,  use  labour  intensive  methods   to
maximize job creation  and  support  the  development  of  SMEs  as  primary
contractors, sub-contractors or suppliers.

In the Committee’s opinion BBBEE principles  and  objectives  should  inform
the allocation of all tenders, and that Public private  partnerships  (PPPs)
are used where appropriate to leverage investment from the  private  sector.
The Committee welcomed the monitoring measures National Treasury had put  in
place on PPPs and also the training for  provinces.  Operational  costs  and
maintenance should not be overlooked in  the  planning  and  development  of
infrastructure.

 4. Surpluses savings and debt service costs

The Committee notes the growing surpluses on the social security funds,  and
calls on the National Treasury to establish  actuarially  acceptable  levels
of cover with a view to possibly reducing the levies that fund these funds.

The Committee welcomes the news that general government saving  is  expected
to become  positive  by  the  end  of  the  MTEF  period.  As  a  result  of
Government’s decision to use the extra revenues to reduce the  deficit,  the
projected debt service costs in the MTBPS 2005 have fallen relative  to  the
baseline projected in Budget 2005/06. The consequence  is  that  instead  of
debt service costs as a percentage of GDP remaining constant  at  about  3.4
percent they now show a strong downward trend. In  the  Committee’s  opinion
this could pave the way for increased expenditure on measures,  to  increase
and upgrade skills required by the economy.

 5. Borrowing requirement of public enterprises

The following table compares the  borrowing  requirements  of  non-financial
public enterprises projected in Budget 2005/06 and those  projected  in  the
MTBPS 2005.

Table 3: Borrowing by non-financial public enterprises

[pic]

The Committee notes that the  MTBPS  2005  projects  a  sharp  reduction  in
public enterprises’ borrowing requirements in 2005/06. This  would  seem  to
suggest that certain very significant projects have had to  be  delayed,  or
that the public enterprises are able to pay  for  these  projects  from  the
cash they are generating.

The Committee also notes  that  by  reducing  the  main  budget  deficit  in
2006/07 and 2007/08, the Government has created additional space for  public
enterprises to increase their borrowing without placing  undue  pressure  on
capital markets. The Committee calls on Government  to  monitor  the  public
enterprises ’ borrowing activities  closely  to  ensure  the  debt  is  used
productively, and it remains at sustainable levels. Also to ensure  that  it
is  structured  so  as  to  minimize  risk,  and  Government’s  exposure  to
contingent liabilities.

 5. TAXATION

The Committee commends the South African Revenue  Services  (SARS)  for  its
continued good performance as reflected by the fact  that  the  Minister  of
Finance revised the  main  budget  revenue  for  2005/06  upwards  by  R30.2
billion to R400.1 billion. In the  Committee’s  opinion  progress  has  been
rapid particularly the implementation the administrative measures  aimed  at
supporting small businesses. The Committee looks forward to the  publication
of the Anti-avoidance discussion document by SARS,  and  proposes  that  the
issue be the subject of public hearings.

 1. Medical Scheme membership

The Committee supports the proposed reforms  to  the  treatment  of  medical
scheme contributions and other medical expenses. However it recommends  that
the Government annually revise the caps placed on the tax-free amounts  that
taxpayers can claim in respect of their  monthly  contributions  to  medical
schemes. This is to ensure that the benefit is not eroded  by  increases  in
the cost of medical scheme contributions.

 2. Tax policy considerations for the 2006 Budget

The continued expected growth of the economy and strong revenue  performance
SARS offers scope to consider  the  significant  reduction  of  taxes  while
maintain the policy target of keeping main budget revenue at 25  percent  of
GDP. The Committee looks forward to the release of the discussion  paper  on
the Tax Reform of Retirement Savings, and proposes that  the  issue  be  the
subject of public hearings.

 3. Scope to offer tax incentives to promote SMEs and skills development

In the committee’s opinion this offers National Treasury the opportunity  to
explore the  possibility  of  making  above  inflation  adjustments  to  the
monetary thresholds and  income  tax  brackets;  increasing  the  incentives
given to small  businesses;  and  offering  incentives  to  businesses  that
provide “learnerships”. The Committee supports the position of the  Minister
of Finance that in this developmental economy there is a need for  business,
workers and the government to jointly confront the challenges  of  expanding
SMEs and ensuring their sustainability.

 4. Reducing the rate of company income tax to stimulate growth

The  committee  considered  the  calls  on  government,  by  the  presenting
economists too further reduce the rate of company income  tax  in  order  to
further  stimulate  investment  and  job  creation.   The   committee   also
considered the Ministers position that a discussion in plans in this  regard
may encourage companies to arbitrage their income  across  years  so  as  to
take advantage of future lower tax rates.

In the Committee’s opinion a competitive tax  regime  is  only  one  of  the
factors that companies consider when deciding on investments,  and  in  this
regard support the comments  made  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  regarding
efforts to stabilize economies in Africa  so  as  to  expand  the  potential
market size of the South African economy.

Nevertheless the Committee is of the view that a further moderate  reduction
in  the  rate  of  company  income  tax  would  contribute  meaningfully  to
sustaining and fostering the positive investment  climate  that  exists,  as
well as positioning South Africa more favourably relative to other  emerging
markets. The Committee continues to support  the  Government’s  position  on
the secondary tax on  companies.  However  it  urges  National  Treasury  to
continue to deal decisively with the misconceptions  and  misrepresentations
that exist; and to disseminate information more widely  regarding  the  real
effective tax on company profits in South Africa.

 5. Replacement of the RSC levies

The Committee is of the view that any replacement for the  RSC  levies  must
comply with the following principles:

  ▪ It  must  promote  local  level  fiscal  accountability,  in  terms  of
    linking responsibility for setting rates, raising revenue and spending;
  ▪ It must provide municipalities with a stable  source  of  revenue,  not
    one  that  is  unduly  dependent  on  cyclical  movements  in  economic
    performance or the performance  of  particular  markets  (such  as  the
    property market);
  ▪ It must have a broad base, but must not be regressive;
  ▪  It  must  be  equitable  across  municipalities,   especially   taking
    historical patterns of development into account;
  ▪ It must be transparent,  in  the  sense  that  tax-payers  be  able  to
    understand the tax, must know when they are paying it and how much they
    are paying;
  ▪ It must not impose an  administrative  burden  on  the  individuals  or
    entities required to pay the tax;
  ▪ It must  not  undermine  the  Government’s  efforts  to  promote  small
    businesses; and
  ▪ It must promote economic unity.

Taking the above principles into account, the Committee’s preliminary
assessment is that in addition to the preferred options, namely zero-rating
of property taxes and allocating municipalities a share of the general fuel
levy, it also supports the use of a municipal electricity levy,
particularly if it is structured so as to tax higher levels of domestic
consumption.

 6. RESOLUTIONS ON THE MTBPS 2005

The Deputy President’s shared growth initiative is a  robust  platform  from
which to implement a number of the resolutions arising from the  committee’s
deliberations on the MTBPS.

The Committee therefore urges:

 1. Government to give the highest priority to the issue of  resolving  the
    shortage of skills required to drive economic growth and  the  delivery
    of government services. The Committee recommends  that  the  Government
    develop a range of short, medium and long term policies in  conjunction
    with other role-players in the economy.
 2. The Department of Labour to take decisive action to ensure that all the
    SETAs have the necessary management capacity to fulfill  there  mandate
    to support the development of skills required in the economy.

 3. A review of all government’s initiatives aimed at promoting the role of
    youth in the economy as part of the Deputy President’s ‘accelerated and
    shared growth initiative’ to  make  recommendations  as  to  how  these
    initiatives can be made more effective.

The Committee also requests:

 4. A written response from National Treasury to the issues it  has  raised
    in relation to the Administered Prices Index in section 3.5 above.
 5. A written explanation from the National  Treasury  as  to  whether  the
    upward trend in main budget revenue as a percent of GDP to  nearly  26%
    towards the end of the MTEF, reflects  a  change  in  the  Government’s
    current policy in this regard.
 6. A written explanation from the National Treasury to clarify the  causes
    of the sharp reduction in non-financial  public  enterprises  borrowing
    requirement in 2005/06.
 7. That when the  Income  Tax  Act  is  amended  to  accommodate  the  new
    treatment of contributions to medical schemes, that  National  Treasury
    consider  legislating  adjustments  of  these  deductions  annually  to
    accommodate the effects of inflation.
 7. ORAL SUBMISSIONS

The following people made oral submissions before  the  Committee,  some  in
their personal capacity. Mr T Manuel, Minister of Finance,  Mr  J  Moleketi,
Deputy  Minister  of  Finance  Mr  L  Kganyago,  Director-General:  National
Treasury, Ms Noelani King Conradie, NKC Independent Economists, Ms  Nazmeera
Moola, Merril Lynch (South Africa), Ms Riefdah Ajam,  Federation  of  Unions
of South Africa (FEDUSA), Mr Cyril Mlatsheni,  Southern  Africa  Labour  and
Development Research Unit (UCT).

Report to be considered.

8. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on Tourism,
  Hospitality and Sport Education and Training Authority (THETA), dated 15
  November 2005:


      The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, having considered and
      examined the Annual Report of the Tourism, Hospitality & Sport
      Education & Training Authority for 2004/2005 including the Report of
      the Auditor-General on the financial statements for 2004/2005 referred
      to it, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

9. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on a fact-finding visit to
  Wallmannstahl, dated 11 November 2005.

The Portfolio Committee on Defence, having undertaken a fact-finding visit
to Wallmannstahl on 20 August 2005, reports as follows.
A. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Portfolio Committee on Defence visited Wallmannstahl on Wednesday, 24
August 2005 to ascertain the size and scope of the land claim of the
Wallmannstahl community. The land claims, in general, against the
Department of Defence amounts to 311 270 hectares, whilst the claims of the
Wallmannstahl community amounts to 1 628 hectares.

The Wallmannstahl land claim concerns four areas: Buffelsdrift,
Wallmannstahl West (also called ‘Avenues’), Wallmannstahl East (also called
Jericho) and Wallmannstahl Central. A portion of Buffelsdrift is used as
grazing land for game by the Bewarea hunting club. Three portions of land
in Wallmannstahl West were handed-over to the community, i.e. Avenues one,
Avenues two and Avenues three. Wallmannstahl East is in the process of
being completed, while the central area is used by the South African
National Defence Force (SANDF).

B. TERMS OF REFERENCE

The land claim of the Wallmannstahl community was registered in 1994,
however it has not been resolved since then. The Portfolio Committee on
Defence received numerous  requests for intervention from the claimants and
decided to send a three-member team [Appendix A] to do an on-site visit of
Wallmannstahl.

C. MAIN FINDINGS

The following findings were made:
   1. There is a communication gap between the Department of Public Works
      (DPW), Department of Land Affairs (DLA), the Department of Defence
      (DoD) and the community, which was a major reason for the claims
      process not being finalised.
   2. The DoD’s motivation of ‘strategic purposes’ to retain the contested
      land was viewed as a smokescreen by the community.

D. BUFFELSDRIFT

The Bewarea club built a fence that cuts across the land that was at the
centre of the claim. The chairperson of this club is Mr George Meiring, the
former Chief of the SANDF. There was also an electricity sub-station and
electrical pylons on the land. According to the claimants, Escom wanted the
area under the electric wires to be a no-go area, but the community is
convinced that it could be used for grazing. They agreed, however, that the
area should not be used for housing.

Mr Schalkwyk of the Department of Land affairs (Appendix C) confirmed that
the fence was erected to protect the power line and that the servitude was
registered. He added that there should be no interference with the power
station. This was acceptable to the claimants. Mr Schalkwyk also stated
that Buffelsdrift was handed-over to the claimants and that the Bewarea
club will be requested to remove its fence, which was used to control the
movements of the game.

E. WALLMANNSTAHL WEST

This area was not contested, because three portions were handed over to the
community.

F. WALLMANNSTAHL EAST
The DoD agreed to hand this area to the claimants. The claimants are
however waiting for the DLA to remove the white squatters from the land,
before they occupy the land. The size of the area is about 400 hectares and
it included the Pienaars River, which is the main source of water for the
farming community.

G. WALLMANNSTAHL CENTRAL STRIP

The DoD used the strip of land (approximately 400 hectares) to connect the
Wallmannstahl Main Ordnance sub-depot with its training area, i.e. the Piet
Joubert military base. The fence that was erected by the DoD forced the
claimants to redirect their cattle approximately 11,5 km to reach the
Pienaars River for drinking water. The claimants stated that this strip of
land was published in the government gazette as a land claim, however the
DoD has not yet released the land, which the DoD argued is of ‘strategic
importance’, i.e. as training and storage of equipment.

The claimants and the DoD were in the process of concluding an agreement,
but the dispute was that the DoD wanted to fence the 400 hectares in. The
claimants were prepared to allow the DoD to use the current road as a
corridor, but not the whole 400 hectares, so that the two military areas
could be linked. This corridor should not be fenced in, so that the
claimants could have access to the river for their cattle.

H. RECOMMENDATIONS

   1. The DoD should make an assessment to determine whether they really
      need the strip of 400 hectares for strategic purposes or whether the
      access road would be sufficient to link the different military areas.
   2. The remaining snags (e.g. squatters and fences) should be addressed by
      the department of Land Affairs, so that the Wallmannstahl community
      can return to the land.

Report to be considered.

APPENDIX A - DELEGATION

PC Defence Delegation
   1. Mr SB Ntuli      - ANC (Delegation leader)
   2. Mr OE Monareng   - ANC
   3. Mr VB Ndlovu     - IFP
   4. Mr G Campher     - Committee Secretary

APPENDIX B – ABBREVIATIONS

ANC         - African national Congress
DLA         - Department of Land Affairs
DoD         - Department of Defence
DPW         - Department of Public Works
IFP         - Inkatha Freedom Party
SANDF - South African National Defence Force

APPENDIX C - PARTICIPANTS

Wallmannstahl Representatives
   1. Mr S Maponya           - Treasurer : Wallmannstahl Claims Committee
   2. Mr BP Motswenyame            - Chair : Wallmannstahl Claims Committee
   3. Mr KW Mmoledi          - Member : Wallmannstahl Claims Committee

Department of Defence Representatives
   1. Brig. Gen BJ Moerane   - Director : Facilities Support Management
   2. Brig.Gen E Navratil          - Director : Facilities
   3. Col JP van Heerden           - Defence Fixed Assets
   4. Lt-Col SB Ramokgadi    - Acting Officer Commanding : JSB Wonderboom

Department of Public Works Representative
   1. Mr FX Mbuli            - Deputy Director : Land Reform

Department of Land Affairs Representatives
   1. Mr CJ Schalkwyk        - Director : State Land Management
   2. Ms N Khuswayo          - Land Commission
   3. Ms J Molefe            - Land Commission
   4. Mr B Mphela            - Regional Land Commissioner
                              (North West & Gauteng)

10. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on the Public Hearings on
   the Wallmannstahl Land Claim, dated 25 October 2005.

The Portfolio Committee on Defence, having held Public Hearings on the
Wallmannstahl Land Claim on 06 September, reports as follows.
A. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Wallmannstahl Community’s land claim was in different settlement
phases. The main disputed claim was the strip of 400 hectares of state land
[1] that linked two military units [2]. When the claim for the 400 hectares
was lodged and published in the government gazette, the Department of
Defence did not lodge any objection. The community is currently cut-off
from the Pienaars River, which is used for livestock and human consumption,
as well as agricultural purposes. The community currently uses a detour of
11,5 km to access the river.

The Portfolio Committee on Defence was briefed on 05 April 2005 by the
Department of Defence (DoD) and the Department of Land Affairs (DLA) on the
state of land reform and the land utilisation by the DoD. The briefing was
uncoordinated and at certain instances contradictory. The Committee made
certain recommendations and was impressed that the two departments, as well
as the Department of Public Works (DPW) moved swiftly to establish the Land
Management Forum, which would enhance the coordination of the three
departments to accelerate land reform.

Even though the Department of Defence and the community have moved closer
to finalise the Wallmannstahl Land claim, the Committee stated that the
desire of the community to return to their land, has to be balanced with
the training needs of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF). The
committee is of the opinion that a court case, which is expensive and
adversarial, would be unnecessary, because the two parties are close to an
agreement.

B. BACKGROUND TO THE HEARINGS

The DoD and the DLA briefed the Portfolio Committee on Defence on 05 April
2005 on the status of the land claims against the DoD. The separate
briefings of the two departments were characterised by a lack of
coordination, confusion on the amount of land that was being claimed and
the land that was owned by the two departments. It was also clear that the
lack of coordination between the two departments was an impediment to the
President’s wishes to accelerate the National Land Reform Programme.

The Portfolio Committee on Defence made certain recommendations, on the
basis of the briefing of 05 April 2005, to remedy the situation. The
recommendations were:
   a. The establishment of a structure between the Department of Defence,
      Department of Land Affairs and the Department of Public Works.
   b. The surveying of the land used by the Department of Defence.
   c. The Department of Land Affairs should complete the land audit process.
   d. The Department of Defence and Department of Land Affairs should
      finalise the Wallmannstahl land claim by the end of May 2005.

The three departments made a follow-up briefing to the Committee on
Tuesday, 06 September 2005 as part of the Public Hearings on the
Wallmannstahl Land claim. The three departments made a joint briefing in
which they reported that a joint structure or forum, i.e. the Land
Management Forum, was established on 20 April 2005, which consisted of
senior departmental officials. The forum included the Land Commission,
which has to implement the land reform programme. The forum would report to
the three directors-general on a bi-monthly basis on:
   a. The surveying and registration of state land used by the Department
      of Defence.
   b. The utilisation of land by the Department of Defence.
   c. Measures to ensure that the acquisition and disposal of land by the
      Department of Defence was transparent and in line with the land
      reform programme.

It was however reported that the Wallmannstahl Land claim remained
unresolved. An agreement was being negotiated and the hope was expressed
that a signing ceremony would be held for the land that was restored to the
community.

The Land Management Forum was in the process of (1) compiling a priority
list on land claims against the Department of Defence and (2) to establish
target dates for the completion of the identified land projects.

The Department of Defence has returned 109 221,70 ha to the Department of
Public Works since 1994. The department currently occupies 414 913 ha of
the total 24 253 640 ha of state land, which represented 1,7 % of state
land and 0,34 % of land in general. Land claims for 227 333 ha had been
lodged against the Department of Defence in terms of the Restitution of
Land Rights Act (Act 22 of 1994). The department has agreed that 1628 ha
could be returned to the Wallmannstahl community.

C. MAIN FINDINGS

   1. The three departments (the DoD, DLA and DPW) were committed to the
      land reform programme, in general and the Wallmannstahl Land claim, in
      particular, which was initiated in 1994.
   2. There was a general agreement between the community and the DoD on
      most of the claims lodged by the community.
   3. The community wanted to settle all the claims before holding a handing-
      over ceremony.
   4. The only area in dispute was the 400 ha strip of land that linked the
      Wallmannstahl Main Ordnance sub-depot and the Piet Joubert training
      area.

D. SUBMISSIONS RECEIVED

I. Submission of the Land Commission & the Department of Land Affairs

a. The Land Claim Process
Land claims were lodged with the Land Commission in terms of the
Restitution of Land Rights Act (Act 22 of 1994). The Commission then
researched and validated the claim, whereafter it was published in the
government gazette.

A land claim could be resolved in one of three ways; i.e. through:
   1. an agreement,
   2. a court decision, if there is disagreement or
   3. expropriation. The DLA could not apply expropriation, because the land
      was used by a state department (i.e. the DoD) and it belonged to the
      Department of Public Works.


It was stated by the Land Commission that the settling of a land claim was
a protracted process, due to several reasons:
   1. There was more than one community that had to be dealt with, as in the
      case of the Lohatla military base, where three communities submitted
      claims.
   2. There were no certificates of ownership or title deed and the land was
      not registered or surveyed.
   3. Disagreements between the claimants and the Department of Land Affairs
      (DLA).
   4. The current user, e.g. the Department of Defence does not clarify its
      need or usage of the contested land.


The Commission indicated that the claim could be processed, if mapping was
done at least, even though surveying was necessary to register the claim.

b. Alternative land
Alternative land was identified, when claimants did not want financial
compensation or cannot move to their original land, as it would lead to
economic disorder. It was a difficult process, because the location, size
and quality of the alternative land might not be to the satisfaction of the
claimants. The value of land also differed from municipality to
municipality, which was exacerbated by the collusion between private land
valuers and public officials.

c. Context
Communities were forced off the land by the pre-1994 regime from the
community in the 1970s. The land was arable and had sufficient water for
livestock and agricultural purposes. The claimed land might be the hub of
economic activity today, which necessitates the identification of
alternative land, so as not to cause economic disruptions. The question was
whether the community would receive land similar in size and quality or
bigger to compensate them for the unjust treatment of the past. The DLA
stated that it made additional land available to the land that was claimed
by the community. The department added that the aim of the legislation was
to bring about land reform, but to prevent disorder.

II. Wallmannstahl Community Submission

The community is still in negotiations with the DoD, which wanted to
release the land in phases. There is currently a 400 ha portion of land
that was in dispute. The community representatives stated that they were
officially informed that the DoD used the land for training for the
military police agency, the South African Military Health Service and the
Special Forces. However, they were informally informed that the land was
used by the DoD for animal breeding. The community is currently separated
from the Pienaars River, which is used for livestock and agricultural
purposes.
It was also established that the DoD did not use the land regularly for
training, but sporadically.

The official view of the DoD at the public hearings was that it did not yet
decide whether to release the 400 ha. The community representatives stated
that the claim for the 400 ha was published in the government gazette, but
it took longer to settle, due to the attitude of the DoD.

The chairperson stated, in conclusion, that the land in question belonged
to the community and that it should be returned to the community, so that
the courts, which are expensive and adversarial, could be avoided.

E. RECOMMENDATIONS

   1. The Minister of Defence should meet with the Wallmannstahl community
      to bring the process to completion by (hopefully) 24 December 2005 so
      that an official hand-over of the land to the community can take place
      in April 2006.
   2. The Committee believes that the Department of Defence should use the
      current dirt road, that should not be fenced in, as a strategic
      corridor to link the Ordnance sub-depot and the training area, so that
      the community could have access to the Pienaars River. A court case,
      which is expensive and adversarial should be prevented.
   3. The committee will monitor the situation so that the parties can
      finalise the matter by December 2005. If the matter was not settled by
      24 December 2005, then the Portfolio Committee on Defence will
      recommend that the relevant Ministries (Public Works, Land Affairs,
      Defence) account to Parliament.

Report to be considered.

NOTES

   1. Public land refers to state land, municipal land and parastatal land,
      while state land refers to land that national and provincial
      departments are in possession of.


   2. Wallmannstahl Main Ordnance sub-depot and the Piet Joubert military
      training area.

APPENDIX A - ABBREVIATIONS

Brig.Gen    : Brigadier-General
DG          : Director-General
DDG         : Deputy Director-General
SANDF : South African National Defence Force
DoD         : Department of Defence
DLA         : Department of Land Affairs
DPW         : Department of Public Works

APPENDIX B - PARTICIPANTS
In attendance:
Wallmannstahl Land Claims Committee
Mr BP Motsuenyana            : Chairperson
Mr K Mmoledi           : Treasurer
Mr S Maponya           : Member

Department of Defence
Mr January Masilela          : Secretary for Defence (DG)
Mr Bruce Ramfolo       : Chief of Acquisition and procurement (DDG)
Mr SD Dlala            : Director – Facilities
Mr Barney Engelbrecht  : Director – Budget Control
Brig Gen Ernest Navratil     : Director – Defence Facilities (SANDF)

Department of Land Affairs
Mr Glen Thomas         : Director-General
Mr Tozi Gwanya         : Chief Land Claims Commissioner
Mr Blessing Mphela           : Land Commissioner (Gauteng & North West)
Mr Danie Pretorius           : Deputy Director – Public Land Support
Services
Mr Chris J Schalkwyk         : Director – Public Land Support
Mr Deon Theron         : Chief Planner - Regional Land Claims
                         (Gauteng & North West)

Department of Public Works
Mr James Maseko        : Director-General
Mr Andre Meyering            : Director – Property Policy


INSERT APPENDIX C: From pages 2807 - 2717


11. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on an oversight visit to
   Thaba Tshwane, dated 11 November 2005.

The Portfolio Committee on Defence, having undertaken an oversight visit to
Thaba Tshwane on 18 and 19 Aug 2005, reports as follows.

A. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Portfolio Committee on Defence visited different military units in the
Thaba Tshwane area from 18 to 19 August 2005 to ascertain the state of the
facilities and the maintenance thereof. The delegation was accompanied by
military officers and officials of the Department of Defence (DoD) and
Department of Public Works (DPW).
The military units visited were:
   1. The South African Military Health Services’ Training Formation.
   2. 1 Military Hospital
   3. Special Forces School
   4. Joint Support Base Garrison (A Mess)
   5. Defence Intelligence Headquarters
   6. South African National Defence College
   7. South African National War College
   8. South African Air Force College
   9. South African Air Force Gymnasium

The buildings and land that the units occupy are managed and maintained by
the DPW, which is the custodian of state land and facilities and therefore
responsible for the maintenance and repair of these facilities. The DPW is
responsible for the maintenance and repair of DoD facilities when the costs
are above the R5000 threshold, whilst the DoD is responsible for
maintenance and repair below the R5000 threshold, i.e. day-to-day
maintenance and repair. The DPW provides 80% of the total funding for
maintenance and repair and the DoD the remaining 20%.

The approval of the DPW is however also necessary for cases that would cost
below R5000, because the DPW has the technical know-how to advise the user,
i.e. the DoD on the best course of action. Each military unit has a budget
for day-to-day maintenance, but it is insufficient and only used for
emergency cases. In most cases it is insufficient to deal with emergencies,
which often cannot be covered due to the fast deterioration of state of
facilities, coupled with the maintenance backlogs. Spending is prioritised
on the core business of the units, which includes training, accommodation
and service delivery so that the output is maximized.

The situation with regard to the Defence Intelligence Headquarters and the
South African National War College are different, because they are renting
their accommodation from private institutions. The maintenance and repair
routine is determined by the owner, who is mindful of over-investment in
old buildings. The owner addresses the maintenance requirements of these
two units, but very gradually. The only units that do not have critical
maintenance problems are the South African National Defence College, except
for the living quarters of the learners, as well as the Special Forces
School, which uses its own capabilities (labour and materials) to improve
and maintain its facilities.

The maintenance challenges of the different units are of a generic nature.
These challenges includes the continual structural repairs, paint work and
piping (water and sewer) maintenance tasks to address the occupational
health and safety risks, which are impediments to training, accommodation
and the provisioning of proper medical care to patients in the case of 1
Military Hospital. During the tour of the facilities it was found that the
facilities were in a general state of disrepair.

B. TERMS OF REFERENCE

The Portfolio Committee on Defence was inundated with reports from the
public and the Department of Defence (DoD) that defence facilities were in
a bad state. These military facilities included hospitals, buildings used
for education and training, living quarters and office buildings. The DoD
has been downscaling its day-to-day maintenance and repair programme, due
to budgetary constraints and the prioritisation of other defence
commitments. This is complicated by the fact that the Department of Defence
used the facilities, but major maintenance and repair projects are
performed by the Department of Public Works, which is the custodian of
state property.


C. MAIN FINDINGS

The main findings by the Portfolio Committee include the following:
   1. The accommodation of nurses at the Military health Training formation
      is appalling and needs urgent attention.
   2. 1 Military Hospital shows signs of structural and mechanical neglect
      and needs an urgent revamp.
   3. The decision on the Military Intelligence headquarters location has
      not been finalised.
   4. Thaba Tshwane was built on dolomite land and with virtually no upgrade
      or renovations during the last two to three decades, poses serious
      structural and maintenance problems for the DoD and DPW.
   5. There is a communication gap between the DPW and the DoD. At one of
      the units the DPW stated that the R5000 maintenance threshold was
      raised to R20 000 per case, but the DoD was not aware of it.
   6. The units use non-public (or private) funds to a large extend to
      improve their living and working conditions. They also do weekly
      inspections and let the vandals pay for damages.
   7.  The Special Forces School is an example of what can be done with own
      initiative and budget constraints.
   8. Foreign learners are accommodated in private guesthouses due to the
      bad state of living quarters and to save the image of the SANDF.
   9. The living conditions of the learners in some units are not fit for
      human occupation and severely impede the education and training of
      learners.
  10. Some of the facilities have to be upgraded to allow usage by the
      physically disabled, as well as for women, especially the facilities
      that catered for operational troops.


D. SA MILITARY HEALTH TRAINING FORMATION

Function and Facilities
This training formation provides training to members of the South African
Military Health Service (SAMHS). This training is realised as:
   1. Medical support during military operations and exercises
   2. Support to other departments (esp. disasters)
   3. Physical, mental and social welfare of the SANDF

The Formation has the following facilities:
   1. 34 residential buildings
   2. 20 special buildings (library, lecture halls, training centres, etc)
   3. 7 recreational buildings
   4. 34 office buildings
   5. 3 workshop and storage buildings

The unit has a two-pronged approach to maintenance and repair. Firstly, the
lecture rooms and accommodation receive priority, because training is the
core business of the formation. Secondly, the unit commander and personnel
do daily and weekly inspections to identify maintenance and repair needs,
because the emphasis is on preventative maintenance.

Maintenance and Repair Programme
Approximately R1 million is spent per year on day-to-day maintenance. The
most expensive and continual maintenance tasks are structural, paint work
and piping (water and sewer). This excludes maintenance of roads, fences,
ceilings, floors and walls. During the tour of the accommodation facilities
for nurses, it was found that the ceilings and window panes were missing,
bathrooms had missing tiles and taps and the sleeping quarters did not have
curtains, cupboards, chairs or tables. There was also no warm water, no
curtains, no storage space and the bathrooms were in general disrepair.

The poor state of the accommodation facilities presents an occupational
health and safety risk, which is not conducive to training. This is a big
concern for students and their parents. It impacts negatively on morale and
therefore performance and the level of patient care. Sometimes
international students and facilitators are housed in guesthouses due to
the poor facilities.

E. 1 MILITARY HOSPITAL

The Function of the Hospital
The hospital provides a comprehensive and self-supporting multi-
disciplinary tertiary military health service to:
    o SANDF members (employed & retired) and their families.
    o Members of other defence forces
    o The President and Deputy President of the Republic, former Presidents,
      former Deputy Presidents and foreign dignitaries.

The following services are rendered:
    o Medical and Specialist service
    o Nursing care service
    o Ancilliary health service
    o Psychological service
    o Social work service
    o Pharmaceutical service
    o Support service

The hospital’s service delivery is stretched as it has been identified as a
Presidential health support unit and a frail care centre or ‘hospice’. It
is also identified as a United Nations (UN) static level 4 hospital, which
means that UN personnel (e.g. peacekeepers) are treated at this hospital.

The Facilities
The hospital complex consists of several buildings: the main building,
which houses the patients has eleven floors, other buildings provide
accommodation for single nurses, single doctors and married personnel.
There are also 4 hangers (for storage), ten operating theatres, two
casualty theatres, an intensive care unit, a dialysis unit, a paediatric
intensive care unit, a 24-hour laboratory service, a rehabilitation wing, a
24-hour information system network, wards, clinics, offices and stores.

Major challenges
   1. Maintenance of infrastructure
        1. Structural deficiencies
              i. The general maintenance and repair  is insufficient, which
                 is evident from the cracks in the walls and floors, loose
                 or missing ceiling panels.
             ii. There is a lack of plumbing maintenance in the hospital and
                 accommodation blocks, with the result that burst water
                 pipes cause damage to ceilings and equipment. The cisterns
                 are also outdated.
            iii. There are no shower facilities in the Biokinetic
                 department.
             iv. There is no access for the disabled to the toilets on the
                 2nd floor.
              v. Emergency escape doors are damaged, due to the structural
                 deficiencies of the building.


        2. Non-compliance to Legal imperatives
              i. The pharmacy needs sufficient floor space, plumbing &
                 private booths so that patients could receive private
                 counseling. The renovation will cost R237 617, which
                 excluded the structural changes.
             ii. There is a lack of designated smoking areas.
            iii. The orthopaedic laboratory needs a new floor and air flow.


        3. Technical
              i. There is a conflict between the use of advanced technology
                 and the old design of the building.
             ii. The power supply system needs continuous attention to
                 minimise interruption so that the life support systems can
                 be supported.


        4. Mechanical
              i. The air conditioning needs attention, because the unstable
                 temperatures are uncomfortable for surgical teams and
                 patients, even dangerous for operating patients.
             ii. The medical air supply also needs attention, because a
                 malfunction led to supply interruption to the high care and
                 intensive care unit.
            iii. The central vacuum system needs an upgrade, because a
                 malfunction caused non-release of scavenging air.
             iv. The central heating system was shut down after the warm
                 water pipes burst to prevent occupational safety and health
                 risks.  This resulted in extreme cold temperatures and
                 general discomfort.
              v. The waste collection area is insufficient, because of the
                 increase in waste.
             vi. The storage space is also insufficient, with the current
                 area being geologically unstable and earmarked for closure.


            vii. The roads and fences are in a poor state.


   2. Fire safety regulations
        1. Additional fire escape routes are needed in certain areas. It
           was indicated that the DPW started a project to address this
           shortcoming.
        2. Work started in the paediatric ward to address the shortcomings,
           but patients were moved to other hospitals, at additional cost
           to the hospital.

   3. Well-being in the workplace
        1. There are insufficient rest and dining facilities, as well as
           office space.
        2. There are also insufficient changing rooms for health and
           cleaning personnel.


   4. Vandalism
      Vandalism occurs, because fences are damaged and drains are
      purposefully blocked.

Achievements
The hospital achieved the following:
        1. The compressors were repaired.
        2. The medical air system was serviced and replaced.
        3. Pipes were replaced to activate the temperature control.
        4. All lifts are in the process of being replaced.
        5. Power saving lighting was installed, which will bring about a
           saving of
           R400 000/year.
        6. All emergency escape routes in paediatric unit are functioning.
        7. New gates were installed at the personnel parking.
        8. Two smoking room were completed.
        9. Most of the heavy theatre doors were replaced with aluminium
           doors.
       10. Plans for a Presidential medical suite was submitted to Chief-
           SANDF at a cost of R11 million.
       11. It is estimated that the hospital saves the state R20 million
           per year, because it provides cheaper treatment, taking into
           account that R4 million was spent on referring patients to other
           hospitals due to malfunctions in air-conditioning and heating
           systems.

F. DEFENCE INTELLIGENCE HEADQUARTERS

The Defence Intelligence Division has three buildings, namely the
headquarters and two colleges, in Radcliff and Fontana. The Defence
Intelligence headquarters is located in the Pretoria central business
district (CBD), which raises certain challenges.

The physical location of the headquarters
The physical location represents a security risk, because:
   1. It makes the building vulnerable to reconnaissance and bomb threats.
   2. It complicates the access control.
   3. It limits the control over public road users.
   4. It compromises the safety of military personnel and their property due
      to the high crime levels.
   5. It necessitates additional facilities to conduct sensitive operations,
      because it is located in a depression, which affects communications
      adversely.

The physical features
The physical features of the building limit the installation of special
equipment, relevant to military intelligence work. There is also no
boardroom and parking facilities for personnel.

Occupational Health and Safety (OHS)
The physical location of the building also represents an occupational
health and safety risk and the Department of Labour considered the closing
of the building on two occasions. The risks for the division include the
following:
   1. A limited fire hazard, because the water pressure is sometimes not
      sufficient.
   2. The lifts and escalators are old and sometimes out of order.
   3. Difficult access for the physically disabled.
   4. High levels of traffic noise, exhaust fumes and dust from the streets.
   5. High temperature, especially during the summer and regular fumigation
      impacts negatively on productivity.

The Defence Intelligence College, Radcliff
It is located on the periphery of town at Fort Klapperkop, at a high
altitude, because it was an observatory. Its location is conducive to
effective communication and sensitive operations and with its good road and
air access; it is excellent for an intelligence headquarters. It also has
additional adjacent land to meet the needs of the military intelligence
division. However, it currently has mostly pre-fabricated structures for
classrooms and the instructors’ offices, resulting in high maintenance
costs.
The Defence Intelligence College, Fontana
The college provides intelligence to the SANDF and the region to create a
fusion of defence intelligence in the region. It is situated 35 km to the
north of the Pretoria CBD. The college has a good location for training in
general, however it has makeshift facilities for training purposes.

Future of the Headquarters
The DoD has to decide on the future of the Defence Intelligence
headquarters: whether to continue renting, to erect its own building or to
use current military facilities.  The division is of the opinion that the
headquarters could relocate to Radcliff, which has excellent facilities and
the geographical location that will enhance military intelligence work.

G. SPECIAL FORCES SCHOOL


Function and facilities

The School conducts all basic and specialised common training within
Special Forces formation in order to ensure a sound feeding source of
qualified Special Forces operators.
The School spent R700 000 in 2001 to improve the facilities, before it
moving into its current location in 2002. It included the sickbay, mess,
duty and guard rooms, toilets (headquarters) and training facilities.

After occupation the unit made the following improvements: upgrade of the
sickbay (R20 683), civilian workers’ recreation and ablution facilities
(R94 896), training control centre (R36 212), training headquarters (R314
455), briefing room (R43 420), computer training centre (R9 695), vehicle
parking area (R33 004), quartermaster stores (R30 188), HQ paving & toilets
(R48 349), auditorium (R26 730), kitchen (R67 354) married quarters (R240
947), bridge (R12 357), quartermaster fridges (R200 000), swimming pool
(R870 000), which is used for water training of operators.

The expenditure on maintenance and repair from unit’s budget from 2002 to
2005/06 was R3 462 088, i.e. an average of R865 521 per year. The
Department of Public Works, however, spent R193 000 over the same four year
period.

In addition, the unit spend the following amounts on general repair and
maintenance: electrical (R46 597), plumbing (R69 555), sewerage (R48 140)
and miscellaneous (R62 284). The unit has two projects in progress, i.e. an
outdoor exit trainer (R200 000) and a specialist training unit (R200 000).

Interaction with the Department of Public Works
The unit requested seven major capital work programmes from the Department
of Public Works. The urban training facility was approved for the 2006/07
and 2007/08 financial years, while feedback is outstanding on (1) a new
sewerage system, (2) a new mess building, (3) a training centre, (4)
upgrade of the access road, (5) upgrade of the training blocks at the
Specialist Training Unit and (6) upgrade of the electrical reticulation
system. The unit wants to use their own funds for the security fence around
the perimeter, but they await feedback from the Department of Public Works,
which has to advise on the tendering process and registered contractors.

The unit experiences the following Occupational, Health and Safety (OHS)
problems:
exposed electrical wiring, no fire extinguishers, a broken bridge, missing
drain covers and blocked or broken sewerage pipes.

The unit used the case study of the swimming training pool to illustrate
the modus operandi of the Department of Public Works to maintain the
facilities.

The swimming training pool project started in 2003, with a budget of R670
000. The funding was forfeited due to the long bureaucratic process. In
2004 the Department of Public Works allocated R870 000 for the construction
of the swimming pool. The funding was however forfeited again, due to poor
delivery by the preferred contractor. The contractor had no construction
experience, did not have a mentor and did not comply with the time
schedules. R820 000 was needed in the current budget to fund the project,
but a snag list was still unresolved, two months after completion of the
project. The snag list included amongst other things: the removal of
building rubble and soil, unfinished paving, incomplete water connections,
incomplete fencing and the incomplete installation of the sub-soil drain.
This procurement process, which resulted in an incompetent contractor being
chosen for the project, leaves much to be desired and requires attention
from the Department of Public Works.

H. JOINT SUPPORT BASE GARRISON (A MESS)

General Support Bases (GSB) are responsible for maintenance and logistical
support to military bases in their sphere of responsibility. However, in
most cases the maintenance needs exceed the capabilities of the general
support base. The Joint Support Base Garrison provides town management
services for infrastructure maintenance, offices and the living quarters.

The Infrastructure
The Department of Public Works and not the local municipality is
responsible for maintenance in Thaba Tshwane, which is an open military
area. The Support Base is then responsible for first line emergency
maintenance, i.e. under R5000, while the Department of Public Works is
responsible for larger projects. The DPW stated that the R5000 maintenance
threshold was increased to R20 000, but the DoD was not aware of it.

Roads, streetlights and security fence
The sewerage and reticulation were partially upgraded in 2005, but certain
areas still need urgent attention. Thaba Tshwane has major challenges,
including the following needs:
    o The roads need urgent attention, because the roads’ surfaces and
      drainage system are
      damaged, while sagging is evident in certain areas. The roads carry a
      larger
      volume of civilian traffic through the area in all directions.
    o Street lighting is unreliable, because of the outdated lighting
      system, theft of electrical wiring and breakages, resulting in poor
      visibility.
    o The security fence is not secure anymore due to pedestrians and
      criminals using the facility as a short cut or target for criminal
      activities, such as theft. Security patrols and repairs are not
      successful to address the matter.

The unit was not complying with the road safety standards due to the
prevalence of potholes. The result was that two claims were recently
registered against the Department of Defence. Criminals used the nearby
township as a safe haven, from which criminal activities are directed at
the base, because the fence is in disrepair.

Offices
Most of the offices were erected in the 1950/60s and the increased power
usage led to overloads and power failures due to outdated electrical
systems. The increase in personnel places pressure on the sewerage system,
so that stoppages and overflows are the norm. In addition, many roofs are
leaking. This has a negative effect on service delivery, because water
damage to office equipment leads to interruptions in production. No major
upgrading for offices was done for the last twenty years in the area.

The living quarters
The Department of Public Works did not implement major upgrades or
maintenance for the last 20 years in the married and single quarters. It
resulted in:
   1. Outdated electrical, water and sewerage systems. Water seeps into the
      walls and floors, because the old plumbing is leaking and old geysers
      are bursting.
   2. Leaking roofs, which damage the wooden beams and therefore the
      structure of the building. It also causes electrical damage and
      potential fires.
   3. Blocked drains due to the limited number of toilets leads to hygiene
      problems.

The living quarters are in need of upgrading. Firstly, it was built for
men, but more women are now in the SANDF, due to the changed gender
profile. Whilst up to 30 men shared a common living area, the women
preferred to stay alone or with a roommate. Secondly, it was built for
operational troops, i.e. it did not cater for handicapped individuals.

Challenges
Thaba Tshwane is no longer a restricted military area, because the main
road is used by the public, as such it is impossible to keep non-military
individuals out of the base.
The Support Base receives R3,4 million per year for day-to-day maintenance,
but it is mostly spent on emergency tasks, like blocked drains, electrical
faults and minor works of under R5 000 per case.

The Support Base endeavours to have sound living conditions in the A Mess
by:
   1. Allocating maintenance responsibilities per unit.
   2. Conducting weekly inspections.
   3. Holding guilty members responsible for damages.

The Officer Commanding of the Support Base stated that funding was not
sufficient for day-to-day maintenance, with the result that patchwork
instead of substantial maintenance and repair was done.  No major
renovation plan is evident in Thaba Tshwane, besides the Repair and
Maintenance Project (RAMP). Buildings and infrastructure are deteriorating
rapidly. Hygiene and fire hazards are also serious problems. The hope of
the base is on the RAMP project, which is planned by the Department of
Public Works.

I. SA NATIONAL DEFENCE COLLEGE

The Defence College prepares selected military officers and civilian
officials for top-level appointments in the Department of Defence and other
state departments.  They deliver two training programmes per year (36
members per programme).  The duration of courses is 19-20 weeks and there
is a diverse profile of students. They also offer seminars.

The facilities are in good condition, except the living quarters of the
students. The entertainment area is housed in a grass roofed building,
which was build by DoD personnel. The DPW refused to take ownership of the
building, because it is difficult to maintain, in addition to being fire
hazard.

J. SA AIR FORCE COLLEGE

The South African Air Force College is the only provider of developmental
training for all junior and senior officers, warrant officers and non-
commissioned officers (NCOs) of the South African Air Force (SAAF). Members
of other arms-of-service of the SANDF and foreign students also attend
courses at the college. The college is also used to host high profile VIP
conferences, meetings and functions.

The college has 201 staff members and 654 learners per year, of which 20
stay in the mess. The NCOs are accommodated in 72 rooms, while the officers
are accommodated in 65 chalets. Some of the chalets are however in a state
of disrepair. The damaged facilities include:
   1. Damaged ceilings and defective ceiling lights due to leaking roofs.
   2. Unsafe paved walkways and erosion of the parade grounds.
   3. Damaged lapa and chalet roofs.
   4. Damaged perimeter fence.
   5. Peeling paint from ceilings and walls.
   6. Damaged ventilation system and air conditioning units due to water
      leakages.
   7. Damaged storm water drain and open sewerage manholes.
   8. Water leaks due to burst water pipes.
   9. Cracks in building walls and tennis court surface
  10. Non-secure and unsafe vehicle parking areas.

Maintenance from the Unit’s Budget
The unit spent R200 000 over the last 18 months on day-to-day maintenance.
However, it addressed less than 10% of the unit’s requirements. The lack of
maintenance and repair has a negative effect on the learning and working
environment, as well as the morale and productivity of the staff and
learners. The poor state of the facilities also hampers the attainment of
South African Qualifications Authority (SAQA) accreditation with the result
that the courses of the college will not be included in the National
Qualifications Framework (NQF) database.

The Consequences of Limited Maintenance
Unhygienic conditions can lead to the outbreak of illnesses, while in some
cases the damage to the buildings’ structure is life threatening. The
learners had to travel to other units, because of the lack of a mess
facility for learners, which affected the available time for classes
negatively.

K. SA AIR FORCE GYMNASIUM

The South African Air Force Gymnasium provides basic military training to
members of the Air Force and local and foreign interested groups. It
currently has six Pakistani learners on a ‘very important person (VIP)
protection’ course. The Gymnasium also supports the training of the
Protection Services, Fire Department and the School of Cookery.


Maintenance by the Unit

The unit is doing limited maintenance from its own budget. It includes:
    o The upgrading of the VIP lecture rooms.
    o The purchase of plants to improve the learning environment from
      ‘learner improvement funds’.
    o The painting of parking lanes, as well as the interior of learners’
      bungalows.
    o The building of a fence from scrap metal.
 o The upgrade of the warrant officer’s mess and the living in quarters of
   learners and staff.
    o The upgrade of the learners’ mess with air conditioning and paving.

The Consequences of Limited Maintenance
The kitchen equipment exceeds the life expectancy of the manufacturer and
has to be replaced to enhance safety. The lack of protective clothing is
also a health and safety risk for personnel. The swimming pool is out of
order and no funding has been allocated for sport equipment and facilities.
The hygiene at the mess is a health risk to learners.

If the lack of maintenance is not addressed urgently, then the facilities
will become irreparable and the gymnasium will not be able to perform its
core function, i.e. training. As such the required output as determined by
the Department of Education will not be achieved. The poor state of the
facilities do not provide an enabling environment for training, the
accommodation is not suitable for learners and staff, while the messes do
not provide a professional service to staff and learners. It was stated
that the Thaba Tshwane area is dolomite area, which negates a long term
maintenance programme for the military facilities in the area. There are a
number of sinkholes, which cause structural damage to the buildings and
facilities in general.

L. SA WAR COLLEGE

Function
The War College provides defence related education, training and
development services as required by the SANDF. These services include war
simulation, peacekeeping training, research and development.

The Boulevard building
The college is housed in the Boulevard building, which was a hotel
previously, in the Pretoria CBD. The building was configured to the tune of
R9,4 million, by the landlord, to the requirements of the college. The
information and technology requirements of R5 million were met by the
state. The current lease, which is renewed annually, will expire in March
2006, but the Military Council approved occupation until December 2006.
Different options are explored with regard to the future of the college at
the Boulevard, with permanent occupation of the Boulevard to be decided
upon. There are advantages and disadvantages by using the Boulevard
building.

The advantages are:
    o The good education, training and development facilities, as well as
      the information and technology infrastructure.
    o The college has its own mess and good learner accommodation.

The disadvantages include:
            o The high monthly costs of leasing, i.e. R254 000
            o The personnel structure is approved, but there are many
              unstaffed posts.
            o The space is limited, with no sporting facilities and some
              sections, like the War
      Simulation Center, are at the Army College, in Thaba Tshwane, 9km
      away.
            o The location in the CBD is not conducive to learning, because
              of the traffic noise
      and pollution.
            o The Boulevard is not registered as a pay point with the
              result that members do
      not receive payouts at the Boulevard and this poses a danger to their
      safety.

M. RECOMMENDATIONS

     1. Communications between the DPW and the DOD should improve
        dramatically with regard to the state of facilities in the DOD and
        the maintenance and repair of such facilities.
     2. The DPW and the DOD should jointly agree to move away from reactive
        maintenance approach towards DOD facilities, to a “preventative
        maintenance programme”, as well as an agreed upon action plan to
        move facilities from a state of “very poor” to “acceptable”.
     3. Many of the facilities in the DOD no longer conform to the minimum
        requirements of the Occupational, Health and Safety Act and urgent
        attention should be given to co-ordinate efforts between
        responsible departments, including the Department of Labour, DPW
        and the DOD, to improve this situation.
     4. The maintenance threshold of R5000 per case should be increased and
        the DoD should be informed officially.
     5. The DoD should make an assessment of its required facilities, so
        that redundant facilities could be done away with and alleviate
        budgetary constraints.
     6. Units, like 1 Military Hospital, that provide services beyond the
        SANDF, should receive the necessary maintenance and repair budget
        to maintain its image and output as an international service
        provider.
     7. The accommodation of nurses the Military Health Training Formation
        should receive priority attention.
     8. The defence intelligence headquarters should relocate to Radcliff,
        for geographical, technical and financial reasons.
     9. The dolomite problem in Thaba Tshwane should be discussed wit the
        relevant stakeholder departments, so that a plan of action can be
        developed as a matter of urgency.
    10. The procurement and tender process of the DPW should ensure that
        contractors are competent to execute the requested work.

Report to be considered.

APPENDIX A – DELEGATION

   1. Mr SB Ntuli      - ANC      Delegation leaders
   2. Dr GW Koornhof   - ANC
   3. Mr MS Booi       - ANC
   4. Mr GP Mngomezulu - ANC
   5. Mr S Dodovu      - ANC
   6. Ms XC Makasi     - ANC
   7. Mr MR Shah       - DA
   8. Mr VB Ndlovu     - IFP
   9. Mr G Campher     - Committee Secretary
   10.      Ms M van Niekerk - Researcher

APPENDIX B – ABBREVIATIONS

ANC         -    African National Congress
CBD         -    central business district
DA          -    Democratic Alliance
DLA         -    Department of Land Affairs
DoD         -    Department of Defence
DPW         -    Department of Public Works
GSB         -    General Support Base
IFP         -    Inkatha Freedom Party
NCO         -    non-commissioned officer
NQF         -    National Qualifications Framework
SAAF        -    South African Air Force
SANDF -     South African National Defence Force
SAQA        -    South African Qualifications Authority
UN          -    United Nations
VIP         -    very important person

12. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on Sport and
   Recreation South Africa (SRSA), South African Institute of Drug-free
   Sport (SAIDS), and South African Sport Commission (SASC) for 2004/2005
   including the Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements
   for 2004/2005, dated 15 November 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, having considered
        and examined the Annual Reports of the Sport and Recreation South
        Africa (SRSA), South African Institute of Drug-free Sport (SAIDS),
        and South African Sport Commission (SASC accountable to it, reports
        that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.


-----------------------
[1] Withdrawn and replaced by Hon Ms D Robinson by Chief Whip of the
Democratic Alliance, Hon D Gibson at Joint Rules Committee on 26 October
2005.
[2] Withdrawn and Hon Prince NE Zulu nominated by Chief Whip of the Inkatha
Freedom Party, Hon JH Van Der Merwe on 27 October 2005.
[3] For additional information on vision, mission and  financial  statement,
refer to 2004/05 annual report of the Department  of  Environmental  Affairs
and Tourism and the presentation document presented to the committee  on  11
October 2005
[4] For additional information on the vision, mission and HR  and  financial
matters related to management and professional staff complement,  commercial
income, commercial revenue highlights, and audit report  comment,  refer  to
2004/05  annual  report  of  the  South  African  Weather  Service  and  the
presentation document presented to the committee on 11 October 2005
[5] For additional information on overview  of  2004,  vision,  mission  and
financial statement for the year ended  31  march  2005,  refer  to  2004/05
annual report of the South African Tourism  and  presentation  made  to  the
committee on the 11 October 2005
[6] The purpose of the Working  for  Wetland  Program  is  to  champion  the
protection, rehabilitation and sustainable use of  South  Africa’s  Wetlands
through  co-operative  governance  and  partnerships.  This  program  is  an
interdepartmental initiative between DEAT, Water Affairs  and  forestry  and
agriculture  and,   is   funded   through   DEAT’s   Social   Responsibility
Directorate.
[7] For information related to vision, mission, audit committee report  and,
income and  expenditure,  refer  presentation  document  on  2004/05  annual
report of South African National Biodiversity  Institute  presented  to  the
committee on 11 October 2005.
[8]  For  additional  information  related  to  vision,  mission  and  audit
committee report on effectiveness  of  internal  control,  monthly  reports,
evaluation of financial  statements  refer,  to  2004/05  annual  report  of
Greater St Lucia Wetland Park tabled in Parliament on 6 September 2005  and,
the presentation document presented to the Committee  on  11  October  2005.

[9] Section 65 of the Public Finance Management Act requires that  Ministers
table the annual reports for the Departments and Public Entities  for  which
they are responsible by 30 September each year.

-----------------------
[pic]

MTBPS, p15, 2005



