---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 14 June 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-06-14
---

TUESDAY, 14 JUNE 2005
                                    ____





              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:30.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.


ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.





                                 NO MOTIONS


                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): I would like to
welcome all our national Ministers, special delegates and permanent
delegates to this sitting here this afternoon. I have been informed that
the Whippery has agreed that there will be no notices of motion and no
motions without notice today.


                  CREATE YOUTH EMPLOYMENT AND FIGHT POVERTY



                          (Subject for Discussion)
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Deputy Chairperson, Minister
Stofile, hon members, in a mere two days’ time the people of South Africa
will pay tribute to the youth of Soweto which, on that cold Wednesday of 16
June 1976, squared up against the frenzied and trigger-happy lunatics of
the apartheid regime’s forces of repression. As well as looking back, not
merely to resuscitate the wounds in order to fill our hearts with the hate
of yesteryears, we will ponder the path that lies ahead of our nation.

This Parliament, the tribune of our people, is therefore correct to hold
this debate to honour the youth and their time-honoured contribution to the
struggle for freedom, and yet sharply to focus its attention on the urgent
and difficult battles of the youth of today.

The youth that swelled the streets of Soweto on that fateful Wednesday did
so neither out of hate for white South Africans, nor disdain for Afrikaans
as a language. Accordingly, through what they did, they restored the common
dignity and humanity of black people and thereby of white people too, for
the freedom we sought was for every single South African, and it put South
Africa firmly on the path of unity in diversity on which all were included
as equals in deciding the common destiny of our country, enjoying equal
rights, including the right to vote.

To honour this day is thus to pay tribute to the vision, the courage and
the resilience of the youth who gave their lives for our liberty. In
imposing Afrikaans as a language of instruction in schools, it was the
apartheid regime and not the youth that attacked Afrikaans and created a
dangerous and unfortunate anti-Afrikaans sentiment among the black youth.
Perforce, the backlash that this would create would not be directed against
the regime alone, but against Afrikaans itself, a language that is as
indigenous as isiZulu, Sepedi or Xitsonga.

The truth is that none in our country has caused Afrikaans, as a language,
greater harm than those that have sought to use it as an instrument of
oppression and exclusion, that continue even today to proceed along the
same divisive and short-sighted path. Despite all of this, Afrikaans has
remained a vibrant and resilient language spoken by black people and white
people alike, as proudly South African and African as it always has been,
facing no threat of attack from any quarter, not least from the black South
Africans who have accepted it as their very language and part of their own
heritage.

Guided by this profound understanding of the uniqueness of the South
African nation, this government has not tried to prescribe which language
needs to be spoken by all our people, but has rather sought to address the
vital challenge of navigating between the vested interests and privileges
of the hitherto dominant and the aspirations for justice of the hitherto
oppressed.

Those that are white and speak Afrikaans must acknowledge that there are
others that are black and speak Afrikaans as well, and there are others
that are black and speak other indigenous languages that also believe that
their children, like those that speak English and Afrikaans, deserve their
right to learn in their indigenous languages.

Most white South Africans have correctly lived in Africa for centuries and
shall continue for centuries more, but still they cannot speak or write a
single indigenous language other than Afrikaans, whereas they are quite
comfortable learning foreign languages. On this occasion, therefore, we
must reaffirm the vision enshrined in the Freedom Charter that South Africa
belongs to all who live in it, black and white.

The 50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter raises, for young people in
South Africa, the critically important question of the relationship between
the past, the present and the future. For, indeed, in celebrating the 50
years of this historical document, the youth recognise the relevance of the
Freedom Charter to changing their present reality, addressing as it does
all the relevant and urgent questions of the day. But they ask the
question: What does the Freedom Charter hold for our future?

To answer this question is vital, given the fact that it bears directly on
the understanding by the youth of their role in present and future
struggles of what they and the rest of our people are fighting for, and
this also has a direct bearing on the moulding of the type of revolutionary
cadre corps of our nation and her struggles.

Everyone in South Africa acknowledges the historic role that the youth
played during the struggle against apartheid, inspired by the unyielding
vision of the Freedom Charter. In his biography, Let My People Go, Chief
Albert Luthuli said: “If the Charter is examined it will be seen that
freedom means the opening up of the opportunity to all South Africans to
live full and abundant lives in terms of country, community and
individual.”

At its 22nd national congress in 2004, and guided by this perspective, the
ANC Youth League directed the youth to “seize the opportunities of
democracy to confront the future”, which summons their initiative,
creativity and genius, guided by the knowledge and conviction that they are
the masters of their own destiny and activists for progressive change.

Earlier today in the Youth Parliament, Mr Dinga from the Western Cape said,
“We are free and have a lot of possibilities ahead of us.” Mr Chabane from
the Free State urged the youth to have a vision for the future, saying that
“No goal is reached without a vision and a try; we must be responsible.”
And, Ms Dreyer from the Northern Cape, when referring to entrepreneurship,
said that it “involves a vision and dedication”.

Ms Ncumisa Loliwe from the Western Cape said:


   Education for liberation refers to the ability to educate and arm the new
   generation with the necessary skills and knowledge that will yield
   intellectuals and experts in technology, science and economy, in order to
   liberate our country economically . . .


   Education for liberation means breaking poverty’s chains, ignorance and
   isolation by encouraging creativity, which, in turn, increases
   productivity, encouraging participation in all economic activities,
   reducing the brain drain, as well as meeting the challenges of the 21st
   century.


Quite obviously, in expressing their views the very intelligent youth
address themselves to all the major questions this House ought to address
itself. These include the pleas made by Ms Manyakanyaka and Ms Peterson
that both entrepreneurship and financial management be made compulsory
subjects in schools.

This imposes an obligation on the people of South Africa, on the government
and the private sector themselves to invest consciously in the youth, to
raise their capacity and all-round competence to occupy the frontline of
the struggle against poverty and underdevelopment, the struggle for
sustainable development.

This requires that we all hear and heed the very militant demands of the
youth for jobs, skills and entrepreneurship opportunities, for the speedy
implementation of the Growth and Development Summit resolutions that
pertain directly to the youth.

This requires that we all hear and heed the very unequivocal and united
demands of the young people who participated in the Youth Parliament, who
called on government and the private sector to invest in the youth and help
them become entrepreneurs in order to increase their participation in the
national programmes for economic growth, development and poverty
eradication.

Today the greatest yearning of the youth is to address their unemployment,
to raise their levels of skills and to have made available to them more
resources and support for youth-owned and managed co-operatives and
enterprises to emerge and flourish. We must perpetuate the perspective that
the youth are vital economic actors and hence must occupy the leading role
in the vital national effort to create a better life for all.

Whereas during the first decade of democracy immense political and social
gains were created for the youth, they have, however, remained economically
marginalised and disadvantaged, without skills and other economic
opportunities, hence constituting 73,8% of all unemployed people.

These figures alone would suffice to make a very strong case for broad-
based youth economic empowerment in terms of jobs, skills development and
self-employment opportunities in order to equip the youth to make a
meaningful contribution to the sustainable growth and development of the
South African economy.

This was fully acknowledged at both the 51st national conference of the ANC
in 2002, as well as the Growth and Development Summit in 2003, which
included the youth as a target group of the black economic empowerment
programmes within the broader vision of the BEE, indicated by overall
equity in income, wealth, increasing levels of black participation and
operational participation and control of the economy, and the extent to
which there has been transfer and possession of skills and a retention of
assets by BEE beneficiaries.

The Growth and Development Summit said in its declaration that youth
economic empowerment was among the most urgent national priorities for
growth and development, given, amongst other things, that the majority of
the unemployed were young, that it was increasingly difficult for young
people to find work, partly because there were not enough jobs and partly
because the young did not have the skills that were in demand in the labour
market. Therefore, currently, too few amongst them were given opportunities
to improve their skills in areas that would enhance their employability.

In 2003 the ANC Youth League broadly defined youth economic empowerment as
“an integrated and coherent socio-economic process that directly and
deliberately integrates the youth into the mainstream South African economy
in a manner that creates sustainable livelihoods for the youth through
programmes that increase their income, asset and skills opportunities, and
increase the numbers of young people that manage, own and control
productive enterprises, including the co-operative enterprises”.

Further, we said: “Critical to youth empowerment is job creation,
including, through special projects such as the Expanded Public Works
Programmes and the National Youth Service Programme, skills development
such as learnership and internship programmes and economic empowerment
through programmes such as BEE, collective enterprises, enterprise
development and others.”

Youth economic empowerment, like broad-based BEE itself, must be broad
based, inclusive, associated with good governance and part of the growth
and development strategy, and must have a strong bias towards young women,
the rural youth, the working class youth and the youth with disabilities.
Constituting the strategic focus areas for youth economic empowerment
should be the implementation of the Growth and Development Summit
agreements, access to capital, business development and support, and
procurement opportunities.

In this regard, government and private corporate procurement policies
should set targets for youth procurement, employment and skills development
through learnership and internship programmes. A conscious effort must be
made urgently to build the capacity of the youth, especially at local
levels, in order to equip them with the capacity fully to seize the
opportunities created by democracy, in particular to access information and
capital for their projects and to be able to develop and implement their
projects.

The problem is that there are no enforcement instruments, especially
through legislation, for youth economic empowerment. Therefore there is no
incentive to comply with it, or penalty for neglecting the youth in
empowerment programmes.

We must continue to pay close attention to the capacity of the youth in
general and of the youth development agencies in particular to continue to
act in unity to advance the interests of the youth through lobbying and
advocacy. The parliamentary structures to monitor the quality of life and
status of the youth must be held to account in terms of the work they are
doing themselves to advance the aspirations of young people.

In view of these enormous challenges facing the youth, we must again raise
the urgent challenge for the youth of our country to develop the capacity
to act in unity and speak with a united voice, especially with regard to
youth development.
The challenge, as we engage in this debate, is what message we are going to
communicate to the millions of our youth who look up to us to help them
develop the capacity to seize the opportunities of democracy to answer the
question: What does the Freedom Charter hold for our future? Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr D G MKONO: Hon Deputy Chairperson, Ministers, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, during the first decade of our democracy the ANC-led government
created many opportunities for our youth. I am sure that you will agree
with me that our youth has indeed played an important role in our struggle.
Many of those who played that important role bravely did not live to see a
free South Africa. Many others were imprisoned because of their efforts.

The fruit of their journey is our democracy, for the youth of our country,
together with the workers, the women, the religious leaders in all the
various organisations of our people and all our political movements played
their part in our national liberation struggle. However, democracy is only
the beginning of a new journey that the South African youth and the South
African people must take towards a common destiny.

Ngalo mhla ubaluleke kangaka, wokubhiyozela uSuku loLutsha, ndivumeleni
ndikhahlele kulutsha ngokukhumbula izigigaba ezenzeka ngo-1976, apho
abantwana babantu batshutshisekayo, hayi ngoba babebulele umntu okanye
babebe into yomntu, kodwa kuba babefuna amalungelo, befuna ukukhulula eli
lizwe laseMzantsi Afrika. Kwenzeka ukuba abanye babo babe bayasishiya.
Sinovuyo ke xa sinabo ngokwasemphefumlweni namhlanje, sithetha nabo.

Sikwakhumbula ukuba ookhokho kwakunye nabadala bahleli nathi. Umngeni ke
ngowokuba ngaba sisalwa ucalucalulo na okanye sesisilwa indlala, sisilwela
intlalontle nokuphila ngendlela efanelekileyo. Ewe, alukapheli lona
ucalucalulo, kusafuneka silulwile, kodwa sicinga ukuba ngoku ngesiqinisa
ekuthini ulutsha malukhule, lungene emashishinini kwaye luzimisele.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[On this very important day, when we are celebrating Youth Day, allow me to
salute the youth for remembering the events that took place in 1976, when
the children of our people were persecuted, not because they murdered
anybody or stole somebody’s property, but because they wanted their rights,
they wanted to liberate this country, South Africa. It happened that some
of them passed away. We are grateful that we are with them in spirit today,
speaking to them.

We also remember that the ancestors and the elders are with us. The
challenge therefore is whether we are still fighting discrimination, or
whether we are now fighting poverty, fighting for the welfare of all and to
live a decent life. Yes, discrimination is not over yet; we still have to
fight it, but we think we should now emphasise that the youth must grow,
join businesses and be determined.]

In this struggle we should now challenge the youth, in all their
formations, to wake up in the morning and begin every single day with more
determination than ever before so as to make a mark.

Indeed this challenge facing us is a historic one. It is a challenge that
we cannot afford to avoid. The youth of our country must seek to develop
themselves in practical, effective and efficient ways so as to work towards
a new reality. This can be achieved through youth empowerment programmes,
information, and career counselling, the Umsobomvu Fund and the like.

Skills development with regard to the youth continues to be a priority and
part of the battle that needs to be fought for the full attainment of our
freedom. We must encourage our youth to enter the business sector earlier
in their lives. Various youth entrepreneurship programmes of government are
aimed at providing business development services and funding support to
young entrepreneurs.

We call upon our youth across the country to conscientise themselves about
these developments and ensure that they access these programmes for the
benefit of their communities.

We call upon our youth to register so that they can participate in the
forthcoming elections. Our young people need to understand the importance
of local government and the need for their participation in political
programmes. Our youth must be conscious participants in community
programmes, in caring for the aged, the disabled and, most importantly,
those that are suffering from HIV/Aids and other diseases.

Community youth service is also important, because it is through these
selfless deeds that our youth attain technical expertise and life skills,
while at the same time developing their communities.

Our youth must be among those who offer their services to govern and to
perform voluntary work. Clearly this must mean an end to homelessness,
poverty, diseases, unemployment, hardship and suffering.

Ngaloo mazwi ndiyabulela, Mhlalingaphambili. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [With those
words, I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Chair and hon members, what are the dreams of our youth?
What are the challenges they face? What is it that we the elders and the
political leaders of our nation are offering our youth?

Today we commemorate the tragic events that took place on 16 June 1976,
when many young lives were lost during rioting and shooting in reaction to
an evil political system where people were judged as groups, not
individuals, where merit did not count and where some young people faced a
bleak future. For them the future did not hold any prospects. They had
little to lose.

Today, despite the fact that we have achieved political freedom and have
made great strides forward, there are still many who face a bleak future
owing to HIV/Aids, the scourge of drugs, unemployment, poverty and crime.

As elected leaders of this nation we need to take stock and remedy what is
going wrong. We must not be blinded by political ideologies, as the old
apartheid regime was.

Unemployment and the resulting demotivation and depression that follow are
burning issues. We acknowledge the magnitude of the problem of a lack of
jobs. While the economy is growing, perhaps not as quickly as we would have
liked, there is no associated growth in jobs. What are the reasons? We need
less regulation and more stimulation.

Entrepreneurship is the alternative way of creating jobs. It is vital that
the right environment is created. Government needs to focus on what creates
jobs, not the rigid labour legislation being counted to meet quotas and
targets. As a result many businesses choose to install machines to do the
work.

Jobs do not fall from the sky: they are created, not by government, but by
industry and business when people see worthwhile places to invest their
money. The role of Setas needs to be looked at to see whether they are
achieving what was intended. Skills, training and learnerships are not
achieving what they should. Far too many people drop out. We need to
harness the energy of the youth, capture their imagination and create a
will to work.

Essential to entrepreneurship is quality education. Instead of breaking
down and attacking what is functioning well, we should concentrate on
improving what has been neglected. The frequent policy changes and
unbearable administrative load with continuous assessments are some of the
reasons that lead to severe demotivation amongst educators. We need more
carrot and less stick, more incentives and less regulation.

The status of teachers needs to be enhanced. They need recognition and to
be shown respect so that they can be the role models that they were
formerly. This will also help with discipline, which is so sadly lacking in
our society.

We need to become a reading nation. We need more libraries in every
community so that the youth can widen their horizons, their dreams and
ambitions. More libraries house business corners where information about
starting businesses is available. [Interjections.] I am so glad that you
recognise my wisdom.

The DA appeals for a rethink on the imposition of value-added tax on books,
especially textbooks. I would like to propose that the money be ring-fenced
and allocated to provinces and municipalities for building and equipping
more libraries.

I mentioned the scourge of drugs, especially tik, which has taken such a
hold here in the Western Cape. Recently released figures reflect an
alarming situation. One in five young people are seeking help to overcome
the drug problem. How many others are using drugs that are not seeking
help? At this rate drugs will soon rival HIV/Aids as the greatest threat,
but information and awareness is sadly lacking.

The small budget of R400 000 allocated annually to the central drug
authority is woefully inadequate for an effective antidrug campaign. It
should not be left to churches and NGOs to take the lead.

The backlog in the judicial system is also a problem, as are the lenient
bail conditions for drug lords and dealers. There has been a desperate plea
for bail conditions to be reviewed so that these predators do not continue
to prowl the neighbourhoods and take as victims our young people who are
vulnerable, those whose self-esteem is low. We owe it to our youth to
empower and protect them, to build up their self-esteem.

We need to combat gangsterism by supporting families that are in distress,
also by providing alternatives through educational and sporting programmes.
When we talk about moral regeneration we, as politicians, need to be
accountable and we must not be found wanting. Citizens must see that
politicians walk the talk and that there are no double standards. Youths
are quick to see through hypocrisy.

To quote Madiba at the recent art concert, “We need leadership. We need
vision and moral courage. We need to cultivate a society that will
encourage all our young people to dream great dreams, to have hope for the
future as a united nation, working hand in hand for a prosperous and
peaceful future.”

Nkosi sikelela iAfrika. Enkosi. [God bless Africa. Thank you.]
[Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Deputy Chairperson, Ministers, Deputy Ministers and
colleagues, this topic is one of the most important topics that need no
political point-scoring. There is a saying in isiZulu:
Inkunzi isematholeni. [The calves are the bulls of tomorrow.]

This topic comes at a time when there will be Youth Day commemorations
countrywide to mark June 16. This reminds me of some of the statements that
were made by some of the youth at that time.

Kwakungamagama alukhuni. Intsha yasho yangananazi ithi bazali hlalani
phansi, ningelekeleli kulo mzabalazo. Indlela esizoyihamba ingumcingo,
umango mude, wuhambo olunosizi, lugcwele ukufa. Thina uma sifa ngeke
sishiye usizi koba nenkululeko kunalokho. Abanye bethu bazohamba
balifulathele leli lengabade baye kwamanye amazwe.

Angiyeke ngokubalisa, ngingageqi amagula sengathi ngiyemuka. Intsha
iwuvanzi, igcwele yonke indawo ayisebenzi. Inkatha Freedom Party inombono
othi kuningi uhulumeni angakwenza ekwelekeleleni intsha. Kufuneka kube
khona izikhungo lapho intsha izoqeqeshwa khona ngezinto ezifana nalezi
ezilandelayo: ukukhanda izimoto, ezolimo, nobunjiniyela. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[It was difficult words. The youth said clearly to their parents that they
must sit down and must not assist in the struggle. The journey we are about
to take is difficult, it is still a long way, it is a journey with much
distress, and it is full of death. If we die, we will not leave sorrow, but
there will be peace. Some of us will leave this country for other
countries.

Let me stop complaining, it is not good to bring up hidden secrets. The
youth is scattered, they are all over and they are not working. The Inkatha
Freedom Party has an idea that there is a lot the government can do to
assist the youth. There must be institutions where the youth can be trained
in the following things: car repairs, agriculture and engineering.]

Our curriculum from Grade 7 should gear the learner right into the field of
self-employment, not a degree that will make our youth struggle for
employment.

Uma senze njalo sobe sibeke induku ebandla. Kulukhuni ukukhuluma ngentsha
namhlanje esithi ayinamsebenzi, sithi akuphele indlala. Intsha ifundile
iqeqeshiwe ineziqu zonke esingase sithi zikhona kodwa leyo ntsha ayikwazi
ukuqashwa, akukho lutho engase ilulethe phambi kwethu. Kulusizi ukubona
intsha yethu iwa izigingqi ibulawa  yizifo esingeke sikwazi ukuzelapha,
ngakho sithi maluju. Uhulumeni ake alekelele njengoba umbono weNkatha uthi
ake kube nalezo zikhungo. Siyethemba ukuthi intsha izothi uma isiqeqeshwe
lapho ikwazi ukuzenzela kunokuba ilinde ukuthi izoqashwa omunye umuntu.

Angigeqi magula angemuki, sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[If we do so, we would have broken the record. It is difficult to talk
about the youth today, the ones we say are jobless; we say poverty must be
eradicated. The youth is educated and trained, they have all the academic
qualifications, but they are not employable, there is nothing they can put
in front of us. It is saddening to see our youth dying of diseases that we
cannot cure, so we are saying enough is enough.  The government must
assist, as Inkatha’s idea is to have such institutions. We hope that after
the youth have been trained, they will be able to be independent, rather
than waiting to be employed by other people.

I am not bringing up hidden secrets, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Mr F ADAMS: Deputy Chairperson, it is time for our youth to model their
rights, marvelling at our great leaders of the youth who have walked the
liberation road, guided by the fundamental principles of the Freedom
Charter, democracy, freedom and franchise in our lifetime. Knowing what
they stood for, they should not allow the spears of the great leaders to
fall. Let us pick them up and lead the way through difficult times. These
reflections are efforts to strengthen our resolve to face our future with a
firm foundation.

I would appeal to our young people to acclimatise themselves with regard to
our history; not like the hon Thetjeng who said the other day that we must
forget our history. Our youth must really acclimatise themselves with
regard to our history in order to understand the present and to prepare for
the future. Indeed, our first decade of freedom brought immense changes to
the lives of the people, and our youth form part thereof.

Constitutional frameworks were established to ensure that issues of the
vulnerable sectors of society, including the youth, are mainstreamed. Many
programmes were instituted to realise these goals over the years with
significant success, although challenges remained.

I appeal to our youth to roll up their sleeves and to join the collective
effort to build a better South Africa and a better world. Our environment
is dynamic and requires dynamic young leadership, like that of the hon Papi
Tau, and people at local level to get involved, while also remaining very
competitive in the global sphere. Young people need to take a central role
in many government programmes aimed at ensuring a better life for all.

I quote one of our great fathers, former President Nelson Mandela:

   Youth are our greatest assets, custodians of our future; therefore, let
   not the apparent insurmountable challenges facing our society today
   blindfold your ability to a great future that awaits our society. You not
   only carry our hopes and our aspirations, but those of Africa and many
   nations of the world who are looking up to you to help create a new world
   order.

We cannot fail our youth and have a future on this score. We should
reinforce the attitude of mind and practice that see them continuing to
hold on to their dignity. The struggle to hold and reverse the effect of
unemployment, poverty, HIV/Aids would be a pipe dream if our youth did not
build on the liberation spirit that sustained generations and generations,
the spirit that our hon Deputy Minister also fought with and which is still
in him.

I listened to him over the weekend at a conference. Thank you for that
spirit, Minister. Keep it up! There are generations of our people to place
us where we are today. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs A N D QIKANE: Deputy Chairperson, hon members, unemployment in South
Africa is a massive problem. Wherever we go in every province, city, town
and village, we are faced with the unemployed multitudes. Wherever we turn
we see them, the desperate faces which are translated into statistics of
massive unemployment. Those desperate faces are more often than not the
faces of our youth. The core statistics tells us that they compromise 60%
or more of the unemployed.

Creating youth employment and fighting poverty must include a more active
government that invests on a vast scale in education and economic
development. Only by equipping the youth with the correct skills and
creating a vibrant economy with sufficient opportunities, will we be able
to roll back unemployment and poverty. This means that where the economy
currently fails to provide opportunities, it is the responsibility of the
government to become an entrepreneur and create new job opportunities.

There are various innovative approaches that are open to government,such as
identifying new industries that government can establish.

Loo nto ke ingenza abantwana bethu bayeke ukuhlala ezirhoxweni, babe nento
yokwenza. Thina bazali masibe nombono omhle ngabantwana bethu, sibakhuthaze
ukuba bafunde nomsebenzi wezandla, ukwenzela ukuba bangajongi kurhulumente
kuphela, nabo bakwazi ukuzenzela. Enkosi.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[That could make our children stay in the spaza shops, and they could have
something to do. We as parents must have positive ideas for our children.
We should encourage them to work with their hands so that they do not just
depend on the government. They should be able to work for themselves. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Are you following the speakers’ list, or not? I ask
this just for my information.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): I am following the
speakers’ list, thank you very much. You may sit down, hon member.

Rev E ADOLPH: Deputy Chairperson, it is indeed our obligation to
acknowledge and accept collective responsibility for the creation of jobs
for the youth in our country and for fighting vigorously against the evil
we call poverty.

Therefore, as the ID we want to declare our solidarity with the many
victims of poverty, especially the youth in the rural areas, where people
are suffering because they don’t have homes, they don’t have food to eat
and they don’t have sanitation or even clean water.

More that 70% of our youth are under the age of thirty-five, so they are
government’s first priority, and I hope that the Deputy Minister is
listening to me. More than 70% of our population is made up of people under
the age of thirty-five. So the youth should be our priority number one.

However, they are faced with a poor and inadequate education system, lack
of resources, illiteracy, HIV and Aids, hunger and joblessness, which is a
major concern. I think that the only solution is for us to teach our youth
the skills of entrepreneurship.

The only thing that we can do in South Africa, as a collective, is to take
responsibility for our youth with regard to unemployment, and to teach them
not to be job seekers, but to be job providers. That would change the whole
scenario of a lack of economic sustainability.

What our youth need to do today is to re-establish a relationship with
their families, to get a sense of belonging and, most of all, find credible
and potential role models to emulate. That would restore the dignity of the
youth, which they have been robbed of owing to this massive unemployment.

Qualified youths with no jobs are roaming the streets. I think we will be
failing in our duty, and history will remember us as mass murderers, if we
don’t take care of this dilemma. I thank you.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, I think hon Mzizi made a very good remark
when he said that this is not a debate for political point-scoring. Having
listened to the debate so far, I must say that this is one of the most
elevating debates that I have taken part in in this House, and I’m very
grateful for this.

If we look at South Africa today, at this point in time, there is one great
liability and that is poverty. We also have a great asset, and that is the
youth. We must cherish, help and encourage the youth to take part in the
economy of South Africa and to use its vibrancy. The youth is so much
alive, enthusiastic and so eager to achieve, and we, as people in
leadership positions, must assist them to achieve something in life.

Rev Adolph said something very important as well, and that is that we must
encourage young people to be job creators, rather than job seekers.  That
is a very important point. And I think that all the parties, despite their
political orientation, should encourage people to become entrepreneurs, as
the hon Adolph indicated here. Our youth, across the spectrum, has a
healthy ambition to move forward and this ambition must be cultivated by
creating jobs.

Unemployment is not a problem unique to South Africa only. I was surprised
to read in the Financial Times of 1 June that in the past decade in France
20% of unemployment has affected people twenty-five years and younger. This
is not a South African problem, but a worldwide problem.

It also goes further to say that a lack of jobs, either side of the Rhine,
is politically corrosive. I don’t know . . . luckily, we are not in
government. The government is here and it must try to do something. It is a
very difficult task. And we realise that and I think that not only us, but
everybody should try and support the government in trying to get somewhere,
because . . .

. . . baie van ons kinders, en dit is nie net wit kinders nie, is in die
buiteland. Hulle moet terugkom. Hulle moet terugkom, en ons moet hul
kundigheid gebruik om verdere werkgeleenthede in Suid-Afrika te skep.
Die VF Plus wil graag dít hê wat die President gesê het, naamlik  Suid-
Afrika behoort aan almal, sodat ons kan werk in daardie rigting dat Suid-
Afrika inderdaad in woord en daad aan almal kan behoort. Baie dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[. . . many of our children, and that is not only white children, are
abroad. They must return. They must return and we must use their expertise
to create additional jobs in South Africa.

The FF Plus would like what the President had said to happen, namely that
South Africa belongs to all, so that we can work in that direction for
South Africa really to belong to everyone in word and deed. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]]

Mr M J SIBIYA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister,
comrades, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, before I start, allow me to
make reference to some of the things I heard yesterday on the news on my
way back to the park. It was announced on radio that a lot of youths who
used to be associated with the DA have come back home to the ANC.
[Applause.]

Their leader was interviewed and he said, amongst other things, that he
thought that by joining the DA he would have had a chance to contribute
towards building a non-racial South Africa. To his alarm, he found that
that was not possible in that organisation.
According to him - I stress, according to him - the DA is racist and is
still in the grips of the outmoded mentality of conservatism. Only two of
their leaders, according to him, have remained behind. I hope and believe
that they too are coming back home, and that hon Thetjeng will follow suit.
[Applause.]

The uprisings of 16 June 1976 in our country marked one of the militant and
brave battles waged by our youth in the struggle against apartheid
colonialism. It was no mistake that the youth of those days was given the
title of “young lions” by the late President Oliver Tambo. I find this a
befitting tribute to the heroic youth of our motherland, and I think we
need to refer to it as such.

The defeat of the racist regime in 1994 bequeathed the ANC-led government a
legacy underpinned by ignorance, disease, poverty and unemployment, to name
a few. The slogan “A better life for all” is a call for all South Africans
to roll up their sleeves and fight this legacy.

From the very first day in its political office, the ANC-led government has
been exploring the use of the Expanded Public Works Programme to alleviate
poverty, create jobs and build the necessary infrastructure amongst poor
communities. The EPWP is, therefore, a product of such evolution,
government policy, government thinking and development.

In May 2004 President Thabo Mbeki committed the government to setting
specific targets for a range of programmes to ensure that progress is made
to reach the goal of halving poverty and unemployment by 2014.

One of these targets was for the EPWP to create at least a million job
opportunities, coupled with training, within five years. The EPWP is a
nationwide programme covering all spheres of government and state-owned
enterprises. It aims to draw significant numbers of unemployed youth into
productive work. As the youth works on projects, they develop relevant
skills, which stand them in good stead when they exit the programme.

Many youths start their own businesses or join small and medium
enterprises. Where they do not, it is important for the private sector to,
in an integrated fashion, join government in finding ways to ensure that
they can be absorbed into the labour market.

Having worked in the EPWP, they are, after all, skilled enough to work and
be employed. Government is mobilising our people, to use President Thabo
Mbeki’s words in his January 8 statement, and I quote: “. . . in their firm
support for our vision to unite our country around the people’s contract to
create work and alleviate poverty”.

Vanghana, xikan’we ni swirho swa NCOP, hulumende wa tiko, loyi a
rhangeriwaka hi ANC, u ni swikunguhato leswi pfunetaka ku lwa ni vusweti
etikweni ra hina. Swikunguhato leswi hi leswi: Xo sungula, ku na miholo ya
vana lava nga ehansi ka malembe ya 15; mimpimo yo karhi ya mati na gezi,
leswi nyikiwaka vanhu lava kumaka mali leyi nga ehansi ka R1 500; ku na
tindlu ta mahala leti nyikiwaka lava tirhaka kambe va hola mali yintsongo
hi nhweti. Ku thlele ku kunguhatiwa timali ta xibalo ku va ti hungutiwa
leswaku lava kumaka mali ya le hansi va nga tikumi va hakela mali yo tala.

Vanghana, ku kunguhata hi ndlela leyi swi pfuna lava hluphekaka ngopfu. Ku
lwisa vusweti swi vula leswaku un’wana ni un’wana etikweni ra hina ra
Afrika Dzonga a tihluvukise yena n’wini a thlela a tirha hi ndlela leyi
hluvukisaka tiko ra hina ra Afrika Dzonga ri thlela ri hluvukisa matiko
hinkwawo ya Afrika.

Mfumo wu na timali, leti hi xilungu hi nge Umsombomvu Fund, leti
tirhisiwaka ku dyondzisa lavantshwa vutivi bya mabindzu leswaku va ta kota
ku sungula mabindzu ya vona, handle ko yimela mfumo ku va nyika mintirho, a
va tumbuluxe mintirho hi voxe. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs
follows.)

[Friends, and members of the NCOP, the government of the country, which is
led by the ANC, has programmes which help to alleviate poverty in our
country.

The programmes are the following: Firstly, there are children’s grants for
children under the age of 15; there is a certain amount of water and
electricity which is given to those people who earn less than R1 500 per
month; there are free houses which are given to those who earn a meagre
monthly salary. There is also a tax reduction for those who earn very
little so that they do not pay a lot.

Friends, to have decisions like this will help those who are suffering.
Alleviating poverty means that everyone in our country, South Africa,
should develop himself or herself and also work in such away that it brings
development to our country, which in turn will also help the development of
the African continent.

The government has allocated money, which in English is called the
Umsobomvu Fund, that is used to help our youth to acquire business skills
so that they can start their own businesses, without having to wait for the
government to employ them; let they themselves create jobs.]

Comrades, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, government established the fund
to promote job creation and skills development amongst the youth in South
Africa between the ages of fifteen and thirty-five.  No one should,
therefore, hesitate to approach the fund, as one will be assisted to join
the entrepreneurs, on whose knowledge and skills this country’s future
development depends.

Some of these programmes include the building of houses by young people for
the homeless. Some of the houses were handed over as part of the National
Youth Service Programme in the North West on 9 June this year.

Comrades, with regard to ensuring consistent development of young people
who are caught in the network of poverty, it is important to note the array
of platforms that government has put in place to assist them. Amongst these
are the following: Firstly, supporting young people with substance abuse
problems, victims of sexual abuse or violence with psychological problems
and who will require special assistance; secondly, workplace counselling
and public health services are available to those battling with poverty-
related illnesses such as drug resistance, tuberculosis and HIV/Aids;
thirdly, young people who are already at work, either in the formal sector
or in self-employment, should be able to access upgraded opportunities.

The government has put employment equity legislation in place that assists
those who have previously suffered as a result of discrimination. This
ensures that the youth from an impoverished background can develop
themselves and fight poverty effectively.

As in the EPWP, the youth should be placed in workplace situations that are
strategically linked to a probation period during which life and work
skills are sharpened and which would fill the gap between learnerships and
actual workplaces.

Before I conclude, let me indicate one thing that is very interesting to me
by referring to some of the words expressed by one of the greatest African
leaders. There was a conference of all Portuguese colonies in Congo,
Brazzaville . . .
[Time expired.][Applause.]

DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Somebody tried to agitate me to respond to
the ideological statement made by the hon Robinson about the role of the
state. She has asked that we shouldn’t talk about ideology today but rather
focus on what interventions are needed to deal with the challenges of youth
unemployment and lack of economic opportunities.

She did proceed to make ideological statements about issues that I wish not
to comment on at the present moment, because I don’t think  we have enough
time. I think I should rather limit my attention to the issues we are
dealing with, save to say that the ANC will continue to regard the state as
an important role-player in economic development, growth and poverty
alleviation. Our intention is not to alleviate poverty but to eradicate it.
That is a drastic paradigm shift if you consider the two.

I want to make the following remarks. The point has been made before that
South Africa has two economies. The first economy is the productive modern
economy, which is integrated into the global economy and it is the
mainstream economy in South Africa. This is where wealth, skills, knowledge
and productive capital reside.

The second economy is where poverty resides. To build the South African
brand of capitalist economy, various apartheid and colonial governments had
sought to transform the black majority into an unskilled, cheap,
propertyless and disenfranchised proletariat.

The black youth were born into this and educated to join the ranks of the
wretched of our land. Therefore, to break the back of poverty in our
country on a sustainable basis, it is crucial that we should focus our
interventions among the youth to ensure that we lift their skills,
employability opportunities and provide them with opportunities to
participate in the economy as activists for progressive economic change for
economic liberation.

Earlier on in the opening statement, we quoted the statements that were
made earlier today by young people from different schools in the youth
parliament, who made, I think, very focused and sharp statements about what
we need to do to respond to their challenges. Some of those statements I
made reference to are about the role of education in economic liberation,
entrepreneurship and financial management, and such other things.

But, many of them also made the point that the Umsobomvu Youth Fund on its
own is not sufficient to respond to the urgent needs and overwhelming needs
of the youth of our country. They kept making a statement that government
has got to do something in order to provide more capital for young people
to design, develop and implement their own projects.

The point that they were making was that we have got to look at the
National Empowerment Fund, other structures, parastatals and, in
particular, the private sector to ask them the question: What are they
doing to develop and empower the youth of our country and therefore to
challenge them to release the resources that they command for the purpose
of fulfilling that objective?

They made the statement that further education and training are important;
that there is insufficient access to higher education because higher
education fees are exorbitant and many of our people are unable to access
it.

The result is that less than 10% of young people who graduate every year
with a Grade 12 certificate are therefore unable to find themselves either
in higher education or in further education and training, or to get jobs.
They fall into the pool of unemployment and therefore are increasing the
number of young people who are unemployed in South Africa.

It would seem that the global economy faces this structural problem of how
to engage young people in economic activity. As the hon Van Heerden
indicated, it is a global phenomenon. It is a problem that faces Europe;
it’s a problem that faces Africa.

So, in our response to that, we have got to look at what other countries
are doing and what we need to do as a country to respond to these
challenges of young people. We have begun to implement some of the
programmes - the learnerships and internships - that are intended to
resolve these problems.

I have got to say, hon Robinson, that learnerships are not a panacea to the
problems of the youth. They will not solve all the problems that our youth
are facing. They are not perfect. There are many problems in the
learnership programmes. Umsobomvu Youth Fund is not perfect, it’s not a
panacea. All these programmes are intended to ensure that, at the least,
there are young people whom we give hope to, that we are able to uplift and
provide with opportunities. And I am happy to say that hundreds of
thousands of youths have begun to benefit from these programmes. When you
come across some of them, they say thank you very much for these
programmes.

But, of course, we have got to pay attention to those who still have not
benefited from these programmes. We must say to them that because we have
been able to reach some, it doesn’t mean that we have succeeded in doing
all that we need to do.

So, the National Youth Service Programme itself is quite important, and I
would like to say that we have got to raise this debate in society as a
whole so that it is not a debate that is limited to the Houses of
Parliament.

We have to go out to society and to the private sector, in particular,
which possesses the largest resources available for development, and say to
them they should do something: these are the things that we suggest you do
in order to respond to the challenge of youth unemployment.

There are many ideas that people have, and I wish to say that there is a
wealth of leadership among the youth of our country. One of the things that
South Africa is blessed with is a huge leadership base among its youth, and
it is a trait that our country possesses that puts us at a comparative
advantage over many other countries in the world. We must use that because
we invested in the youth. As the youth parliamentarians suggested earlier,
we should invest in the youth of our country today, not tomorrow, because
the fact that the youth is the future creates an excuse for us to say that
we will invest in them in the future. Unfortunately, when the future comes,
the youth will be decapacitated, disgruntled and quite dangerous with
regard to the sustainability of our democracy.

We must invest in them today to ensure that when the future comes, they too
will play their part at the helm of our country’s efforts to develop to
even greater heights. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, hon Deputy Minister. On
behalf of the House, we want to thank you for showing high regard by
participating in this critical debate, which marks one of the indelible
chapters in the history of our country and our nation.

We hope that in future you are also going to display this keen interest in
the affairs of Parliament and government in terms of driving the new
development agenda. We want to thank you.

Debate concluded.

                    CITATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAWS BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr A L MOSEKI: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Hon Ministers, members of
this august House, as members we will remember that our Constitution was
adopted in 1996 by the Constitutional Assembly. It was at the same time
given a number like any other Act of Parliament.

It was referred to as the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, Act
108 of 1996. This was done to adhere to standard practice whereby all laws
passed by Parliament are referred to as Acts, with specific numbering
attached to them.

However, this House will recall further that the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa, which is the supreme law of the country, was
passed by Parliament. As we said earlier, it was passed by the
Constitutional Assembly, precisely because it was drafted and adopted as
such.

The issue or need for allocating a number did not arise, although such
allocation of numbers was done. It was, on a number of occasions, pointed
out not only by the constitutional experts but also by the Chief Justice
and members of the judiciary, that this numbering of the Constitution was
an anomaly, or it was an oversight.

Accordingly, and in line with international standards, the Constitution has
had to be different from any other Act of Parliament and similarly any
other law that has been passed affecting amendment or making reference to
the supreme law that has a citation deemed to have been changed with
deletion of the Act.

Simply put, it is not in order for the Constitution to begin as an Act or
to be numbered. It is therefore necessary for an amendment to be made to
correct this, and therefore I am actually referring to the numbering of the
Constitution. It is not supposed to be numbered like other Acts of
Parliament.

This Bill therefore seeks to rectify those anomalies. Therefore we put this
Bill before this august House for adoption. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.


               SOUTH AFRICAN SPORTS COMMISSION ACT REPEAL BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: My understanding is that where the
Rules are not clear in dealing with certain things, it is within the
discretion of the presiding officer to take certain decisions. In terms of
the speaker’s list before me here this afternoon, I have got only one
speaker who is going to make a statement on behalf of the committee.

I also want to acknowledge the presence of the Minister of Sport and
Recreation, hon Stofile, who is here in our midst today. And I would also
like to say that if the Minister wants to make statements or say a few
words on this he is allowed to do so.

Could I get and indication from the Minister?

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: I will follow the indication from the
Chair. If the House wishes me to make a statement the Chair will indicate.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I was thinking that if you so wish,
since you are not on the speaker’s list. I was using my discretion. I
therefore call hon Mazibuko.

Ms F MAZIBUKO: Thank you, Chairperson. Members say I must talk about
condoms. Hon Chair, hon members of Parliament . . . Chairperson, could I
get your protection; because it is Youth Day, you know, apparently there is
something that was left out.

With the advent of democracy in 1994, sport in South Africa was identified
as an integral part of the social and political transformation of the
country, particularly in fostering racial, social and political
integration.

Indeed sport in this country has grown to be an integral part of social and
community skills education and development of the people of South Africa.
Sporting activities and events throughout the country have grown to major
economic contributors to small businesses and local communities.

That is why as the government, elected by the majority of the people of
this country, we have committed ourselves to continually seeking ways of
ensuring the improvement of our administration and management of sport in
this country.

Therefore, the Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having
considered the subject of the South African Sports Commission Act Repeal
Bill, Act B13B of 2005, which was referred to it and classified by the
joint tagging mechanism as a section 75 Bill, agrees to Bill B13B - 2005.

The committee is of the view that the proposed South African Sports
Commission Act Repeal Bill will seek to merge the Sports Commission with
the Department of Sports and Recreation, which is a positive step towards
the administration and management of sports in this country.

We believe that this measure will go a long way towards addressing the
insufficiency and fragmentation of the institution of sport in this
country, which was caused by the legacy of the long years of apartheid. The
select committee of sports and recreation agrees to this Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.


                       SECTIONAL TITLES AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Members, this Bill has to do with
Land Affairs and Agriculture, and I recognise the presence of the hon
Deputy Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs. Hon Prof Du Toit, would
you like to make some comments?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chair, I will not
make comments. I am just showing my support for the NCOP. [Applause.]

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, hon Ministers present, the Deputy Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs, we appreciate your support. Hon members and
colleagues, I place before this House the Sectional Titles Amendment Bill
today, 14 June 2005. The Sectional Titles Amendment Bill I am presenting
before the House today was unanimously adopted by members of the select
committee without any reservation.

We all realised the necessity of the Bill to close the gaps in the
Sectional Titles Act of 1986. We had already amended the Act in 2003 to
bring it in line with new developments. What we are presenting before this
House today is a second amendment to the Act. This in itself implies that
there are minor changes in this Bill in order to give effect to the smooth
management of sectional title schemes.

The amendments are around technical and legal aspects of creating and
dealing with a unit title, and the rights and responsibilities of body
corporates governing these units. It is important that where there is
multiple ownership of a property, there should be rules and regulations
governing the use of property to avoid infighting, to ensure that
properties are properly managed and to ensure that owners understand their
responsibility towards maintaining the common property of sectional title
developments.

The aims of the Bill are to amend the definition of “exclusive use area” in
order to prevent any misunderstanding, increase the percentage deviation in
the participation quota as a result of the extension of any section in a
scheme, provide for extension where a scheme is extended by the addition of
a section, provide for registration of an extension where a scheme is
extended by definition of a section, extend the types of real rights which
may be registered against a portion of common property, include
imprisonment in a penalty provision, and to protect members of the body
corporate who have paid up their levies from judgment that has been given
against the body corporate.

Let me touch briefly on the amendments and explain why they have to be
introduced. Firstly, “exclusive use area” refers to a part or parts of
common property for the exclusive use by the owner or owners of one or more
sections. Through the amendment, the definition was extended to other
sections of the Act, instead of referring only to section 27. In this way,
the confusion that was created due to different interpretations in the
application of the management and application of rules is solved. So this
amendment is going to correct the ambiguity and introduce more certainty in
the meaning of “exclusive use area”.

Secondly, in terms of the extension of boundaries, the Act says that that
should be approved by resolution of its members and should be registered.
It further provides that, if the deviation in the participation quota is
more than five per cent, the consent to registration of a plan for
extension should be by mortgage of each section in the scheme.

The problem with this arrangement is that it is not clear whether the
percentage deviation relates to the participation quota of the individual
section concerned, or to all participation quotas of the section in the
scheme. Also, the small percentage deviation does not justify the time and
cost to obtain consent from each of the mortgages for the registration of
the sectional plan of extension.

The amendment in clause 2 of the Bill is to clarify the uncertainty
pertaining to the participation quota and to save time and cost by
increasing the deviation percentage to 10%. We welcome this, as it will
reduce the instances where all the mortgages have to investigate the
requests and provide decisions for extension.

Clause 5 deals with developers who fail to comply with the requirement to
call the first meeting of the body corporate within 60 days after its
establishment and furnish its members with a copy of the sectional plan
with full financial statement as provided for by section 36 of the Act.
According to section 36 of the Act, a developer who fails to comply with
this provision is guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding R1000.

However, the fine has proved not to be an effective deterrent, as many
developers do not comply with the obligation. This Bill proposes the
inclusion of imprisonment for a period not exceeding two years as a
deterrent, which we have accepted.

Owners of sectional title units share and utilise common areas in the same
building and are expected to make financial contributions to the upkeep of
the property. Nonpayment of property levies and contributions by some
owners of the sectional title units or poor management by the body
corporate or managing agent lead to outstanding debts by the body
corporate.

Section 47 of the Act empowers the creditor of a body corporate to apply to
court both for the members of the body corporate in their personal capacity
and as joint judgment debtors in instances where judgment against them
remains unsatisfied.

Therefore, we want to place this Bill before this House for adoption. On
behalf of the select committee, we want to extend words of warm welcome to
hon member Watty Watson who was hospitalised, but who has joined the stream
once more. Indeed, we wish him a speedy recovery. I thank you. [Applause.]



Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with the section 75 of the Constitution.


   AFRICAN UNION CONVENTION ON THE PREVENTION AND COMBATING OF CORRUPTION


                          (Consideration of Report)

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you for the
accolades, hon members. Chairperson, as you are aware, South Africa is
hailed by many countries on this continent as a leader and a role model.
This is the reason why countries on this continent won’t make any move on
anything before they haven’t consulted South Africa.

There are those countries that, in our street language, we say are lastig
or ba a phapha [troublesome]. There are many examples that one can give to
prove this. There is this African Union Convention on Prevention and
Combating Corruption. As a norm, countries are waiting to hear what we are
saying, as South Africa, about this convention. But there are those
countries that have already signed. There are nine of them.

Those are the first countries that we had to follow, unfortunately. The
main aim of this convention is to promote and strengthen the development in
Africa by each party state of a mechanism requirement to prevent, detect,
punish, and eradicate corruption and related offences in the public or
private sector.

It, again, makes it possible to co-ordinate and harmonise the policies and
legislation between party states for purposes of prevention, detection,
punishment and eradication of corruption on the continent. One of the most
important things is to establish the necessary conditions to foster
transparency and accountability in management or public affairs.

Another principle of this convention is the respect for democratic
institutions amongst the populace, participation, and the rule of law and
good governance. There is a range of issues covered by the convention. For
example, things related to laundering of proceeds of corruption, the fight
against corruption and related offences in the public sector, illicit
enrichment, access to information, funding of political parties, civil
society and media, extradition and many other issues.

This convention, as we are aware, was tabled in this Parliament many months
ago. I know that all members in this House have gone through it. Let me
therefore stop right here, because I will be preaching the gospel to the
converted.

On behalf of the wonderful, dynamic select committee led by the hon
Shiceka, let me humbly submit this convention to this House for its
adoption to enable our government to rectify it. Hon Members, this
convention therefore is tabled before you for adoption. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber, to cast their provinces’
vote. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the
opportunity to make their declarations of votes, if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in an
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE (Eastern Cape): In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN (Free State): In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI (Gauteng): Eyethu. (We support.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI (KwaZulu-Natal): KwaZulu-Natal iyavumelana. (KwaZulu-Natal
supports.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE (Limpopo): Limpopo e a dumela. (Limpopo agrees.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA (Mpumalanga): Siyaxhasa. (We support.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN (Northern Cape): Northern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE (North West): North West supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr N MACK (Western Cape): In favour.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with Section 65 of the
Constitution.




                    MAGISTRATES P P MKALIPI AND P W PHIRI


                         (Consideration of Reports)

Mr D A WORTH: Thank you, Chairperson. Chairperson, hon members, the Select
Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs have given due
consideration to all the facts presented in terms of section 13(4)(c) of
the Magistrates Act of 1993. I want to just elaborate here, Chairperson.
Your committee saw documented evidence of maladministration charges and
facts which prove beyond doubt that the two magistrates in question were
not fit or proper persons to hold the office of magistrate.

Whilst I do not wish to elaborate further on the actual charges against
them, your committee, needless to say, decided unanimously that Magistrates
P P Mkhalipi and P W Phiri be removed from office, and not be reinstated. I
trust that this House will support the decision of your committee. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, hon member. I shall now
put the question in respect of the fifth Order. The question is that the
report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. In accordance with
Rule 71, I shall allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations
of vote, if they so wish. Is there any province that wants to make a
declaration?

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE (Eastern Cape): In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN (Free State): Vrystaat steun. (Free State supports.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI (Gauteng): Siyavuma. (We support.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI (KwaZulu-Natal): KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE (Limpopo): Limpopo iyaxhasa. (Limpopo supports.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA (Mpumalanga): Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN (Northern Cape): Noord-Kaap steun. (Northern Cape
supports.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE (North West): Noordwes steun. (North West supports.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr N MACK (Western Cape): Western Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEE: All nine provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution. [Applause.]

I shall now proceed to put the question in respect of the sixth Order. The
question is that the report be adopted. As a decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’
votes. I am convinced they are all here.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall now allow provinces the opportunity to
make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. Is there any province
that wants to make a declaration of vote?

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do so in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must indicate to the
Chair whether they vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE (Eastern Cape): Re a e thega. (We support.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN (Free State): In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI (Gauteng): Iyavuma iGauteng. (Gauteng supports.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI (KwaZulu-Natal): KwaZulu-Natal iyaxhasa. (KwaZulu-Natal
supports.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE (Limpopo): Ke ya rona. (We support.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA (Mpumalanga): In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN (Northern Cape): Ke a rona. (We support.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE (North West): Siyayisekela. (We support.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr M MACK (Western Cape): Wes-Kaap steun. (Western Cape supports.)

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 16:00.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                            FRIDAY, 10 JUNE 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS:



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


               i) South African Abattoir Corporation Act Repeal Bill [B 21 –
                  2005] (National Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
                  Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
                  Government Gazette No 27670 of 10 June 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as
         referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 13 June 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      Report on the withholding of remuneration of Mr H W Moldenhauer,
    Chief Magistrate, Pretoria, tabled in terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the
    Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


2.    The Minister for Safety and Security

Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic of South
Africa and the African Union Contributing South African Police Service
Monitors to the Civilian Police Component of the African Union Mission in
the Darfur Region of the Republic of Sudan (AMIS), tabled in terms of
section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


                            MONDAY, 13 JUNE 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Message from President

      The Speaker and the Chairperson received the following message, dated
        13 June 2005, from the President, calling a Joint Sitting of the
        National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces:

      CALLING OF A JOINT SITTING OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE NATIONAL
        COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

      By direction of the President and in terms of section 84(2)(d) of the
        Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No. 108 of
        1996), read with Rule 7(1)(b) of the Joint Rules of Parliament,
        this serves to confirm the President’s call for a joint sitting of
        the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces on
        Tuesday, 14 June 2005 at 14:00, in order to deliver a message to
        Parliament.
      Signed
      F CHIKANE
        (The Presidency)


                            TUESDAY, 14 JUNE 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent
      (1)   Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 14 June 2005:


         (i)     Citation of Constitutional Laws Bill [B 5B – 2005]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)


        (ii)     South African Sports Commission Act Repeal Bill [B 13B –
               2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)


        (iii)    Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 10B – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 75)


TABLINGS:



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Report of the Judicial Service Commission for 2004.

      (b)   Government Notice No R.415 published in Government Gazette No
         27549 dated 29 April 2005: Amendment of Regulations in terms of the
         Judges’ Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No
         47 of 2001).

      (c)   Proclamation No R.21 published in Government Gazette No 27549
         dated 29 April 2005: Extension of the period of operation of
         sections 51 and 52 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1997 (Act No
         105 of 1997).


COMMITTEE REPORTS:


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on Co-
    operatives Bill [B 4B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 14
    June 2005:

      The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having
        considered the subject of the Co-operatives Bill [B 4B – 2005]
        (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
        JTM as a section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on
    Minerals and Energy Laws Amendment Bill [B 1 – 2005] (National Assembly
    – sec 75), dated 14 June 2005:

      The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having
        considered the subject of the Minerals and Energy Laws Amendment
        Bill [B 1 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and
        classified by the JTM as a section 75 Bill, reports that it has
        agreed to the Bill.


