---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 August 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-08-25
---

THURSDAY, 25 AUGUST 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr M M SWATHE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall
move:

   That this House discusses the unsustainably high salaries and bonuses
   paid to some municipal managers in the light of poor service delivery in
   certain municipalities.

[Applause.]


                      PRESIDENTIAL REMUNERATION PACKAGE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I hereby move the
motion printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


    That the House resolves that -

    (1)     in terms of section 2(1) of the Remuneration of Public Office
          Bearers Act, 1998 (Act No 20 of 1998), and having due regard to
          the criteria listed in that subsection, the salary and motor
          vehicle allowance payable to the President of the Republic of
          South Africa be determined at eight hundred and thirty seven
          thousand eight hundred and ninety nine rand and thirty five cents
          (R837 899,35) and two hundred and seventy nine thousand two
          hundred and ninety nine rand and seventy cents (R279 299,70) per
          annum, respectively, with effect from 1 April 2005; and


      2) in terms of section 2(2) of the said Act, the amount of forty
         thousand rand (R40 000) per annum be determined as that portion of
         the remuneration of the President to which section 8(1)(d) of the
         Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962), shall apply.

Agreed to.

                             MEMBERS' STATEMENTS



                        VIGILANCE AGAINST CORRUPTION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs T J TSHIVHASE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC applauds the initiative
taken by the Minister and the Department of Social Development to fight
corruption within the department and within the social security system. The
anticorruption campaign and the indemnity offer made by the Minister have
successfully saved R400 million of social grant money.

Nearly 86 000 illegitimate beneficiaries have asked for indemnity and we
thank them for coming forward. Of these, 21 000 have already been granted
indemnity and 44 000 cases are with the police for further investigation.
Corruption and unethical conduct pose a major challenge within the public,
civil and private sectors. Wherever they occur, they undermine the values
and objectives of our transformation agenda. These kinds of activities rob
the poor of their only source of income and undermine our efforts to
alleviate poverty. We call on all our people to be vigilant and report
cases of corruption to the nearest police station or call the free number
normally provided for such purposes. I thank you.


                         PETROSA, IMVUME AND THE ANC


                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv H C SCHMIDT (DA): Deputy Speaker, answers provided by PetroSA, who
appeared before Scopa yesterday, demonstrate that Imvume management misled
PetroSA about the purpose for which it needed an advance payment of R15
million. Instead of buying oil condensate as required by its contract,
Imvume used R11 million of public money to finance the ANC’s 2004 election
campaign. This resulted in its own effective insolvency and PetroSA having
to make a double payment. It is also apparent that PetroSA failed to
implement the appropriate internal financial checks before granting the
advance payment to Imvume.

The National Prosecuting Authority must urgently launch a full and
comprehensive forensic investigation into the relationship between PetroSA,
Imvume and the ANC. Further, the ANC must break its silence on this matter
and undertake its own internal inquiry into its role in Oilgate. The DA has
written to the NPA, requesting that they investigate this matter. We are
still awaiting their response. I thank you. [Applause.]


                              MISUSE OF ORGANS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Deputy Speaker, since it is Organ Transplant Week,
the IFP would like to draw attention to the misuse of organ transplantation
by various doctors in KwaZulu-Natal. We would like to commend law
enforcement officers and members of the public who have exposed this misuse
of organs, which has literally turned people into bags of money, instead of
unique beings who function in a balanced way, to participate in balanced
communities in a give and take fashion.

We call upon all members of the medical profession and members of the
public to be aware of the potential for the misuse of human bodies, masking
greed as service, and rather to use their skills as health professionals in
an ethical way.


                         IMPROVED HOUSING STRATEGIES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the recent statement made by
President Mbeki at the launch of the Brickfields Housing Project, that “we
have, among others, an urgent challenge of bringing to a stop the pro-rich
housing development strategies that ensure that the best located land close
to all the best facilities is always available to the rich”, is welcomed
and fully supported by the ANC.

This statement echoes the announcement by the Minister of Housing, Lindiwe
Sisulu, during her budget speech on 17 May 2005, that all housing
developments not subsidised through state funding should allocate 20% of
the development to affordable housing. The Portfolio Committee on Housing,
during its strategic planning workshop in 2004, emphasised the importance
of building a society that is truly united, nonracial, nonsexist and
democratic and the need for a single and integrated economy that will
benefit all South Africans.

We also welcome the support and commitment of the chief executive of Engel
and Volkers, Mr Patrick O’Shea, and the incoming chief executive of the SA
Property Owners’ Association, Mr Neil Gopaul, to working with government to
ensure effective and integrated housing development. In all deliberations
which have taken place in the Portfolio Committee on Housing, all members
of that committee have supported the stance of the President and the
Minister.

We call on all South Africans, and in particular the housing sector, to
join and support government in providing vibrant, sustainable and
integrated human settlements. I thank you. [Applause.]


                             VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N M MDAKA (UDM): Deputy Speaker, the UDM expresses its shock at the
revelations yesterday at the Western Cape Safe Schools Indaba. It was
reported by the head of education in the province that 850 schools have
been categorised according to the levels of violence and crime they are
exposed to. A startling 125 schools fell into the high-risk category and an
additional 85 schools were described as extremely high-risk schools.

These 220 schools represent approximately 220 000 pupils who on a daily
basis would experience violence and crime in or near their school. The
result is that many schools have become unsafe for both pupils and
teachers, whilst criminals run amok. These disturbing statistics indicate
that a major section of the school-going population of the province is
being deprived of a proper education.

The long-term implications for the upliftment of these communities can only
be guessed. The UDM repeats its call upon the Ministers of Safety and
Security and Education, and their provincial counterparts, to develop an
integrated strategy to make the province’s schools places of safety and the
first step in overcoming the gang culture that is threatening many
communities. Thank you, Deputy Speaker.


                       SOUTH AFRICA’S ECONOMIC GROWTH


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (NNP): Deputy Speaker, South Africa has achieved a level of
macroeconomic stability without parallel in 40 years. In the decade prior
to 1994 economic growth averaged less than 1% a year. Since then it has
averaged almost 3% a year. In 2005 South Africa entered its 26th quarter of
continuous positive growth, marking the longest expansionary phase in its
history. The economy grew by 2,4% in the second quarter of 2005, compared
to 2,8% GDP growth in 2003 and 3,7% in 2004.

The Minister of Finance is to be commended for his sound economic
management. Under his financial leadership South Africa is now rated as the
most competitive economy in the sub-Saharan region and the most attractive
economy in Africa to invest in.

This positive economic growth should now be converted into jobs.
Unemployment is still too high, with varying statistics that range from
over 30% to as high as 42%. Let our focus for the next decade be the
economic integration of the previously disadvantaged majority. Thank you.


                   INSENSITIVE TREATMENT DURING LAST RITES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (ACDP): Deputy Speaker, the ACDP wishes to express its shock
at Somerset Hospital’s insensitive treatment of a grieving family. By
disrupting the last rites of Mr Robert Fester, the staff member concerned
acted in a manner that can only be described as inhumane. It is during
times of serious illness and death that people need all the support that
they can get. This applies to everyone, regardless of his or her faith,
nationality or position in life. It is unacceptable that this traumatic
time for the Fester family was further overshadowed by the callousness of
the hospital staff member concerned.

This incident highlights concerns about declining services and conditions
within our health services. It emphasises the need for trained, caring
professionals to be employed at our health institutions, and for government
to give serious attention to conditions at state hospitals. It is deeply
disturbing that people should spend their last hours in a run-down
environment and still have to listen to disrespectful remarks from staff
members.

The ACDP calls upon hospital staff to exercise compassion and respect
during hospital prayer vigils and we appeal to all staff members to give
their full support to all religious leaders who administer the last rites
at hospitals throughout our country. Thank you.

     INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR REMEMBRANCE OF SLAVE TRADE AND ITS ABOLITION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S L TSENOLI (ANC): Deputy Speaker, this week, on 23 August, was the
International Day for the Remembrance of Slave Trade and its Abolition.

The period of slave trade right here in Cape Town and its surroundings must
not be forgotten and ignored, but should be recognised as a crucial part of
our history.

The unacceptable slave trade was recorded callously, with no indication of
the humanity of those about whom transactions were conducted. The slave
trade was characterised by the abuse of African people in general, such as
that of Sarah Baartman. This abuse was rubbed in when former slaves lost
their land through Acts such as the Land Act.

The year 1994 was an important break-through for the country, especially
for indigenous people who also experienced this deep slavery problem.

We recognise that people were taken out of Africa to foreign countries and
others were brought into Africa - such as those from Malaysia, including
indentured labour from India and Indonesia - through the slave trade.

We in the ANC remember these brutalities with deep commitment to the
creation of a caring society that values solidarity and a deep culture of
human rights.

I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]


                            THE ANC AND AFRIKAANS




                            (Member’s Statement)

Mev D VAN DER WALT (DA): Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, die DA verwelkom die
verklaring van die ANC Hoofsweep, agbare Goniwe, vroeër die week waarin hy
die Afrikaanssprekendes in Suid-Afrika gelukwens met die taal se 130ste
verjaarsdag, die doelwitte wat die taal bereik het en die erkenning dat
Afrikaans ’n rolmodel, ook vir ander tale in ons land, is.

Die uitdaging aan die ANC-regering, egter, bly om daad by word te voeg en
te verseker dat Afrikaanssprekendes, soos andertaliges, in hul eie
moedertaal onderrig kan word. Statutêre aansoekvorms by alle departemente,
soos byvoorbeeld tydens die huidige stormloop vir die hernuwing van
vuurwapenlisensie-aansoeke, moet in mense se moedertaal wees, sodat hul hul
aansoeke in hul eie taal kan voltooi.

Die Afrikaanssprekendes het by wyse van die 11-jaarlange onderhandelings
tussen die ANC en die VF Plus ervaar dat gelukwense en onderhandelings
meestal net vir mediakonsumpsie is voor verkiesings. Ek dank u, Mevrou die
Adjunkspeaker. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA welcomes the
statement made earlier this week by the Chief Whip of the ANC, hon Goniwe
in which he congratulated Afrikaans speakers in South Africa on the 130th
anniversary of their language, the objectives the language has achieved and
the recognition that Afrikaans is also a role model for other languages in
our country.

The challenge for the ANC-led government, however, is to put their words
into action and ensure that Afrikaans speakers, like speakers of other
languages, can be taught in their mother tongue. Statutory application
forms of all departments, such as those used during the current rush to
apply to renew firearm licences, must be available in the applicants’
mother tongue so that they can fill in their application forms in their own
language.

The Afrikaans speakers have, through the 11-year long negotiations between
the ANC and the FF Plus, discovered that congratulations and negotiations
are primarily for media consumption before elections. I thank you, Madam
Deputy Speaker.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of
order: Since she mentioned me, and I am not a Minister, will you give me an
opportunity to respond?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not at all. That is a very good try, but we won’t, sir.
[Laughter.]


                GOVERNMENT’S PROJECT CONSOLIDATE BEARS FRUITS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M M S LEKGORO (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC congratulates the 22
Northern Cape municipal managers and other officials who recently completed
special capacity-building programmes at the Free State University. This is
an encouraging effort in an endeavour to address the grave lack of skills
in our country’s municipalities.

Project Consolidate and other government efforts have pointed to lack of
skills as a major cause for poor service delivery throughout the country.
We call on the Minister, the Department for Provincial and Local
Government, the local government Seta and all stakeholders in the training
sector to pay more attention to rapid delivery of critical skills for local
government to enhance service delivery capacity.

I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]


                     CRISIS IN COMBAT READINESS OF SANDF


                            (Member’s Statement)

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, reports of a crisis
in the combat readiness of the SA National Defence Force are indeed a cause
for great concern. Just as we have warned for many years now, the cost of
the arms deal is placing an unbearable burden on the operational capacity
of the SA National Defence Force. The result of the government’s misplaced
priorities is that the SA National Defence Force may be unable to repel a
serious conventional threat to South Africa’s territorial integrity.

This is unacceptable. The blame for it must be laid squarely at the feet of
the current and previous Ministers of Defence. It is about time that the
government acknowledged the folly of the arms deal and took decisive steps
to address the crisis in the SA National Defence Force.

Because the people of South Africa pay huge amounts of money through their
taxes for defence, they deserve a force that is capable of defending South
Africa’s sovereignty and of meeting our responsibilities on the continent.
They do not deserve the current mess it is in now.

Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]


           CONCERN OVER FORMER SAA EXECUTIVE NOW AT AIR MAURITIUS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, it has been reported that the
former vice-president of operations at SAA was allegedly paid several
million rands to stop him from working for another airline within a year
after leaving SAA. He has now joined Air Mauritius in a similar capacity
less than eight months after leaving SAA.

This person was SAA executive vice-president of operations from March 2002
until November 2004. Although he was not the only SAA executive to receive
a restraint of trade payment, he apparently received the largest share of
the severance packages.

Considering the large sum of money involved, we urge the relevant
authorities to look into this person’s move to Air Mauritius thoroughly so
as to establish whether there was any violation of his agreement with SAA,
since it is also stated in the Transnet annual report that restraint of
trade agreements with its executives only terminate after one year. It
should also be established whether there would be any negative impact for
SAA as a result of his early move to another airline.

I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.





              FREE STATE PUPILS WIN 2005 STOCKHOLM YOUTH WATER


                          CONSERVATION CHAMPIONSHIP


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mong S L J MODISENYANE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, barutwana ba sekolo sa
Setjhaba-Se-Maketse, mane Botshabelo, Foreisetata, ba hapile sekola sa ba
banyenyane phehisanong ya paballo ya metsi e tshwarelwang Stockholm selemo
le selemo.

Phehisano ena e khothaletsa batjha, paballo ya metsi le tikoloho. Dinaheng
tse 27 tse nkileng karolo, Afrika Borwa e ile ya boela ya itlhoma pele. E
se e le ka makgetlo a mabedi dilemong tse tharo tse fetileng Afrika Borwa e
ntse e nka boemo ba pele, mme e ile ya tswa boemong ba bobedi ka selemo sa
2004.

Paballo ya metsi dinakong tsa pula tse fokolang e thusa ho thibela moyafalo
mme e bitswa ``nocturnal hydro-minimizer’’. E thusa tshebediso ya metsi ka
tsela e hlokolotsi, etswe Afrika Borwa e a ameha dinaheng tse nang le
moyafalo e hodimo.

ANC e phaella taba ya letona le kgabane ho tsa metsi le meru, tjama,
thoholetsong e lebisitsweng ho Pontsho Moletsane, Elvis Moshodi le Sechaba
Ramabenyane ba ileng ba bea sekolo sa Setjhaba-Se-Maketse, Botshabelo
sehlohlolong, mme e ba nkela hloohong haholo.

ANC e kgothaletsa dikolo ho kenela phehisano ena ka bongata. ANC e boela e
mamiella pehelo ena ya letona ya hore boramahlale ba hosane ba botjwa ka
tsela e jwalo ho tloha bonyenyaneng ba bona.
Ke a leboha. [Lehofi.] (Translation of Sotho member’s statement follows.)

[Mr L J MODISENYANE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the learners of Setjhaba-
se-maketse School at Botshabelo, Free State, won the water conservation
youth championship which is held in Stockholm annually.

This competition encourages youth about water and environmental
conservation. Out of 27 participating countries, South Africa came first
again. This is the second time in the past three years that South Africa
has held the first position, and it took second position in 2004.

Water conservation, in times of less rainfall, helps to prevent air
pollution, and this is called the nocturnal hydro-minimizer. It helps in
the proper usage of water, since South Africa is one of the countries
affected by high air pollution.

The ANC supports the hon Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry in
congratulating Pontsho Moletsane, Elvis Moshodi and Sechaba Ramabenyane,
who put Setjhaba-se-maketse School, Botshabelo, at the top, and it
recognises this.

The ANC encourages schools to participate in this competition in large
numbers. The ANC further supports the report by the Minister that future
scientists are mentored in this way from their childhood.

I thank you.] [Applause.]]


                         CREATING JOB OPPORTUNITIES

                            (Member’s statement)

Nksz N C KONDLO (ANC): Sekela Somlomo, urhulumente okhokelwa ngumbutho
wesizwe i-ANC uyakuthi gqolo usebenzisana nabemi beli lizwe ekwakheni
amathuba emisebenzi nokulwa indlala. Kulo nyaka uphelileyo umama uLumnka
Nzimela wahlelwa yingozi yenqwelo eyamshiya engcileza ukuhamba baye
oogqirha bemxelela ukuba akanakukwazi ukuphinda aphile ngokuthe qete.
Kwanyanzeleka ukuba awuncame umsebenzi wakhe kumzi wokwenza iinqwelo-
mafutha wakwa Volkswagen eTinarha.

Lo mama akazange awe madolo akuziva ezi ndaba, koko waxoza mphini wumbi
waziqalela ishishini leendawo zokulala i-bed and breakfast ngokolwimi
lwasemzini. Sithetha nje ngoku uqashe abanye abantu abane abancedisana naye
kweli shishini. Urhulumente wesixeko se-Nelson Mandela Metro okhokelwa yi-
ANC unika uncedo lokufundisa lo mama nabasebenzi bakhe ngoqeqesho lokuqhuba
ishishini elikumila kunje. Umama uLumnka Nzimela uthi ke xa ethetha,
‘Ndakhuthazwa yintetho kaMongameli welizwe xa wayesithi, Vuka uzenzele.
Boomama vukani nizenzele. Lithi iqhalo lesintu, Imbila yaswela umsila
ngokuyalezela.’ Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa speech
follows.)

[Ms N C KONDLO (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led Government will continue
to co-operate with the citizens of this country in creating job
opportunities and alleviating poverty. Last year Ms Lumnka Nzimela was
involved in a car accident which left her with a limp, and doctors told her
that she would never fully recover. She was forced to leave her job at a
motor manufacturing company Volkswagen South Africa in Uitenhage.

This woman never lost hope after hearing this news, and instead she devised
a plan to start a bed and breakfast business. As we speak now, she has
hired four other people to help her in this business. The Nelson Mandela
Metro, which is led by the ANC, has given this woman and her workers some
assistance in the form of training in how to run such a business. Ms Lumnka
Nzimela said, “I was inspired by the speech of the State President of the
country when he said, ‘Wake up and do it yourself! Women, wake up and do it
yourselves.’ An isiXhosa idiom says, ‘A rock rabbit lost its tail as a
result of its laziness.”  I thank you. [Applause.]]


                            MINISTERS’ RESPONSES



                        VIGILANCE AGAINST CORRUPTION


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Sekela Somlomo, (Deputy Speaker), this
is Afrikaans.

Ndinqwenela ukuba onke amalungu abekekileyo abe ayahambisana nentetho
yelungu elibekekileyo uTshivhase xa ebesithi zonke izenzo zorhwiphilizo
nobuqhophololo ezenzeka xa urhulumente ehlawula izibonelelo kubantu bonke
abangaphilanga, abadala okanye abantwana mabazizise emapoliseni ukuze
ziphandwe nzulu . . .  (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[I would like all hon members to support what hon Tshivhase is suggesting.
She suggests that all acts of corruption in respect of the payment of
grants for the disabled, old age pensions and child grants must be reported
to the police for investigation . . . ]

 . . . because it is in fact our mandate as public representatives to raise
these issues relating to corruption in engaging with our people all the
time. If corruption is not dealt with, particularly by people who are in
government, and people like us who are public representatives, it causes
immeasurable damage in terms of our programme for the advancement of the
cause of our people.

Ndiyacela ke ukuba xa sithetha nabantu sithi kubo, obu buqhophololo abuveli
kurhulumente nakubantu abasebenza eburhulumenteni kuphela, koko bukwakho
nakwimibutho yasekuhlaleni kanti nakoosomashishini. Kuba kaloku xa sithetha
ngobuqhophololo siyathanda ukubashiya ngaphandle oosomashishini.
Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[We ask you to tell communities that corruption does not only occur in
government and among government officials but also in community structures
and among business people. This is because when we refer to corruption we
have a tendency to exclude business people. Thank you. [Applause.]]


                VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS; MOTHER-TONGUE EDUCATION

                            (Minister’s Response)

Die MINISTER VAN ONDERWYS: Mev die Speaker, ek kan nie baie goed Afrikaans
praat nie. Ek praat kombuis-Afrikaans. Ek wil suiwer Afrikaans praat, en
die mense wat suiwer Afrikaans praat help my. Ek ken nie baie Afrikaans nie
. . . (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, I do not speak Afrikaans very
well. I speak kitchen Afrikaans. I would like to speak  Afrikaans properly
and people who do speak Afrikaans fluently are helping me. I do not know
much Afrikaans . . . ]

 . . . but I am available to be taught. [Applause.]

I am very concerned about the reported safety and security situation in
many of the schools in the Western Cape. In fact, the Minister of Safety
and Security and the Minister of Education are already working together on
this matter, as well as the MEC for Safety and Security, and the MEC for
Education in this province and other provinces where we face this
particular challenge. We believe that indeed any child who is not safe, as
well as teachers, in our schools are being denied a proper context in which
to work, and a proper situation in which to enjoy a quality education.

However, it is important for us to say that in fact many of those who pose
a threat to our schools are members of the community in which our schools
are located. Therefore, as members of Parliament let us not come here to
talk to each other about this, but go to our communities and change the way
our communities perceive the schools that our children attend. [Applause.]

There is no country in which a school is not a safe place, respected by the
community. Therefore there is something wrong in the attitude that our
communities have towards our schools. Let us not make cheap politics out of
it. Let us ensure that we work with our communities to improve their
attitude. You may well laugh, hon member. Unfortunately we lose a lot of
computers which are stolen by the very people who live next door to the
relevant schools.

We have to ask the communities to stop that practice, and not laugh about
it. It is not a laughing matter. It is a serious matter that we must
address as parliamentarians in partnership with our communities.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Why don’t you listen, you talk too much. [Laughter.] On the matter of
Afrikaans, I want to say that in terms of the law in our country, Afrikaans
speakers who wish to be educated in Afrikaans have such a choice by law,
and the courts have ruled very clearly on this question, and we must
respect the law, as it exists. Nevertheless, we face the challenge of
ensuring that all children enjoy equal rights to all languages in South
Africa. And that is where we must give our attention. It is not just a
question of one language in our country, but of all the languages and
creating a multilingual society where parity of esteem for all languages
exists. And that is what we will work towards. Thank you. [Applause.]


             MULTILINGUALISM; OILGATE; CONDITIONS IN HOSPITALS;


                         WATER PROJECT IN FREE STATE


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, . . .

 . . . iyaxaka into yokuba thina saqhekeka iintloko, siziluma amalwimi,
sifunda iilwimi ezingezozethu, kube nanamhlanje, ngoku sesikhululekile,
kusafuneka siphinde sizilume amalwimi.

Mna bendifuna ukuba sibe nethuba lokusetyenziswa kwesiVenda kule ndawo.
Bendifuna amalungu, nala akwela cala, athethe isiVenda nesiZulu xa
ephakamile emi kule ndawo, ezona lwimi zicinezelekileyo kweli lizwe lethu,
ezona lwimi kufanele ukuba sizikhulule.

Ndifuna ukuthi ke, Sekela Somlomo, siwuvile lo mba we-Oilgate. Uthathiwe
nguMkhuseli woLuntu wawuhlalutya, wakhupha ingxelo, kodwa use ngundaba-
mlonyeni, awupheli kude kube namhlanje. Ndifuna ukuthi thina siliSebe
LeZimbiwa naMandla asibuzi gama lamntu, ukuba uphethe ikhadi likabani,
sinceda abantu boMzantsi Afrika.

Sinceda zonke iinkampani, ezixhotyiswe phantsi kwenkqubo ye-BEE kunye
neenkampani ezinkulu. Asibuzi phaya ukuba wena nkampani exhotyiswe phantsi
kwenkqubo i-BEE usebenza phi na, uza kuthini ngale mali. Asibuzi ukuba wena
De Beers uza kugqebhela bani kule mali. Sinceda bonke abantu boMzantsi
Afrika. Ngoko ke onobungqina makeze ngaphambili abheke emapoliseni.

Ndifuna ukubulela ilungu elithethe ngemeko yabantu ezibhedlele.
Singurhulumente senza unakonako, yiyo loo nto sino-Batho Pele, inkqubo
eyenza ukuba abantu banonelelwe kwiNkonzo yoLuntu.

Ndifuna ke ukwenza isikhalo phaya kubefundisi nakwimibutho yezenkolo,
ngelithi kaloku le nto asiloxanduva lukarhulumente yedwa, mayiphakame nayo
ithathe inxaxheba kangangoko, ukuzama ukubuyisa izimilo, ixelele abasebenzi
indlela abantu amabaphathwe ngayo.

Ndifuna ukubulela nelungu uModisenyane. Ndiza kumkhuthaza . . .
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[ . . . I find it very strange that at this time in our democracy we should
be expected to crack our heads, bite our tongues, while trying to learn
languages that are not our own.

I would like us to speak Tshivenda and isiZulu here. Members, including the
ones seated on the other side, should speak Tshivenda and isiZulu when they
rise to make their presentations, because they are among the languages that
had, for a long time, been marginalised and we need to work towards their
freedom and upliftment.

Deputy Speaker, I would, therefore, like to say that we have looked at the
Oilgate matter. The Public Protector pondered it and released a report but
there is still dissatisfaction among members of society because the matter
is still being talked about. As the Department of Minerals and Energy, we
do not ask people’s names, neither whose card they carry; we assist all the
people of South Africa.

We assist all companies, both those that fall under the BEE and those that
are large and well established. We do not ask questions about where a BEE
company operates or what it is going to do with the money. We would not ask
whom De Beers is going to share the money with. We assist everybody in
South Africa. Anyone who has evidence of any wrongdoing should go to the
police.

I would like to thank the hon member who spoke about the condition of
people in our hospitals. The government is committed to improving service
delivery in hospitals, which is why we have the Batho Pele programme.

I would also like to call on the church ministers and all religious
organisations to join hands with the government and share the
responsibility to deal with the process of moral regeneration and educate
workers about their conduct and treatment of other people.

May I also thank hon Modisenyane and encourage him to . . . ]

Letona la rona la metsi, hore ka nnete re lebohile ho fanwa ha metsi ho
etsahalang Foreisetata, le diporofensing tse ding tsa rona. Ke tla be ke mo
kope hore a tswelle pele ka kwetliso, mme a tswelle pele ka ho fana ka
ditshebeletso jwalo ka ha mmuso wa rona o etsa. Ke a leboha. [Ditlatse.]
(Translation of Sotho paragraph follows.)

[Our Minister of water, we are really thankful about the water project that
is happening in the Free State, and our other provinces. I request him to
continue with the training, continue to provide services as our government
is doing. Thank you. [Applause.]]


                          COMBAT READINESS OF SANDF

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Speaker, firstly, the report that
was leaked by the DA out of a closed portfolio committee meeting was
completely exaggerated. [Interjections.] The impression that is being
created is that the Defence Force is not capable of doing its core
business, and that is defending the sovereignty of this country and the
people of this country. [Interjections.]

The Defence Force of this country is looked upon by all African countries
as one of the best-trained defence forces, one that is ready, not only to
defend the borders of this country, but also to make sure that there is
peace on the whole continent. So anybody who creates the impression that
this Defence Force cannot defend the people of the country is
irresponsible. [Interjections.]

It is a fact that . . . [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, please, we would like to hear what the
Deputy Minister is saying.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: It is a fact that budgetary constraints and
the cut in the budget of the Defence Force have affected some of our
capabilities, but that has absolutely nothing to do with the arms deal.

In fact, the arms deal has helped us to be ready to defend this country.
[Interjections.] So nobody must make us apologise. The decision we took to
buy those Corvettes and those Grippen was the correct one.

Even regarding this issue of budget constraints, we are able to manage and
control the constraints, so there is no crisis in the country. I want to
say that the people of this country can rest assured that the Department of
Defence and the Defence Force of this country will defend them whenever
they are called upon to do so. Thank you. [Applause.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Who is the enemy?


                       HEALTH CARE IN STATE HOSPITALS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Deputy Speaker, I just want to give hon
member Green the assurance that if he gives me the details of the situation
he described here, we will definitely ask the department to investigate.

I also want to say to you, hon member, that as the Minister of Education
has said, all of us have a responsibility to support our health system to
ensure that it delivers as the Freedom Charter promised. And I want to
actually emphasise the fact that it was this ANC that adopted the Freedom
Charter, and we committed ourselves to delivering quality health care. And
what have we done? [Interjections.]

We have passed the Patients’ Charter, through which patients can demand to
be treated in a fair manner. We have established a quality healthcare
hotline, so that each and every patient that is not treated properly can
phone the Department of Health and say, I had this problem. And we can
mention here that there are issues that we took up when they were brought
to our attention.

We have passed the National Health Act. I want to lay emphasis on this Act
because it establishes hospital boards. I don’t know how many members of
your community belong to these boards. The Act establishes district health
committees and ward health committees, through which our people can
participate.

Hon member, it doesn’t help to come here and grandstand, because when you
make a general, sweeping statement and say that our health facilities are
declining, what you are actually doing is discouraging and demotivating
those very committed health professionals who are delivering health care in
our institutions.

Therefore, I am inviting you and the DA not to just come here and make
statements, but also to do something. What are you doing about the problems
you have identified? Thank you very much. [Applause.]


            ACKNOWLEDGING OF SOUTH AFRICAN OLYMPIC GOLD MEDALLIST


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order hon members, before we move on to the first order
of the day, I would like you to join me in acknowledging a South African
Olympic Gold medallist, who is with us here in the gallery. Mr Neethling,
please, would you rise as we welcome you to the House. [Applause.]


             SOUTH AFRICAN ABATTOIR CORPORATION ACT REPEAL BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.


Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security -
INDEPENDENT COMPLAINTS DIRECTORATE

Ms M M SOTYU: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, members of Parliament, the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa states that we –

   . . . lay the foundation for a democratic and open society in which
  government is based on the will of the people and every citizen is
  equally protected by law.

The ANC is committed to ensuring that our people and property are protected
and kept safe by the SA Police Service. This commitment is underscored by
the prerequisites of dignity, respect and human rights.

We support the existence and mandate of the ICD to act as a civilian
oversight mechanism to ensure a democratic, human rights- sensitive and
corruption-free SAPS.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, will you please take your seat?

Hon members, I think we have forgotten that this is the Chamber where
serious business of the country takes place. You are at liberty to go and
have a cup of tea and continue your discussions. Some people are actually
laughing out loud as if they are at a restaurant.

Hon members, please, if this persists you will be called by name, so that
the nation will actually know who is disruptive. We appeal for respect. You
know how difficult it is when you are putting a message across and people
are not listening. This is an important debate. Let us give the hon member
an opportunity to be heard. If you are not interested, or if you have
pressing work in the office, please leave quietly and go and continue your
work, but give those who would like to listen to the debate a chance. Thank
you very much.

Hon member, will you please start from the beginning, because the
disruption started then.

Ms M M SOTYU: Deputy Speaker, it seems as if we don’t take our safety very
seriously in this country, seeing that members of Parliament are doing what
they are doing.

The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa states that we -

   . . . lay the foundation for a democratic and open society in which
  government is based on the will of the people and every citizen is
  equally protected by law.

The ANC is committed to ensuring that our people and property are protected
and kept safe by the SA Police Service. This commitment is underscored by
the prerequisites of dignity, respect and human dignity.

We support the existence and mandate of the ICD, that is, the Independent
Complaints Directorate, to act as a civilian oversight mechanism to ensure
a democratic, human rights-sensitive and corruption-free SA Police Service.
It is for this reason that this report is of the utmost importance to the
portfolio committee and to all of us.

The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security held a number of meetings
with the ICD national office between March 2005 and June 2005, to discuss
their 2005-06 budget allocation. Despite these meetings, the ICD has never
been able to provide adequate answers to the concerns raised by the
portfolio committee members. After all these meetings, the portfolio
committee met with all nine provincial heads of the Independent Complaints
Directorate.

The portfolio committee raised the following concerns and observations:
Firstly, the high travel budget of the ICD, particularly with respect to
the national office. According to the ICD, its total travel expenditure for
2004-05 was R2,9 million, of which approximately R650 000 was spent by the
national office. The national office spent more than three times the
average expenditure of an entire provincial office and consists of only
five managers, including the executive director.

Secondly, the insufficient details on ICD figures for deaths in police
custody and police misconduct allowed for the formulation of a potentially
incorrect interpretation. This resulted in an interpretation by the Human
Rights Watch report that states that there has been an increase in cases of
police misconduct, while, in fact, the ICD had attributed the increase to
an increase in reported cases of outreach programmes.

The portfolio committee is frustrated by the fact that the ICD only
received negative publicity, as this could have been avoided if they had
only listened to the portfolio committee. It was disappointing to discover
that even the reports that are mentioned in the estimate of national
expenditure for 2005, were never submitted to the portfolio committee.
There should have been four research reports and four domestic violence
reports. Such reports actually did not exist.

It was clear from the ICD provincial reports that even though the ICD
received an increase for the 2005-06 financial year, the additional funds
were not allocated to core functions, such as investigation, but instead
were allocated to national office staff. This impacted negatively at
provincial level. There was an increase in complaints by the public about
poor service delivery because of a shortage of investigators, as many
investigators have resigned from the service.

Many provincial heads identified the lack of satellite offices as reducing
the accessibility of services, especially in rural areas. The legal
requirement that is applied by the ICD, even regarding the entry-level post
for caseworkers that fall under the complaints registry programme, is of
great concern to the portfolio committee. The LLB-degree requirement for
the salary they are offering makes it even more difficult to attract new
recruits into the service.

The portfolio committee discovered that a delay of up to one year in the
issuing of appointment certificates added to the staff shortage. It became
clear from responses by the executive director that the ICD is not meeting
its operational targets; particularly in terms of its core function, which
is investigation.

In attempting to get more information regarding ICD expenditure, we
consulted with the Auditor–General’s office. The Auditor-General’s office
made some recommendations, and he totally agreed with the recommendations
of the portfolio committee, which hon Annelizé van Wyk will expound on
later.

Sihlalo, Mphathiswa, izinto azimnta’ kaNgqika kweli candelo. Singathanda
ukuncedisana noMphathiswa nje kuba enethuba lokuphucula nokumisa ngokutsha
eli candelo.

Sikhe sahambela kweli candelo apha eNtshona Koloni, safumanisa ukuba
amandla eentloko zamaphondo awalingani. Sifumanise nokuba umsebenzi omninzi
wophando wenziwa ngundlunkulu, that is by the national office of the ICD
[oko kukuthi yiofisi kazwelonke ye-ICD].

Hayi ke, Mphathiswa, abasethyini bona ababonakali mpela kwicandelo
labacuphi. Intsebenziswano enkenenkene, apha naphaya, phakathi kweli
candelo namapolisa nayo ithe yaphawuleka kwamanye amaphondo.

Enye yezinto esingathanda ukuba uzijonge, Mphathiswa, xa uqhuba uphuhliso,
ngumgaqo-nkqubo wonxibelelwano namajelo eendaba weli candelo. Ikomiti
inoluvo lokuba ngathi amandla angasiwa kakhulu phaya kumaphondo, kambe
iofisi kazwelonke yona ihlole ukuba amajelo eendaba asetyenziswa kakuhle
na, hayi ukuba ibe yiyo enamandla amaninzi. Loo nto ibangela ukuba
umsebenzi ungaqhubeli phambili phaya kumaphondo. (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, Minister, the situation is bad in this directorate. We would
like to assist the Minister when he has the opportunity to restructure the
directorate.

We visited the Western Cape directorate and established that distribution
of power is not equal across the provinces. We found out that the national
office of the ICD does a large amount of the work that is supposed to be
done by the provinces.

There are no women employees as investigators in the directorate. There are
also poor working relations noticeable in other provinces between the
directorate and the police department.

One other issue that we would like the Minister to look at is the media
communication policy of the directorate.  The committee is of the opinion
that the powers should be delegated to the provinces and the national
office should monitor the process. The great involvement of the national
office is impeding progress.]

We should note that in the past the DA voted against the ICD budget; they
argued that the ICD should receive greater funding. In accepting this very
same report, the DA wanted a bigger budget for the ICD to form part of the
recommendations. However, while we are not, in principle, against the ICD
receiving more funding, we believe it would be irresponsible to do so while
they are clearly not able to manage the existing funding properly. It also
needs to be pointed out that the ICD never came to the portfolio committee
requesting an increase in funding.

The purpose of this report is to highlight the serious concerns raised by
the committee regarding the current functioning of the ICD and to request
the Minister to consider these recommendations and concerns when
restructuring the ICD. Siyabulela, Mphathiswa, siyabulela. [Thank you,
Minister, thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Chairperson, while the average police official in South
Africa does good work with limited remuneration and resources, there are
always some bad apples that tarnish the image of the Service. It is these
few bad apples that need to be rooted out of the Service, and we require a
well-resourced investigative unit that is insulated and independent from
the SA Police Service to do so.

The ANC government closed down the anticorruption unit at the end of 2001.
Between 1996 and its closure, this unit received 20 779 allegations of
police corruption, 3 045 police officers were arrested and 576 convicted.
It was perhaps the success of this unit, more than any other reason, that
led to its closure.

The Independent Complaints Directorate was established in 1997, before the
closure of the anticorruption unit. Its purpose was not to replace this
unit, but to deal with different complaints. Government made sure from the
outset that the ICD would investigate mostly operational issues within the
SA Police Service, such as general police misconduct and deaths in police
custody.

Corruption is merely a subcategory of misconduct. Corruption is not and
never was the main focus of the ICD. In fact, a provincial report states
that the IDC has received no training on the application of the Corruption
Act. In many instances, the SA Police Service has to provide backup in
anticorruption cases, which damages the IDC image as an independent
investigative body.

The ANC, however, allowed a crisis to develop within the IDC before
acknowledging that this institution has serious constraints. Shortages of
investigative personnel, offices and other resources have made the IDC
dependent on the SA Police Service, the very people they are meant to
investigate, for forensic and other assistance.

Rural areas are the main victims of the underresourcing of the IDC. For
example, while the number of cases in the Free State and Northern Cape
increased by 92% and 50% respectively, the Free State has three and the
Northern Cape four investigators to deal with all investigations.

Investigators in rural provinces have to travel long distances to
investigate cases. Slow response times affect evidence as well as the
effectiveness and outcomes of the investigations. In Limpopo province 20%
of all dockets are returned with enquiries from the Directorate of Public
Prosecutions.

Other problems reported to the committee include, among others, the fact
that various provinces reported caseloads of up to 300 per investigator. In
Limpopo, there are cases that have been pending since 1998. Many
investigators do not have policing powers, which implies that they do not
have access to police dockets.

The Gauteng report stated that the investigative component is “hopelessly
incapacitated to attend to matters monthly in accordance with standard
operating procedures, and thus causing complainants to lose faith in the
ICD holding the SA Police Service to account”.

With huge budget constraints, management spent R700 000 on decorating their
offices, and R42 000 on gifts at a conference. Provincial heads therefore
rightfully complain that the budget is allocated disproportionately, with
management consuming up to 47% of the budget.

A serious conflict has developed between the ICD nationally and the various
provinces, with accusations and counteraccusations being the order of the
day. Individuals in provinces lodged grievances with the Minister of Safety
and Security in 2003 but, to date, have not yet received a reply from him.

The DA did not support the ICD’s budgets over the past two years, firstly,
because of the inadequacy of the budget, and secondly, because of the
resulting capacity constraints. Even if the whole budget of R37 000 000 was
spent on investigations in the various provinces, this would not be enough
for the IDC to fulfil its mandate.

An inadequate budget can constrain the capacity of an institution as much
as the abuse or misdirection of that budget. Members of the ICD themselves
admit that the unit is unable to hold the SA Police Service to account for
their actions.

Anthony Altbeker of the Institute of Securities Studies rightly points out:
“ What government chooses to fund can tell us a great deal about where its
priorities lie.” This could also apply directly to the ICD’s budget and its
lack of a specified mandate to fight corruption.

While the ANC makes a great deal of noise about one or two high-profile
corruption cases, it has yet to put its money where its mouth is. In the
past, the ANC attacked the DA in this House for voicing the exact concerns
about the ICD that the ANC itself is now so vocal about.

I am, however, happy that the ANC has smelled the coffee and has now woken
up, or at least has smelled a rat and is now redirecting its poison.
Although the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security has missed an
opportunity to deal with the budgetary concerns, the DA supports this first
attempt by the committee to deal with the problems within the ICD. Thank
you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo neNdlu ehloniphekile, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe
nabahlonishwa bonke abakhona, kufanele kucacele noma ubani ukuthi kukhona
okungahambi kahle neze kulo msebenzi we-Independent Complaints Directorate.

Thina, njengokomidi, asigculisekile neze ngoba imibuzo ayiphendulwa
ngokweqiniso, futhi ayikho imizamo yokukulungisa lokho. Ngakho-ke kucacela
noma ubani ukuthi kufanele lo mbiko ubekwe lapha ePhalamende futhi
iPhalamende liwamukele njengoba unjalo ngenxa yalezi zizathu ezilandelayo.

Okokuqala, wonke amahhovisi asezifundeni awagculisekile ngendlela aphethwe
ngayo yihhovisi elikhulu. Okwesibili, akukho ukuxhumana phakathi kwehhovisi
elikhulu nawo wonke amahhovisi asezifundazweni.(Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson and hon House, hon Ministers and all hon
members present here, it should be clear to everybody that something is
wrong with the Independent Complaints Directorate.

As a committee, we are not impressed because questions are not handled
truthfully and there is no effort to correct that. Therefore, it is clear
to everybody that the report that is before Parliament should be accepted
as it is for the following reasons:

Firstly, provincial offices are not impressed with the way they are treated
by the national office. Secondly, there is no communication between the
national office and provincial offices.]

There is no communication whatsoever.

Okwesithathu, kunemisebenzi okufanele ngabe yenziwa ezifundazweni, kodwa,
lutho, alivumi ihhovisi elikhulu kangangoba lize lisebenzise abaphenyi
basezifundazweni ukwenza umsebenzi walo uqobo ihhovisi elikhulu.

Okwesine, mhlonishwa Nggqongqoshe, abalingani abaphathi basezifundazweni
kodwa benza umsebenzi ofanayo. Ukuthi yini eyenza bangalingaiswa asazi
ngoba umsebenzi abawenzayo ufana nse.

Okwesihlanu, maqondana namacala avelele, umuntu uye abone sekukhuluma
umqondisi omkhulu womnyango kodwa bengazi lutho abasezifundazweni noma
baphucwe amafayela icala lingakaphethwa, liphathwe komkhulu ngoba mhlawumbe
livelele. Kwakhona nje ukuthi abezifundazwe bangawutsheli umphakathi
ngomsebenzi abawenzayo, kusho ukuthi akufanelekile ukuthi bakhulume
ngamacala ababhekene nawo.
Lezi zinto ezibhalwe lapha phansi zikhona njengoba zinjalo. Ngakho-ke
kungakuhle umhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe wezokuPhepha nokuVikeleka alusukumele
lolu daba futhi ashintshe abathize kulo mkhakha ukuze kusebenzeke kahle.

Mhlonishwa  Ngqongqoshe,  iKomidi  lezokuPhepha   nokuVikeleka   liphakamise
ukuthi . . . (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Thirdly, there is work that  should  be  done  in  the  provinces  but  the
national  office  does  not  agree.  The  national  office  sometimes   uses
provincial investigators to do work that is  supposed  to  be  done  by  the
national office.

Fourthly, hon Minister, provincial heads are not equal but  they  are  doing
the same work. We don’t know why they are not equal, because they are  doing
the same work..

Fifthly, concerning high profile cases, we often hear the Chief Director
talking without the knowledge of the provinces and files of high profile
cases are even taken away from them and handled by the head office. For the
provinces not to inform the public about the work that they are doing means
that they are not supposed to talk about the cases that they are dealing
with.

Things that are written down here are true. Therefore it would  be  good  if
the hon Minister of Safety and Security could take  action  concerning  this
issue and remove certain people in this department.

Hon Minister, the Portfolio Committee on Safety  and  Security   recommended
that . . . ]

. . . in the restructuring of the ICD, the Minister should look at the
feasibility of developing separate legislation to govern the functioning of
the ICD instead of retaining this in the SA Police Service Act.

The Minister should also review or capacitate the ICD to effectively fulfil
its mandate in terms of the Domestic Violence Act. The ICD is not really
fulfilling its mandate in respect of this Act. Remove the monitoring of
station audits from the responsibility of the ICD, and ensure that the
secretariat is capacitated to fulfil its needs.

Ngikhuluma kanjena nje ngoba ngiyazi ukuthi ngixabana njalo ne-secretariat.
Umhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe uyongixolela ngoba uyazi ukuthi sixabana njalo ne-
secretariat ngoba ayiwenzi umsebenzi. (Translation of Zulu paragraph
follows.)

[I am talking like that because we always argue with the secretariat. The
hon Minister will forgive me, as he knows that we always argue with the
secretariat because it does not do its job.]

They should review the necessity for a newly established research unit; the
placement and functioning of an anticorruption command in terms of the
national and provincial distribution of resources, and they should also
review or capacitate the ICD to fulfil its role in terms of cell
inspections.

Mhloniswa uNgqongqoshe, yizinto lezi esicela ukuthi uma ngabe ulungisa i-
ICD uzibheke. Mina Velaphi Ndlovu, ngithi umsebenzi we-ICD awungaphathiswa
okwesiphaza shop nje somuntu othile. Kodwa akusetshenzwe ngokubambisana
futhi kulungiswe wonke amaphutha akhona emahhovisini asezifundazweni ngoba
amahhovisi ezifundazwe asemqoka kakhulu ekwenzeni umsebenzi. Yiwona aphethe
umsebenzi jikelele, ngakho awanikezwe akudingayo ukuze umsebenzi wawo
uphumelele. Ngakho-ke ngiphakamisa ukuthi le Ndlu namhlanje iwamukele lo
mbiko njengoba unjalo. Ngiyathokoza.(Translation of Zulu paragraph
follows.)

[Hon Minister, we request you to look at those things when restructuring
the ICD. As Velaphi Ndlovu, I am saying that the work of the ICD should not
be run like a spaza shop. They must work together and solve problems that
exist in provincial offices. Provincial offices are very important in this
job and they must be given the resources they need in order for them to be
successful. Therefore, I recommend that the House accept this report as it
is. I thank you.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Mr Madikiza, I see you are not on
the waiting bench. Are you next on the speakers’ list? Please use the
waiting bench.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, the special report before us
highlights a series of problematic issues, which can all be traced back to
the national management of the Independent Complaints Directorate. The
report is a litany of failures by the ICD national office and its office
bearers to ensure that the core function of the ICD is met and seen to be
met.

In fact it is of great concern that certain aspects of the ICD’s reporting,
or failure to report, are making it almost impossible for Parliament to
exercise its oversight function.

It is important to reflect upon the reason for the establishment of the
ICD, namely, that in a democratic society, the Police Service must fall
under independent scrutiny.  This was specifically intended to prevent the
abuse of power by the police, which was common under apartheid. The
ultimate goal is to ensure that the new democratic Police Service is held
accountable and has the trust of the public.

In light of this extremely important function of the ICD, this Parliament
cannot idly accept the major failures and concerns regarding the ICD’s
current management and functioning.

We concur therefore with the recommendations in this special report, and
urge the Minister and the ICD to implement the necessary remedies as a
matter of urgency. I thank you.
Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Minister, the ACDP is dismayed at the
autocratic manner in which the ICD national office operates in relation to
the provincial offices. It is evident that the provinces are faced with
numerous obstacles that hinder effective functioning on a daily basis. The
ACDP strongly recommends that a provincial forum be created. This will
provide the provinces with an opportunity to meet regularly with the
Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security to discuss those issues that
affect their performance.

There is an urgent need for the ICD national office to show high levels of
transparency. This is crucial to the democratic process, and to the
fulfilling of their mandate. They need to furnish the committee with more
detailed reports that do not simply reflect the success at head office, but
provide an honest reflection of activities, progress and problems,
including an assessment of staff morale.

In conclusion, the ACDP requests an official inquiry into the areas of the
ICD’s functioning in terms of the Domestic Violence Act, whether the ICD
national office is over or underresourced, and complaints lodged by the
provincial offices. I thank you. [Time expired.]

Ms S RAJBALLY:  Chairperson, regarding the special report of the Portfolio
Committee on Safety and Security on the ICD, the MF thanks the portfolio
committee for bringing forth the many loopholes that need to be seriously
addressed.

We agree with the majority that the ICD serves as a very important organ to
address and manage SA Police Service matters. Like other parties, we do not
approve of the heavy travel expenditure, and suggest that travel expenses
be stepped up.

Further regular and detailed reports need to be instituted to ensure proper
management and accountability of the ICD. The MF requires an official
inquiry to eliminate any lingering questions and loopholes.

We have faith that if the recommendations made are instituted wisely, the
ICD’s efficiency and effectiveness will be revived to benefit the SAPS and
all South Africans. Thank you, Chairperson.

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, I’m amazed and disappointed that the DA comes
here and misses an opportunity to participate in a constructive manner in a
debate that actively demonstrates what the role of Parliament in oversight
can be. I want to challenge Mr Jankielsohn to bring to the committee proof
of those issues that the DA supposedly raised in this House regarding the
ICD in the past.

This year, during the Budget debate, they did not utter one single word on
the functions of the ICD. Come on, let Hansard prove what you have said
here today. Secondly, I also want to challenge the perception that Mr
Jankielsohn created here today, namely that the majority of the SAPS is
corrupt. That is not the case. [Interjections.] The fact of the matter is
that he’s insulting the integrity, the loyalty and the commitment of the
majority of SAPS members, who on a daily basis put their lives on the line
to defend even people like him. [Applause.]

The principle of human rights as contained in our Constitution informs the
operations of the SAPS. The ICD derives its mandate from the endeavour to
transform the SAPS into a democratic, transparent and human rights
sensitive service providing equal service to all citizens. The Constitution
. . . [Interjections.]

Bly tog nou net ’n slag stil; ek is nie ’n meisietjie nie! Dit is regtig
geslags-onsensitief. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Just be quiet for a moment; I am
not a little girl! This is really gender insensitive.[Interjections.]]

The Constitution, in section 206(6), provides for an independent complaints
body established by national legislation to investigate any alleged
misconduct of, or offence committed by, a member of the SA Police Service.
This provision has resulted in the establishment of the Independent
Complaints Directorate, independent from the SAPS and with a separate
budgetary allocation.

Despite its financial independence it derives its legislative mandate from
the SA Police Service Act, Act 68 of 1995. Sections 50 to 54 pertain to the
ICD. In section 53 the ICD’s functions are set out as follows: the
investigation of any misconduct or offence allegedly committed by members
of the SAPS, by its own accord or upon the receipt of a complaint. The ICD
must investigate any death in police custody or as a result of police
action.

Furthermore the ICD must investigate any other matter referred to it by the
Minister or a member of the executive council. It has a responsibility to
monitor police obligations in terms of the Domestic Violence Act. The ICD’s
civilian oversight duties are further extended to the municipal police
services through section 64 of the SAPS Act and regulation 9 and annexure 5
of the regulations for the municipal police services.

The reason that I’ve spent some time highlighting the functions of the ICD
is that in our engagement with the ICD the committee on numerous occasions
expressed its concern about the ICD deviating from and focusing resources,
both human and financial, on issues outside of its mandate; this despite
the fact that they were not meeting their own operational targets. It’s
also clear that I need to repeat this today, because it’s clear that the DA
also don’t understand the functions of the ICD. [Interjections.] Their
primary mandate and functions suffered as a result of the deviation.

In dealing with the recommendations of the committee, I will combine the
recommendations dealing with finances and then look at recommendations
addressing staff matters, the provision of reports and data, the
restructuring of the ICD and the monitoring of the actual implementation of
these recommendations. The committee recommends that an extensive
performance audit be conducted by the Office of the Auditor-General on the
ICD.

This is especially necessary in the light of the ICD not achieving its
operational targets. It set itself a target of finalising 80% of cases of
death in custody, but in reality only achieved a finalisation rate of 63%.
Furthermore, it has failed to provide the six-monthly domestic violence
report as determined by the Domestic Violence Act.

In undertaking this performance audit the portfolio committee would like,
amongst other things, that the following receives special attention: the
extremely high travel costs incurred, specifically by the national office,
and the determination of the relevancy of that expenditure in relation to
the achievement of the mandate of the ICD; the skewed budget distribution
between the national office and the nine provincial offices; the
disparities in provincial office accounts for travel, and the budget
reporting in general. Upon completion of this report it must be tabled in
Parliament.

To counter the high turnover of staff in the ICD we recommend that a
retention policy should be developed which is fairly applied both at
national and provincial level. The upgrading of posts to ensure the ability
of the ICD to attract skilled staff should be explored. Entry level
salaries, particularly for investigation and complaints registry and
monitoring, should be reviewed.

As far as training opportunities are concerned, we would like to see new
staff members undergo induction training within the first three months of
appointment. We further recommend that some training be decentralised to
provincial level to ensure that provincial managers are able to identify
training needs amongst staff and provide this accordingly.

Policies that affect the day-to-day operations of the ICD should be
developed in consultation with the provincial offices. That way it would be
possible to develop operational policies that reflect the concerns of the
people who are affected by them.

Policy should also be reviewed regularly to ensure their relevance to
current practice. If policies are a result of public service regulations
then this should be explained properly to the staff. In order for the staff
to function better the committee further recommends that provincial heads
should be entrusted to deal with operational matters without the constant
intervention of the national office. Provincial heads should be empowered
to approve overtime for staff. Provincial offices should also be able to
recruit and appoint entry-level staff and interns according to the
requirements and regulations established by the national office.

The delay in obtaining policing powers by the national office should be
addressed immediately. It is simply not acceptable, in the light of the
severe staff shortage, that obtaining policing powers still takes up to a
year to effect and that the national office takes no steps to ensure that
existing staff can function effectively. This in itself is a waste of
financial and human resources.

I will now deal with the submission of reports to Parliament, the lack of
detailed information and the presentation of statistics by the ICD.
[Interjections.] You’ve missed the debate!

The ICD does not comply with its duty and legal requirement to submit
reports to Parliament. The committee recommends that all research reports
and recommendations made affecting management, procedure and operational
policy within the SAPS must be submitted to Parliament within one month
after completion as a matter of procedure.

The ICD complains that recommendations that they make are not being
implemented by the SAPS, yet they fail to inform this committee about these
recommendations so as to empower us to assist them in overseeing whether
these recommendations are actually implemented.

It appears as if the ICD is only providing information to the committee
that depicts it in a positive light and is withholding certain problems and
information from the committee. This is counter-productive for the ICD and
undermines the oversight responsibility of the portfolio committee.

In order to ensure that reports received are accurate and contain
sufficient information, the ICD must ensure that all reports and
presentations to the committee contain sufficient detail and are received
by the committee at least one week prior to the scheduled briefing.
[Interjections.]

The committee reached an agreement with the executive director that all
reports will present statistics in such a manner that they provide
sufficient detail so as to reduce the possibility of misinterpretation of
the information. We cannot again allow a situation in which the way in
which statistics are presented leads to a misconception and wrongful
interpretation such as in the case of the Human Watch Report of last year.
The committee expects that this agreed-upon approach should be reflected in
the 2004-05 Annual Report of the ICD that must be submitted to Parliament
by the end of September.

During the Budget debate on 12 April 2005 the Minister announced his
intention to restructure both the ICD and the secretariat. The committee
takes this opportunity to raise certain issues that we believe should be
taken into consideration when embarking on restructuring. We request that
due consideration should be given to the proper empowerment of the ICD to
fulfil its mandated responsibilities effectively.

While it is understood that the ICD functions within its budget
constraints, the committee recommends that a feasibility assessment is done
on the establishment of satellite or district offices in the provinces to
ensure access to the rural areas. We also need to look at creative
solutions, including the possibility of establishing these offices based on
geographical proximity rather than clear borderlines and the sharing of
possible district offices of the secretariat by the ICD staff.

In restructuring the ICD the mandate of the ICD to deal with the Domestic
Violence Act should either be reviewed or the ICD should be capacitated.
The ICD is not fulfilling its legislative responsibilities in regard to the
Domestic Violence Act, largely because of a lack of co-operation by the
SAPS. This issue is of the utmost importance and the effective monitoring
of police action in this regard is essential.

Provincial commissioners should be held accountable for the implementation
of solutions recommended by the ICD to ensure that recommendations are
actually implemented and that adherence is given to the requirement
specifically of the Domestic Violence Act. We further recommend that the
monitoring of the station audits be removed from the responsibility of the
ICD and that the secretariat’s capacity to fulfil this function is ensured.
Insofar as some inspections are concerned the ICD’s role should either be
reviewed, or the ICD should be properly capacitated to conduct these
inspections.

The newly established research unit should be reviewed. The committee, in
its budget report to Parliament on the ICD, recommended that the
establishment of the unit should be shelved pending the restructuring
process and that the ICD should consult the Ministry in this regard, as
research is not a core function of the ICD. Despite this recommendation the
ICD went ahead and unilaterally established such a unit.

The placement and establishment of the anticorruption command in terms of
national and provincial distribution of resources and functions should also
be reviewed. There’s a need to determine once and for all where this would
be best placed and whether it should in fact be with the ICD at all. We
believe that the restructuring of the ICD provides the ideal opportunity to
look at separate legislation for the ICD. Currently, the only legislation
relevant to the ICD is within the SAPS Act and the requirements in the
Domestic Violence Act.

The Constitution states clearly that the ICD should be established under
legislation, and it’s not desirable for its own functioning and
independence that legislation lies within the legislation of the very body
that it must oversee. It might also be that the lack of separate
legislation is a factor affecting effective management and execution of
duties of the ICD.

In monitoring the implementation of these recommendation and the progress
made, the committee intends to take the following actions: The committee
will schedule annual meetings with the provincial heads to discuss problems
and identify solutions to these problems, at least until such time as some
of the more serious problems with the national office have been resolved.
In addition, the portfolio committee will request quarterly written reports
from each of the provincial heads highlighting problems, progress in
rectifying them and the status in terms of reaching their operational
targets. In addition, the portfolio committee expects progress reports on
steps taken by the national office within three months of tabling this
report in Parliament and when the need arises in the future.

In conclusion, bringing a report of this nature to Parliament is not
something done light-heartedly. It’s a sign of specifically the ANC
commitment to oversight, to responsibility as a committee and as a
legislature. [Interjections.] The role of the ICD in ensuring a Police
Service underscored by dignity, respect and basic human rights is too
important to simply ignore what is going wrong within the ICD. If we want
to achieve the kind of Police Service that we envisage, then we need,
equally, as role-players, to take our role seriously and ensure that we all
play our part to rid the SAPS of the few members who undermine its
transformation into a truly democratic service. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S ABRAM: Chairperson, on a point of order: During the course of the
speech by the hon member Van Wyk, an hon member on the other side - I think
it was the DA’s imbongi [praise singer], the hon King - referred to her as
a “meisietjie”. I believe that that is degrading and I call for a ruling.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, you know that the
requirements of the House are that we refer to each other as “hon”, and the
speaker at the podium did say that you referred to her as a “meisie”. Can
you please withdraw that? Can you approach your microphone, please?

Mnr R J KING: Voorsitter, dit was hoegenaamd nie ’n tussenwerpsel nie. Ons
het gesit en gesels, en iemand het iets gehoor. Dit was nie ’n
tussenwerpsel nie, maar ek is bereid om dit terug te trek. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr R J KING: Chairperson, it was by no means an interjection. We were
sitting and talking, and somebody overheard something. It was not an
interjection, but I am prepared to withdraw it.]

Debate concluded.

The Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved: That the report be
adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.



    Consideration of request for approval by Parliament OF STATUTE OF THE
   CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY OF THE NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT AND OTHER
                            DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Chairperson, hon members, and guests of Parliament, South
Africa’s accession to the Statute of the Centre for Science and Technology
of the Non-Aligned Movement and Other Developing Countries is what is being
presented to this House today.

South Africa is a member of the Non-Aligned Movement through the Department
of Foreign Affairs, and now seeks to obtain membership of the Non-Aligned
Movement’s Science and Technology Centre. The Non-Aligned Movement’s
Science and Technology Centre was set up in August 1989 in New Delhi,
India, and offers a magnitude of benefits related to increasing
collaboration among scientists from Non-Aligned Movement countries.

South Africa would like to become a member of the centre. There are major
benefits to be gained by South Africa through being a member of the Non-
Aligned Movement’s Science and Technology Centre, such as the following:
The Centre for Science and Technology of the Non-Aligned Movement and Other
Developing Countries came into existence as a follow-up of the
deliberations of the 5th, 6th and 7th Non-Aligned Movement summits held in
Colombo, 1976, Havana, 1979 and New Delhi, 1989, respectively. It was set
up in August 1989 in New Delhi, India.

Its main objectives are to provide the fullest possible mutually beneficial
collaboration among scientists, organisations and institutions from non-
aligned and other developing countries. It will act as a steering house of
information regarding the technological capabilities of non-aligned and
other developing countries, with a view to promoting scientific and
technological co-operation and transfer of technology among them, providing
early information about impending technological changes and seeking to
develop a data bank.

The centre seeks to stimulate and promote joint research and development
projects and training programmes on a bilateral or multilateral basis among
the members of the centre in selected fields of special relevance. Finally,
it aims to render expert advice in the growth of science, development of
technology and the utilisation of natural resources.

I just want to give a brief idea of how the centre operates. The governing
council of the centre is composed of representatives of all the members of
the centre. For each session of the governing council, a president, vice-
president and a rapporteur are elected. The secretariat of the centre is
headed by the director of the centre, who himself is appointed by the
governing council.

According to the advice obtained from the Chief State Law Adviser in the
Department of Foreign Affairs, no possible conflict with domestic law for
the Republic of South Africa was identified for South Africa in becoming a
member of the centre. Instead, the following were the benefits identified
when the Republic of South African becomes a member of the centre. Firstly,
total financial support for international travel, boarding and lodging of
one nominee of each country participating in the activities organised by
the centre.

Secondly, the centre’s Young Scientist Lectureship Award provides the young
scientists in member countries with opportunities to develop links and
establish closer co-operation with each other in various fields of science
and technology, including reimbursement of the full international air
travel expenses to the awardees of the scheme to deliver a lecture in an
institution in another member country.

Thirdly, there will be dissemination of information on science and
technology developments on the website, including the technologies
developed by scientists in member countries and other developing countries.
Such information can be used for further research and development
pertaining to local conditions of the member states.

Fourthly, it will facilitate the organisation of training and hands-on
courses for the scientists of member countries in other member countries on
a payment basis. Fifthly, there will be free subscription to the centre’s
newsletter, which includes important scientific events and discoveries in
the developing countries specifically. Finally, there will be free receipt
of the centre’s publications in various disciplines such as biotechnology
for food security in developing countries, aromatic and essential oil-
bearing plants of member countries, etc.

In terms of organisational and personnel implications, these are to be
absorbed as part of the line function of the directorate of multilateral co-
operation of the Department of Science and Technology. In terms of
financial implications, the annual subscription is only $10 000. In terms
of constitutional implications, there are none.

The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology therefore recommends that
this House ratify the signing of the agreement by South Africa to the
Centre for Science and Technology of the Non-Aligned Movement, in terms of
section 231(2) of the Republic of South Africa’s Constitution, Act 108 of
1996. Thank you. [Applause.]
There was no debate.

Statute of the Centre for Science and Technology of the Non-Aligned
Movement and Other Developing Countries approved.

The House adjourned at 15:25.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Health


              i) Nursing Bill [B 26 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76)
                 [Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
                 Government Gazette No 27904 of 12 August 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Health of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         24 August 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    1) Precious Metals Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of Minerals
       and Energy on 25 August 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
       Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign
       Affairs.


    2) Diamonds Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of Minerals
       and Energy on 25 August 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
       Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign
       Affairs.


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


2.    The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
         Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2004-2005,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 54-2005].

3.    The Minister of Education

     (a)          Report and Financial Statements of South African Council
         for Educators (SACE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

4.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2004-2005,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2004-2005.

