---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 April 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-04-14
---

                           THURSDAY, 14 APRIL 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
____


  The House met at 14:02.


  The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
  silence for prayers or meditation.


  ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


  Business suspended at 14:06 and resumed at 14:10.


  The SPEAKER: [Inaudible.] … Is there sound? … We now have sound.
  [Applause.] Can you hear me?


HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, thank you for your patience, we will find out
what went wrong and get to the bottom of it. We will then give you
feedback.

The first item on the Order Paper is questions to the President. Members
are reminded that they may press the “to talk” button at their desks. I do
not know, after this experience, whether they work. So, if you have a
problem with what is going on at your desk, just raise your hand in
addition to pressing the “to talk” button in order to ask a supplementary
question.


  Questions and Replies – see that book.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                        (The late Inkosi M W Hlengwa)

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Speaker, I move the motion that has been printed on
the Order Paper in the name of Mr J H van der Merwe, Chief Whip of the IFP,
as follows:

  That the House –

  (1) notes with profound sadness the death of the honourable Inkosi
        Mhlabunzima Wellington Hlengwa, a former member of this House, who
        passed away on 15 March 2005;


  (2) recognises the valuable contribution the honourable Inkosi Hlengwa
        made to this Parliament as a member, where he also served as the
        Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works for a time;


  (3) mourns the passing of our former colleague Inkosi Hlengwa;


4) conveys its sincere condolences to the Hlengwa family, their friends and
  the Inkatha Freedom Party; and


  (5) wishes that they be filled with strength and fortitude in their time
        of sadness.

Mnu D M GUMEDE: Somlomo, inhlangano kaKhongolose ishaqeke kakhulu ukuzwa
ngokukhothama kweNkosi uHlengwa obeyiphini likasotswebhu wesifundazwe
saKwaZulu-Natali. OkaMashasha ubehlonishwa kakhulu ngamalungu kaKhongolose
ngokuzithoba, ukuhlonipha nokuhlakanipha kwakhe. Ubehlonipha omdala
ahloniphe omncane, ahloniphe osebukhosini ahloniphe abafokazana, ahloniphe
azwana nabo ahloniphe angaboni ngaso linye nabo.

Ubenobuciko obuyisimmanga sokwehlukanisa isimo sakhe sobukhosi nesimo sakhe
sobuqembu ngendlela yokuthi ubengubaba wesizwe, engekho ozizwa
ecindezelekile ngobuqembu bakhe esimweni lapho kunzima ukwenze njalo khona.
Ubengumholi oyisibonelo, onesibindi esikhulu. Ingqondo yakhe ibivulekile.
Indlela ubeyithatha ngoba ekholwa ukuthi inobulungiswa, ekholwa ukuthi
ineqiniso, ekholwa ukuthi ifanele.

Sikhala nomndeni wakwaMashasha, sikhale neqembu lakhe le-IFP, sikhale
nesizwe sakhe eMfume, sikhale nesizwe sonkana saseNingizimu Afrika.
Asilahlekelwe sodwa kodwa umhlaba wonke ulahlekelwe umholi oqotho. Yebo,
isitsha esihle asidleli ngoba umsebenzi obusadinga abaholi abafana naye
usemningi futhi ngineqiniso ukuthi ubezoba nesandla ekuwunqobeni.

Sithi emndenini wakwaMashasha, koMbuyisa, kubantwana bakhe, kodadewabo,
kubafowabo: anikhali nodwa. Isililo senu yisililo sethu. Qinani, yimani
isibindi, ningesabi! Ubengeyena ubaba wenu kuphela, ubengeyena umfowenu
kuphela kepha ubengubaba wesizwe sakhe eMfume, engubaba kusishayamthetho
nakuwo wonke umuntu eNingizimu Afrika. Akwehlanga lungehlanga. Owayeyilungu
lale Ndlu usishiyile. Sithi kwisifundazwe saKwaZulu-Natali nakubo bonke:
Nilale ngenxeba!

Wo, kufa luphi udosi lwakho na? Yebo, mhlaba kawunoni. Lala uphumule
Mashasha. Lala uphumule Mbuyisa, qhawe lamaqhawe. Akumizuzu ingakanani
sehlukene. Sethemba ukuthi indlela yethu sonke uyosilungisela lapho usufike
khona. Hamba kahle Ndabezitha! Hamba kahle Mashasha! Hamba kahle Mbuyisa!
Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[Mr D M GUMEDE: Madam Speaker, the ANC is very shocked after having
received the news of the death of Inkosi Hlengwa, who was the Deputy
Chairperson of the KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Legislature. Mashasha was
highly respected by the ANC owing to his modesty, respectful manner and
wisdom. He respected adults, the youth, traditional leadership, commoners,
his comrades and opponents.

He had the unique ability to distinguish between his traditional leadership
and party politics and acted in a fatherly manner towards the people, and
nobody felt oppressed because of his partisanship. Even under difficult
conditions, he maintained the same position. He was a leader who led by
example. He was very brave and open-minded. He would take a decision that
he believed was fair, frank and proper.

We convey our condolences to the Mashasha family, the IFP, his people at
Mfume and South Africa as a whole. We did not suffer this loss alone, but
the whole world has also suffered by losing such a leader of quality. We
agree, quality does not stay long. There is still a lot of work to be done,
particularly by leaders of his quality and disposition, and I am certain
that he was going to make a contribution towards its completion.

To the family of Mashasha, the Mbuyisas, his children, his sisters and
brothers, we say: You do not grieve alone. Your lament is our lament; be
consoled, be brave and do not fear. He was not a father or a brother to you
alone, but also to his people of Mfume. He was also a father of the
Legislature and all South Africans. God has given and God has taken. A
member of this House has passed away. We express our heartfelt condolences
to the province and everyone.

Woe, death, where is thy sting? Of course, death is persistent. Rest in
peace Mashasha, hero of heroes. We parted ways recently; however, we hope
that he will pave the way for all of us. Rest in peace, Ndabezitha! Rest in
peace, Mashasha! Rest in peace, Mbuyisa! Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Speaker, the DA wishes to associate itself with the
motion of condolence concerning our late colleague Inkosi Mhlabunzima
Hlengwa. It is very sad that at a relatively young age our colleague has
left us. During his lifetime he occupied various posts of authority such as
being the Inkosi of the Thoyana traditional authority. He was an active and
loyal member of the Inkatha Freedom Party trusted by the members and the
leadership. We definitely do not doubt that.

Inkosi Hlengwa performed important work for his community, the province of
KwaZulu-Natal and our country. He was a loving, firm but accessible person.
We convey the sympathies of the DA to his loved ones, the relatives of our
departed colleague and the IFP. We will always remember him.

A mowa wa motlhanka wa gago o robale ka kagiso. [May the soul of your
servant rest in peace.]

Mnu G T MADIKIZA: Sihlalo, abaPhathiswa abahloniphekileyo  abalapha,
amalungu ahloniphekileyo ale Ndlu yowisomthetho, ndime apha egameni le UDM,
ukugxwala emswaneni kunye nosapho lakwaHlengwa, ubukhosi bakwaZulu, iqela
lezopolitiko leNkatha kaZulu, iPalamente yoMzantsi Afrika kwakunye
neyephondo lakwaZulu ngokubanzi.

uNkosi uHlengwa andimazi ebusweni, kodwa ngezenzo ndiyamazi. uMntwanenkosi
lo ibe ingumntu wabantu obethanda inkqubela. Loo nto ibonakele ngokuba
afunde ayekuqabela kwimatriki. Inkosi, ngokwela xesha labo, imfundo
ibingeyonto ziyinakileyo zona kuqala, kunye nabo zibakhokeleyo, kodwa yena
ebengenguwo loo mfanekiso.

Izingqi zakhe zivakele kwinqila yakhe xa wayekho ncakasana eququzelela
ukuba kufakwe umbane kunye namanzi. Babuvile ubunkokheli bakhe kwinqila
ebengusihlalo kuyo yengingqi yaseMbumbulu. Ukanti ilizwi lakhe livakele,
ebelilumkisa, lifundisa ngesifo ugawulayo kwiNdlu yeenkosi phaya Kwazulu-
Natal. Nale iNdlu sikuyo siyeva ukuba ike yawongeka bubukho bakhe phakathi
kwayo phakathi kweminyaka yowe-1994 ukuyakutsho kowama-2004. Bayamazi ke
abaninzi.

Lithi ilizwi lobulumko, Isitya esihle asidleli. Kusapho lwakhe kwiiNkosi
zomthonyama kwaZulu, kumalungu aleNdlu yowisomthetho apha kuNdlu-nkulu
nakwiphondo, koogxa bakhe kwiNkatha sithi, Akuhlanga lungehlanga. Lalani
ngenxeba. Umphefumlo wakhe ulale ngoxolo. Ndiyabulela. (Translation of
Xhosa speech follows.)

[Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers present here, hon members of
the National Assembly, I am standing here in the name of the UDM to grieve
together with the Hlengwa family, the Zulu royalty, the Inkatha Freedom
Party of KwaZulu, the South African Parliament and the Provincial
Legislature of KwaZulu-Natal at large.

I did not know Inkosi Hlengwa in person, but I know his works. This Inkosi
was a sociable person who liked progress. That is indicated by the fact
that he attended school and matriculated. During their time, chiefs were
the first people who could not be bothered about education, and then their
subjects would do likewise. But he did not set that example.

His region benefited from his efforts when he was personally present to
organise the installation of water and electricity. They felt his
leadership in his region in the Mbumbulu area, where he was a chairperson.
And his voice was heard advising and educating about HIV/Aids in the House
of Traditional Leaders in KwaZulu-Natal. Even this House we are in, we
hear, was once honoured by his presence between the years 1994 and 2004.
Many knew him then.

Words of wisdom say: “Good things do not last.” To his family, the
traditional leaders of KwaZulu-Natal, the members of the National Assembly
and of the Provincial Legislature, and his colleagues in the Inkatha
Freedom Party we say: What happened, happens to everybody. Be comforted and
consoled. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Madam Speaker, the Independent Democrats shares the
sentiments of this House with regard to the death of the hon Inkosi
Hlengwa. Hon Hlengwa made a valuable contribution to this Parliament not
only as a member but also as a Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Public Works.

As a young parliamentarian serving my first term, I owe an enormous debt of
gratitude to people such as the hon Inkosi Hlengwa who played a vital role
in laying the foundation for our democracy and building this Parliament
into the vibrant institution it is today.

The ID would therefore like to convey its sincere condolences to the
Hlengwa family, as well as the IFP who have sadly lost a trusted colleague.

Mnr S SIMMONS: Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, die NNP wil hiermee ook sy medelye
en simpatie betoon met die afsterwe van Inkosi Hlengwa, Adjunkspeaker van
KwaZulu-Natal se wetgewer, en voorheen ook lid van dié Parlement.

Hy het geglo dat die vermoë van die verskillende politieke partye om ook
saam te werk, ten spyte van hul onderliggende verskille, een van die
mylpale was wat die Parlement binne 10 jaar bereik het. Sy kollegas in die
wetgewer praat met groot lof van sy toewyding en sy betrokkenheid by die
gemeenskap en dat hy hom veral toegespits het op die impak van MIV/Vigs –
eienskappe wat toon dat hy sy medemens en die gemeenskap eerste geplaas
het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Deputy Speaker, with this the NNP also wants to convey
its condolences and sympathy on the passing away of Inkosi Hlengwa, Deputy
Speaker of the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature, and previously also a member of
this Parliament.

He believed that the ability of different political parties also to work
together, in spite of their underlying differences, was one of the
milestones that Parliament had achieved within 10 years. His colleagues in
the Legislature speak with great praise of his dedication to and
involvement in the community and the fact that he concentrated in
particular on the impact of HIV/Aids - qualities that show that he put his
fellow man and the community first.]

On behalf of the NNP, I would like to express our sympathy and condolences
to Inkosi Hlengwa’s family, loved ones and colleagues in the IFP.

Rev M S KHUMALO: Hon Deputy Speaker, Ministers and members, the ACDP
expresses its deepest sympathy with the family of the late Inkosi
Mhlabunzima Wellington Hlengwa. We also convey our heartfelt condolences to
the KZN parliament and the IFP.

Inkosi Hlengwa was committed to community development. He was a part of
that elite group of politicians who could strike a clear balance between
issues of public interest and issues of party interest. In pursuance of his
duties he frequently exercised a degree of impartiality, required by the
office he held.

The late Inkosi Hlengwa will be remembered as a peace lover, a firebrand, a
man of wisdom, who was guided by his traditional, ethical values, and who
made a solid and lasting contribution to building a peaceful society in
KwaZulu-Natal.

I-ACDP idlulisa ukuzwelana kwayo nomndeni weNkosi uHlengwa ekhotheme
ngomhla ka-15 Mashi kulo nyaka. Sengathi uNkulunkulu angaduduza umndeni,
isizwe senkosi nabakhele indawo yenkosi. Sithi akwehlanga lungehlanga.
(Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[The ACDP would like to convey its condolences to the family of Inkosi
Hlengwa, who passed away on 15 March this year. May God comfort the family,
the tribe of Inkosi and the residence. God has given, God has taken.]

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Deputy Speaker, it’s an honour and a privilege for me,
on behalf of the FF Plus, to express our unequivocal support for the motion
of condolence for the late Inkosi Hlengwa before the House. The honourable
former member of this House was a senior member of the IFP, and from our
side we would like to express our appreciation for the role that he played,
not only in this Parliament and in his province, but also within his own
party.

On a personal note, the honourable Inkosi Hlengwa was a very devoted
sportsperson. At some stage during an overseas visit he told a colleague of
mine about all the things that he had been doing to take sport further
within his own community, even sponsoring soccer jerseys for the young ones
to make them more interested in sport. That was the kind of person he was.

Adjunkspeaker, ek wil graag namens die VF Plus ons meelewing oordra aan sy
gesin, dit is vir hulle ’n moeilike tyd. Hulle het ’n vader en ’n oupa
verloor, en ons wil die vertroue uitspreek dat hulle vertroosting sal vind
na die afsterwe van ’n geliefde. Ons meelewing gaan ook na die IVP as ’n
party. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the FF Plus I would like to convey our
sympathy to his family. This is a difficult time for them. They have lost a
father and a grandfather, and we hope and trust that they will find
consolation after the passing away of a loved one. We also convey our
sympathy to the IFP as a party. Thank you very much.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Deputy Speaker and hon members, I consider myself
fortunate that I came to meet and know Inkosi Mhlabunzima Hlengwa, while he
served in Parliament representing the IFP.
He came across as a man with a quiet and affable disposition; he did not
have any airs as someone of royalty. He was simple and down to earth. I
came to know Inkosi Hlengwa more closely in 2002 during the three or so
weeks that we spent in Zimbabwe, observing the presidential elections. I
was in the same group as him, and we were deployed in the Mashonaland West
province where there are many traditional leaders. He showed how he could
ably adapt to any situation. He showed great passion in engaging
traditional leaders there, alongside the rank-and-file members of the
community.

The other side of this Inkosi was that he was very fond of music. He never
ceased to hum lyrics of the great Mtukuzi. Inkosi Hlengwa was a traditional
leader, but quite amenable to change. I shall always remember how he, on
more than one occasion, in his characteristic dry humour, quipped by saying
that his party, the IFP, was not faring well in the elections in KwaZulu-
Natal, because their own members, during the election time, removed posters
bearing the picture of the leader of the party, Prince Mangosuthu
Buthelezi, saying they cannot leave uMntwana waKwaPhindangene to be exposed
to cold and rain, while they were enjoying warmth in their houses,
oblivious of the fact they were causing the party to lose the elections.
[Laughter.]

Inkosi Hlengwa will always be remembered with fondness. The UCDP supports
the motion of condolence to his family, his tribe, the KwaZulu-Natal
Legislature – where he died in harness – and also, finally, the IFP. May
his soul rest in peace.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Madam Deputy Speaker, the PAC of Azania also wishes to
extend words of comfort and sympathy to the family of the late Inkosi
Hlengwa his political party, the IFP; the Parliament of the Republic of
South Africa, where he served in this House as an hon member, and as the
chairperson for the Portfolio Committee on Public Works, in the past his
constituency in the KZN province, and the entire nation he served. We wish
them heavenly strength in this time of sorrow.

Ka sehaeso re re; “Morena ha a shwe, o phomotse.” Morena o sebeditse, o
phethile thomo ya badimo le Modimo. Morena a re dumedisetse ho baholo ba
rona, a re kopele nala le kgora. Re re pula le kgotso setjhabeng sa
maAforika. Lefu ke ngwetsi ya malapa ohle. (Translation of Sesotho
paragraph follows.)

[In our culture we say; “The king never dies, but has rested.” The king
worked, he has run the ancestors’ and God’s errands. May the king pass our
greetings to our elders, and request prosperity for us. We say let there be
rain and peace for Africans. Death knows no colour or creed.]

Thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, on behalf of the MF, I
take this opportunity in extending our deepest regret and condolences on
the death of the gallant and dedicated former member of Parliament, the hon
Inkosi Hlengwa. There are many sorrows in life and one sorrow no one would
like to experience is the sorrow of death.

Our sincere condolences are extended to the bereaved family, friends, loved
ones and the IFP, which has lost an astounding pioneer to the cause. To the
late hon Inkosi Hlengwa who passed away peacefully: May you rest in peace.
Knowing that you have represented, served and dedicated yourself to the
will of the people, the loving memory of all your efforts shall forever
rest in the history of our nation and your inspiring example shall be
followed by your members and comrades in decades to come. May God bless you
and may you rest in peace. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, although I didn’t meet the hon
Hlengwa and talk to him, from what is being related to me, he was indeed a
progressive traditional leader. What we noticed is that he was prepared to
work with his people and to listen to others. For that matter, indeed the
IFP has lost a leader and a dedicated soldier in the struggle for
traditional leadership and the maintenance of our culture.

On behalf of Azapo, we wish to convey our deepest and heartfelt condolences
to the hon Hlengwa’s family and friends. Azapo wishes to join the IFP and
all those who knew Inkosi Hlengwa in saluting his contribution to the
country and its people. May God give his family the strength and the power
to see them through this mourning period. In my mother tongue, we say:

Khosi yo tshimbila – yo tuwa. Vhamusanda vho nenga. [The King is gone – he
has left. The Chief has disappeared.]

We say so because there is a belief that people like Inkosi Hlengwa merely
disappear. They are not dead. I thank you.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sekela Somlomo, abahlonishwa abakhona nendlu ehloniphekile,
malunga ahloniphekile, inkosi yakwaThoyana yayizalwa umama uMaNgcobo
enkosini endala eyakhothama, inkosi u-Charles ‘Small bhodlela’ Bhoyi
Hlengwa. Babebahlanu kwabo kungodadewabo abathathu naye kanye nomfowabo.
Basekhona bonke laba abanye kanti nomama wayo inkosi usekhona. Inkosi
ifunde yaze yayoqedela ukufunda kwayo eBhekuzulu College okwakuyisikole
esasiqeqesha abafana bamakhosi ukuba balungele ukuthatha izikhundla zabo
zokuzalwa.

Inkosi ibiganwe amakhosokazi amabili okunguMakhawula kanye noMaMngomezulu.
Ngeshwa uMaMngomezulu wedlula emhlabeni kuqala ngaphambi kokuthi inkosi
ikhothame. Inkosi ibisithanda isizwe sayo futhi ibibuthanda ubuZulu
namasiko akhona. Ibihlonipha kakhulu inkosi, ingumuntu okhulumela phansi
futhi ingayithandi ingxabano. Kodwa bekuthi uma isidiniwe iphume ihambe
ishiye phansi yonke into eyenzeka lapho iqonde ekhaya kumama wayo.
Ibimthanda futhi imkhonzile kakhulu umama wayo uMaNgcobo.

Inkosi yakwaHlengwa yabekwa ebukhosini ubaba wenkosi nohulumeni wakwaZulu
omdala inkosi isaphila ukuba yenze umsebenzi wayo. Inkosi yayimbekele ukuba
imfundise lokho ebona ukuthi kuhlakaniphile isekhona. Wayeze athi ubaba
wakhe ekhuluma naye nathi sikhona nje sonke njengabantu ekade
bengababngani, akobalalela bonke abantu uma bekhuluma noma ngabe balishumi
kodwa akophendula ababili. Impendulo yakhe ibenele bonke abantu,
angabaphenduli bonke ngoba kukhona nababhedayo. Lokho kakushiwo inkosi
esiyakhothama, ubaba wenkosi. [Uhleko.]

Iqembu leNkatha yenkululeko lilahlekelwe kakhulu ngokukhothama kwenkosi
yakwaThoyana. Umnikelo wakhe ubujulile kunoma yini okuthiwa akayenze
kanjalo futhi nakuleyo futhi ezenzela yona ngokwakhe. Ilahlekelwe indlu
yamakhosi esifundazweni saKwaZulu-Natali ngeqhaza abelibambile kanye
namakomidi abewahola khona, ikakhulukazi ikomidi lamakhosi ebelibhekene ne-
HIV/Aids.

INkatha ilahlekelwe umxhumanisi nomlamuli woqobo. Ubulungu bakhe
kumhlahlandlela wethu eNkatheni buzokhumbuleka ngenxa yolwazi lwakhe
olunzulu lokubeka izinto ngobonono abenalo. Kuhambe inkosi ebilithanda
iqiniso futhi ebifuna likhulunywe linjalo noma ngabe libuhlungu noma
linjani. Ngisho ngabe bekuthiwa akathandaze, ubethandaza akubeke ngqo afuna
kwenziwe kulowo mhlangano futhi akusho njengoba kunjalo ngobunono nangomoya
ophansi wokuthobeka.
Isishayamthetho sesifunda silahlekelwe ngoba ubengakawavezi onke amakhono
akhe kodwa bekukhona akuthintileyo.

INkatha yenkululeko ibonga umndeni wakwaHlengwa ngoyizalela insizwa
ezinsizweni nendoda emadodeni. Sibonga kubaba wayo inkosi ukuthi
wayikhulisa kahle, yabazi abantu futhi yabathanda yaphinda yazi nesizwe
sayo yasithanda futhi yase yazisa nobuzwe bayo nabo yabuthanda ngokunjalo.
Sibonga inkosi uqobo lwayo, inkosi uMhlabunzima Wellington Hlengwa, ngokuba
yilungu elethembekile kwaze kwaba sekugcineni eqenjini lethu leNkatha
yenkululeko. Kwakuthi noma isinikwe izikhundla ezinkulu ezinamandla kodwa
ingadlali ngamandla azo.

Thina beNkatha yenkululeko sobonga kakhulu uhulumeni oholwa uMongameli
ngokuhlonipha inkosi njengoba kade ibiwuSihlalo weKomidi lezoMnyango
wezoMsebenzi woMphakathi kusukela ngo-1999 kuya ku-2004. Sibonga kakhulu
futhi nakuNdunankulu wesifunda nesifunda ukuba bahloniphe isikhundla
senkosi njengoba kade inguSomlomo kwisishayamthetho sesifundazwe saKwaZulu-
Natali. Umfihlo waba nesizotha esiwufanele inkosi futhi ngiyethemba nenkosi
lapho ikhona yathokoza kakhulu.

Okokugcina sibonga kakhulu kuzo zonke izikhulumi ezakhuluma emfihlweni
wenkosi kusukela esikhulumeni sokuqala okwaba umholi weqembu leNkatha
yenkululeko uMntwana wakwaPhindangene, kwaba uNdunankulu wesifundazwe kwase
kuzoba iSekela likaMongameli. ISekela likaMongameli lakhuluma lahlaziya
yonke into ekade inkosi isebenza ngaphansi kwayo yelekelelwa noma ithunywa
ubuholi beqembu leNkatha yenkululeko kanye namakhosi njengesikhundla sayo.
Hamba kahle Mashasha! Hamba kahle mfoka “Small bhodlela”! Hamba kahle nkosi
yesizwe, Mbuyisa! Siyathokoza. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu speech
follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Deputy Speaker, dignitaries present and the hon House at
large, hon members, Inkosi of kwaThoyana born of the queen née Ngcobo from
the late Inkosi, Charles ‘Small bhodlela’ Bhoyi Hlengwa had four siblings -
three sisters and a brother. Inkosi is survived by all his siblings and his
mother. Inkosi went to school and completed his education at Bhekuzulu
College, which was the school aimed at training the boys born of amakhosi
so that they could be ready to take up their inherited positions.

Inkosi was married and had two wives in the ladies whose maiden names were
Khawula and Mngomezulu, respectively. Sadly, the lady whose maiden name was
Mngomezulu passed away before Inkosi could pass on. Inkosi loved his people
and he loved the Zulu people and its culture. Inkosi was a humble person, a
soft-spoken person who did not like bickering. However, when Inkosi was
cross about something he would simply stage a walkout and go straight home
to his mother. He dearly loved his mother, MaNgcobo.

Inkosi Hlengwa was inaugurated in chieftainship to do his work by his
father, who was still alive, and the then KwaZulu government. The father of
Inkosi inaugurated him when he was still alive so that he could teach
Inkosi what he felt was wise whilst he was still alive. I want to tell
everyone present as his friends that his father would tell him that he
should listen to all people talking, even if there were ten people, but
simply answer two of those. His answer in turn should satisfy them all, and
he should not answer them individually because some of them may be talking
nonsense. This was said by the late Inkosi, the father of Inkosi.
[Laughter.]

The Inkatha Freedom Party has lost dearly by the death of the Inkosi of
KwaThoyana. He was immensely dedicated in everything he was tasked to do,
even if he was doing it of his own volition. The House of Traditional
Leaders in KwaZulu-Natal has lost dearly because of the role he was playing
in all of the committees he was leading, and more especially the committee
of amakhosi dealing with HIV/Aids.

The IFP has lost a communicator and a real arbitrator. His membership in
the National Council of the IFP will be sadly missed because of his depth
of knowledge of putting things in a gentle way. We have lost Inkosi, who
loved the truth and who wanted it to be told no matter how painful it may
be. Even if he was called upon to pray, he would directly recite in his
prayers what he would want to be done in that particular meeting and he
would gently say it in a very humble way. The Provincial Legislature has
lost because he had not shown all his talents, although he somehow
displayed some of them.

The Inkatha Freedom Party thanks the Hlengwa family for having given birth
to a gentleman amongst gentlemen and a man amongst men. We thank the father
of Inkosi for having reared him very well, so that he grew up knowing and
loving his people and the other people in general; he also loved his
citizenship to boot. We thank the Inkosi himself, Inkosi Mhlabunzima
Wellington Hlengwa, for being an honest member of the Inkatha Freedom Party
until the end. He would not even abuse his powers when he was given high
positions.

We in the Inkatha Freedom Party sincerely thank this government, led by the
President, for honouring the Inkosi with the position of being the
Chairperson of the Public Works Committee from 1999 to 2004. We also thank
the Premier of the province and the province for bestowing on the Inkosi
the position of the Provincial Speaker in the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature.
His funeral was a dignified one worthy of Inkosi and I hope that Inkosi was
also very pleased wherever he is.

Finally, we are greatly indebted to all the speakers who spoke at the
funeral of Inkosi. The first speaker was the leader of the Inkatha Freedom
Party, the Prince of KwaPhindangene, next was the Premier of the province
and then it was the Deputy President. The Deputy President analysed every
capacity in which Inkosi had been working, having been assisted or sent by
the Inkatha Freedom Party and amakhosi. Rest in peace, Mashasha! Rest in
peace, son of “Small bhodlela”! Rest in peace, nkosi of the nation,
Mbuyisa! We thank you. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon members. I take it that there are no
objections to the adoption of the motion. The condolences of the House will
be conveyed to the Hlengwa family.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.


   CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF DRAFT NOTICE FOR
           DECLARATION OF AMNESTY IN TERMS OF FIREARMS CONTROL ACT


There was no debate.

Government Notice No 27441 published in the Government Gazette of 31 March
2005 in regard to the declaration of an amnesty in terms of section
139(2)(a) of the Firearms Control Act, 2000, approved.
The House adjourned at 16:32.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     A letter was received from the Minister for Safety and Security on 13
     April 2005, requesting Parliament’s approval of a notice, published in
     the Gazette of 31 March 2005, of a declaration of amnesty for the
     period 1 April 2005 until 30 June 2005 in terms of section 139(2)(a) of
     the Firearms Control Act, 2000 (Act No 60 of 2000).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

     Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund for 2003-
     2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 33-2005].

2.    The Minister of Social Development


     Report and Financial Statements of the National Development Agency
     (NDA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 157-2004].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     Petition received from Ms D van der Walt, MP against name change of
     Pretoria.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
      Development on the Desirability of the Restoration to the Office of
      Magistrate Mr PP Mkalipi, dated 13 April 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
        having considered the report  on  the  suspension  from  office  of
        magistrate PP Mkalipi, tabled  by  the  Minister  for  Justice  and
        Constitutional Development in terms  of  section  13(4)(b)  of  the
        Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

        1)  The  Portfolio  Committee  noted  from  the  report  that   the
             Magistrates Commission recommended that Mr Mkalipi  be  removed
             from the office of magistrate on account of incapacity to carry
             out the duties of his office efficiently.


        2) The Portfolio Committee invited Mr  Mkalipi  to  submit  written
             representations to the Committee regarding  the  recommendation
             of  the  Magistrates  Commission.  Mr  Mkalipi   responded   by
             indicating that he is ready to take up the office of magistrate
             again.


        3) The Portfolio Committee noted that the report and the  documents
             submitted in terms  of  the  relevant  regulations  bear  ample
             evidence that Mr Mkalipi  is  incapable  of  carrying  out  the
             duties of his office efficiently. There are numerous  instances
             where case records kept by Mr Mkalipi  were  incomplete  and/or
             reflected gross  irregularities.  Uncontested  evidence  exists
             that he committed gross procedural irregularities  on  numerous
             occasions and that he failed to furnish reasons for convictions
             and sentences on review or appeal in certain  instances.  Other
             uncontested evidence  relates  to  non-observance  of  official
             hours,  lack  of  discipline,  inadequate  knowledge  of  civil
             adjudication and being inebriated whilst on official duty.


        4) In terms of section 13(4) (c ) of  the  Magistrates  Act,  1993,
             Parliament must, as soon as  is  reasonably  possible,  pass  a
             resolution as to whether or not the restoration of  Mr  Mkalipi
             to the office  of  magistrate  is  recommended.  The  Portfolio
             Committee is of the opinion that there is  no  reason  why  the
             recommendation by the Magistrates Commission,  namely  that  Mr
             Mkalipi should be removed from the office of magistrate, should
             not be followed  and  accordingly  recommends  that  the  House
             resolve that Mr Mkalipi  not  be  restored  to  the  office  of
             magistrate.


Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
      Development on the Desirability of the Restoration to the Office of
      Magistrate Mr PW Phiri, dated 13 April 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
        having considered the report  on  the  suspension  from  office  of
        magistrate PW  Phiri,  tabled  by  the  Minister  for  Justice  and
        Constitutional Development in terms  of  section  13(4)(b)  of  the
        Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

        1)  The  Portfolio  Committee  noted  from  the  report  that   the
             Magistrates Commission recommended that  Mr  Phiri  be  removed
             from the office of magistrate on account of incapacity to carry
             out the duties of his office efficiently.


        2) The Portfolio Committee  invited  Mr  Phiri  to  submit  written
             representations to the Committee regarding  the  recommendation
             of the Magistrates Commission. The Committee  did  not  receive
             any response to the invitation.


        3) The Portfolio Committee noted that the report and the  documents
             submitted in terms  of  the  relevant  regulations  bear  ample
             evidence that Mr Phiri is incapable of carrying out the  duties
             of his office efficiently. Mr Phiri repeatedly failed  to  send
             reviewable cases to the High  Court  timeously  and  repeatedly
             failed to respond  to  various  queries  by  reviewing  judges,
             resulting in failures of justice and causing prejudice  to  the
             accused persons concerned. He pleaded guilty to  three  charges
             of misconduct in this respect. His  performance  on  the  bench
             disclosed  numerous,  serious  and   profound   irregularities.
             Numerous cases over which Mr Phiri presided had to be  sent  on
             special  review  and  serious  procedural  irregularities  were
             detected.  Individual  and  formal   training,   guidance   and
             counseling failed to achieve the desired effect  and  Mr  Phiri
             repeatedly made the same mistakes and failed to adhere to  time
             limits.


        4) In terms of section 13(4) (c ) of  the  Magistrates  Act,  1993,
             Parliament must, as soon as  is  reasonably  possible,  pass  a
             resolution as to whether or not the restoration of Mr Phiri  to
             the  office  of  magistrate  is  recommended.   The   Portfolio
             Committee is of the opinion that there is  no  reason  why  the
             recommendation by the Magistrates Commission,  namely  that  Mr
             Phiri should be removed from the office of  magistrate,  should
             not be followed  and  accordingly  recommends  that  the  House
             resolve that  Mr  Phiri  not  be  restored  to  the  office  of
             magistrate.


Report to be considered.

3.    The Portfolio Committee on Defence, having undertaken an oversight
      visit to the Military Academy at Saldanha on 19 January 2005, reports
      as follows:

Table of Contents
   1. Preface
   2. Introduction
   3. The Military Academy: Past, present and Future
   4. Findings
   5. Conclusion and Recommendations
   6. Appendix 1 (Committee delegation)
   7. Appendix 2 (Military Academy delegation)
   8. Appendix 3 (Military Academy Demographic Profile)


1. Preface

1. Strategic Environment

Democratic South Africa occupies a unique position within  the  crucible  of
African  efforts  to  eradicate  poverty,  promote  sustainable  growth  and
development,  and  bring  peace  to  our  war-ravaged  continent.  The   New
Partnership for Africa’s Development gives impulse to such  initiatives,  as
do peace support operations undertaken by the African Union  in  partnership
with the United  Nations.  South  Africa  plays  a  leading  role  in  these
efforts, having committed major political, economic and  military  resources
to African  renewal.  Our  obligations  along  these  lines  are  likely  to
increase in the years ahead.

This is the continental starting point for considering  the  report  by  the
Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Defence concerning  the  South  African
Military Academy at Saldanha. The  assessment  and  recommendations  of  the
Committee form part of its oversight of the Department of  Defence  and  its
associated institutions. Like all its work, this report is meant to  promote
and advance the ability of the Department, and the bodies  that  fall  under
its authority, to meet their constitutional obligations.

The South African Military Academy is a pivotal institution.  Its  principal
function is to educate and train the officer  corps  of  the  South  African
National  Defence  Force  (SANDF).  The  Constitution  defines  the  primary
objectives of the SANDF as follows: “to defend  and  protect  the  Republic,
its  territorial  integrity  and  its  people   in   accordance   with   the
Constitution and the principles of international law regulating the  use  of
force”.

The SANDF must be able to live up to these historic tasks in an  epoch  that
has come to be defined  by  the  rapid  and  unpredictable  consequences  of
globalisation, and by new political, economic  and  military  challenges  in
world affairs.

For the Academy, this implies an obligation to equip the officer corps  with
a set of finely honed intellectual and military  skills.  Yet  at  the  same
time, the institution must make demonstrable  progress  along  the  road  of
transformation, so that talented young South  Africans  of  all  backgrounds
will choose to attend the Academy for its academic excellence. South  Africa
needs an officer corps with the utmost flexibility in the 21st century –  an
officer corps that understands the changing nature of the work of the  SANDF
and the global environment. The functioning  and  outlook  of  this  officer
corps must be rooted in the Constitution, and  it  must  understand  and  be
able to relate to the diverse cultures that characterise  our  country,  our
continent and our planet.

Lt General (ret) Romeo  Dallaire,  the  Canadian  commander  of  the  United
Nations  mission  in  Rwanda  during  the  1994  genocide,   and   who   has
considerable experience in staff training,  made  similar  points  during  a
recent visit to South Africa. Dallaire emphasised that modern officer  corps
must be sensitive to a range of cultural, social and  psychological  factors
in relation  to  their  subordinates  and  in  the  field  of  operations  –
especially in peacekeeping missions abroad.

Moreover, in the context  of  increased  collaboration  within  the  African
Union, and the principle that Africa cannot depend on  outside  powers,  the
Military Academy must become a first-class institution that  is  the  centre
for  officer  training  in  Africa.  The  Academy  should  function   as   a
continental magnet for young officers in training, who are attracted to  the
Academy not only for its academic excellence and  military  competence,  but
also because  it  is  a  reflection  of  democratic  South  Africa  and  our
commitment to democracy, peace and the full development of Africa.

At the outset, the Committee  must  state  that  it  was  impressed  by  the
determination of a great many people associated with the Military Academy  –
officers, faculty, staff and  students  –  to  transform  this  institution,
which was once a cog in the machinery of white minority rule, into a  first-
class academy of higher learning worthy of  our  constitutional,  non-racial
democracy.

1.2 Leadership and Transformation

The Committee firmly agrees  that  the  Academy  needs  to  be  transformed.
However, the challenge remains the specific manner of change and the  extent
to which it provides further grounds for development.

Transformation is not limited solely to numbers and representivity. It  also
embraces an ethos  and  values  reflecting  an  entirely  different  set  of
assumptions   to   those   held   under   apartheid,   including   openness,
transparency, equality and justice.

What is described in a document prepared by the University of  Witwatersrand
in 1998 is applicable to all higher  education  institutions,  where  it  is
said that: “transformation is not an end  in  itself,  but  a  process  that
leads us to achieve our goal  of  participative  democracy,  accountability,
responsibility and transparency”.

What is to be achieved  from  transformation  is  best  articulated  by  the
Department of Education’s White Paper on Higher Education,  which  describes
the aim of transformation vividly:

      South  Africa’s  transition  from  apartheid  and  minority  rule   to
      democracy requires  that  all  existing  practices,  institutions  and
      values are viewed anew and rethought in terms of their fitness for the
      new era. Higher education plays a central role in the social, cultural
      and economic development of modern societies. In South  Africa  today,
      the challenge is to redress past inequalities  and  to  transform  the
      higher education system to serve a new social order, to meet  pressing
      national needs, and to respond to new realities and opportunities.  It
      must lay the foundations for the development  of  a  learning  society
      which can stimulate, direct and mobilise the creative and intellectual
      energies  of  all  the  people  towards  meeting  the   challenge   of
      reconstruction and development.

It is clear to the Committee that the majority of the  management,  faculty,
staff and students support transformation. The  key,  then,  is  leadership,
applied with  vision,  sensitivity  and  care.  Such  leadership  must  take
cognisance of  the  fact  that  the  Academy  is  unlike  any  other  higher
education institution in South Africa because it serves a dual purpose:  one
academic, as part of the University of Stellenbosch; the other military,  as
a unit of the SANDF.

After considering  all  these  factors,  and  following  a  site  visit  and
reviewing additional documentation, the  Committee  strongly  believes  that
the approach taken at the Military Academy does not meet the needs of  South
Africa’s officer training corps, and as a result neither  the  military  nor
the academic side  of  this  duality  is  being  adequately  served  in  the
interests of the nation.

The Committee’s findings are  listed  in  Section  4  of  this  report;  its
conclusions and  recommendations  in  Section  5.  Key  points  include  the
following:

    • The Academy has reached a critical turning point;
    • There is confusion over the core business  of  the  Academy,  and  the
      appropriate academic balance has not been adequately struck;
    • A rehabilitative process needs to be initiated that will  involve  the
      Academy’s management, the Department of Defence and the University  of
      Stellenbosch.  Such  a  review  will  have  to  examine  the  required
      leadership qualifications for the Academy, appropriate funding  levels
      and the need to upgrade curriculum development;
    • This process must also examine the output of the Academy, and  find  a
      cost-effective model that serves the long-term needs of the four  arms
      of the SANDF;
    • The Academy should not be run on a strictly militaristic basis. It  is
      a staff training college, not a military finishing school;
    • Lengthy delays in filling academic posts harm students and  must  come
      to an end;
    • The Academy has made some progress with regard to  representivity.  It
      can help speed  this  process  by  implementing  a  staff  development
      programme for blacks that includes systematic mentoring; and
    • The physical infrastructure of the Academy needs to be upgraded.

2.    Introduction

1. Basis of report

The Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Defence  presents  this  report  in
the context of the oversight role assigned to the National Assembly  by  the
Constitution.

The Committee conducted a visit to the South African Military Academy on  19
January 2005 as part of its oversight and monitoring of  the  Department  of
Defence, the SANDF and their institutions. Portfolio  Committee  Chairperson
Professor Kader Asmal headed the delegation. A full list of  the  delegation
members is provided in Appendix 1. The delegation met  with  officials  from
the Academy’s management team  (see  Appendix  2)  and  held  meetings  with
University  of  Stellenbosch  faculty,  Academy  staff  and  students.   The
delegation also toured the facilities.

The  report  is  based  on  this  visit,  and  also  draws   on   additional
correspondence and documents made available to the Committee.
2.2 Objectives of visit

In  addition   to   the   aforementioned   exercise   of   the   Committee’s
constitutionally mandated oversight role, and within the  framework  of  the
constitutional  imperatives  of  transformation,  affirmative   action   and
employment  equity,  good  governance,  delivery,  accountability  and  non-
racialism, the delegation had the following objectives:

    • To  ascertain  the  quality  of  education  and  the  content  of  the
      curriculum offered by the Military Academy to its  students,  and  its
      subsequent effect on the development of the SANDF officer corps;
    •  To  find  out  about  the  foundations  of  the  Academy’s   training
      programmes;
    • To learn about the composition of the staff and their  qualifications,
      as well as the type of research produced by the Academy;
    • To determine the state of student and staff relations; and
    • To investigate whether the Academy reflects South  Africa’s  democracy
      and demographics.

2.3 Board of Inquiry

This report does not attempt to duplicate the work of the Board of  Inquiry,
appointed by the Minister of Defence,  which  is  examining  allegations  of
racism and violence at the Military Academy. The Committee awaits the  Board
of Inquiry’s conclusions, but in consonance with the oversight  role  vested
in Parliament by the Constitution, it  is  obligated  to  proceed  with  its
report and findings.

3.    The Military Academy: Past, Present and Future

3.1 The Academy in the Past

The Military Academy was established in  1950  under  the  auspices  of  the
University of Pretoria as a branch of the SA Military College. According  to
material on its website, it was created as a traditional  military  academy,
based to some degree on the model of the United States Military  Academy  at
West Point. This seems rather far-fetched. In the mid-1950s  it  was  placed
under the trusteeship of the University of  Stellenbosch,  and  subsequently
moved from Voortrekkerhoogte (now Thaba Tshwane) to its present location  at
Saldanha. In January  1961  the  Academy  became  the  Faculty  of  Military
Science of the University of Stellenbosch.

The Academy was an institution rooted in the apartheid ethos and served  the
needs of the apartheid state. As such, it  remained  an  exclusively  white,
male entity until 1978 when the  first  three  white  female  students  were
admitted – a decision suspended the very next year “due to lack of  suitable
accommodation”. The first Coloured student was  admitted  in  1979.  It  was
only in 1991 that female students, and  the  first  African  students,  were
admitted to the Academy.

The  Academy  has  registered  some  progress  in   terms   of   demographic
transformation (see Appendix 3). However, a great deal more  remains  to  be
accomplished. Progress in this area cannot be separated from the ability  of
the Academy to function as a centre of academic and military excellence.  We
discuss this further under Findings.

3.2 The Academy Today
It is  stated  that  the  Academy’s  purpose  is  to  elevate  education  of
Permanent Force (sic) cadets to the level of baccalaureate  in  the  Natural
or Human Sciences, and  to  provide  the  SANDF  with  a  competent,  highly
professional officer corps. Apart from their academic studies,  students  at
the Academy also continue their normal military training as cadets.

The existing agreement between the Department of Defence and the  University
of Stellenbosch states: “The Military Academy is  a  military  unit  of  the
Department and is under the military command of a  Commanding  Officer.  The
Faculty of Military Science, in terms of the Private Law on  the  University
of Stellenbosch (Volksraad), 1992, is a faculty of the  University  that  is
accommodated by the Military Academy.”

What follows in this section are brief summaries of  presentations  made  to
the Committee during its oversight  visit  to  the  Academy,  along  with  a
discussion of correspondence made available to the Committee  following  the
visit.

3.2.1 Meeting with Management

In its meeting with the Committee, the Academy’s management team  identified
its vision as follows: To be the leader in professional  military  education
in Africa, and in so doing to empower  the  African  security  community  to
manage current and future security challenges effectively.

Goals, strategies and objectives identified by the management include:


    • Ensuring relevance of the Academy’s core business;
    • Ensuring representivity;
    • Pursuing an international academic stature;
    •  Capturing  the  African  market  (sic)  for   professional   military
      education;
    • Marketing the Academy;
    • Integrating the Academy with the education, training  and  development
      system of the Department of Defence; and
    • Developing an integrated academic military professional curriculum  in
      accordance with the needs of the various services.

Challenges identified by the management:

    • Transformation and representivity;
    • Criminal activity;
    • Supplies;
    • Staff morale;
    • Funding for research, guest speakers and international conferences;
    • Filling of vacant posts; and
    • The language policy of the University of Stellenbosch and the Academy.

Apart from physical conditions, the Commandant  stated  that  everything  at
the Academy was “hunky dory”.

3.2.2 Meeting with University of Stellenbosch Faculty Programme

In their meeting with the Committee delegation, University  of  Stellenbosch
Faculty Programme members identified the following as key issues:

    • Transformation and employment equity;
    • The University policy of promoting Afrikaans, while  the  majority  of
      the Academy’s students do not speak Afrikaans as a first language  (In
      terms  of  the  agreement  between  Stellenbosch  University  and  the
      Department, English  is  the  medium  of  instruction  for  programmes
      falling under the Faculty of Military Science);
    • The University’s  role  as  a  guarantor  of  academic,  teaching  and
      research development, support and excellence;
    • The University’s role in the development of the academic curriculum;
    • The faculty’s role in the appointment and selection of students;
    • The University has committed itself to ensuring that by 2006,  25%  of
      professors would be black or women (35% by 2012), but no coherent plan
      was put before the Committee;
    • The University is  committed  to  maintaining  and  strengthening  its
      relationship with the  Department  of  Defence  with  regards  to  the
      Academy;
    • Research papers increased from 46 in 2000 to 56 in 2003; over the same
      period publications fell from 42 to 41; and
    • Student numbers have risen from 266 to 426.

3.2.3 Military Professional Development Programme

This programme oversees the discipline, training, uniform, duties and  other
military aspects of the students’ development.
3.2.4 Meeting with Support Services

Support  Services  is  responsible  for  facilities  maintenance,   hospital
services, logistics, communications and the  like.  In  their  meeting  with
members of  the  delegation,  staff  members  identified  several  problems,
including  strains  on  infrastructure,  particularly  living  quarters  and
classrooms, due to growing student numbers. In  addition,  there  have  been
long delays in the repair, maintenance and  upgrading  of  such  facilities.
The Committee was informed that some barracks do not meet government  safety
regulations and could soon be condemned.

3.2.5 Meeting with Staff

The Committee delegation  met  with  about  100  staff  members.  Their  key
concerns include the following:
    • The Committee should support the work of the Board of Inquiry;
    • The Academy’s academic stature, performance and  education  are  being
      undermined;
    • The Dean’s authority has been undermined by the Academy’s  management:
      he has a two-year contract, not a  standard  five-year  contract,  and
      does not have requisite support staff;
    • Some  staff  feel  that  affirmative  action,  employment  equity  and
      transformation  are  being  pursued  too  fast,  that  standards   are
      declining because posts are not being filled, and that white staff are
      being marginalised;
    • Other staff feel that not enough has been done in terms of affirmative
      action, employment equity and transformation. They feel more should be
      done, including attracting new staff with  competitive  packages,  and
      using English as the  medium  of  communication  at  staff  and  other
      meetings;
    • All staff have committed themselves to transformation, but there is  a
      need for a dedicated diversity management programme;
    • The budget should be increased  in  line  with  the  rise  in  student
      numbers;
    • Vacant posts should be filled as a matter of priority;
    • Funding should be made available to support research and conferences;
    • The Military Academy should be  part  of  the  career  path  of  SANDF
      officers. Training and education should be integrated at  the  Academy
      and throughout the SANDF;
    • The four services should ensure they pay their financial contributions
      to the Academy in a timely manner;
    • There are differing views between the Department of  Defence  and  the
      Public Service Commission regarding the status and benefits of Academy
      staff;
    • New staff are not provided with relocation assistance; and
    • The Committee should intervene with the Military  Academy,  Department
      of Defence and Stellenbosch University to address these concerns.

3.2.6 Meeting with students

The Committee delegation met with approximately 200 students. Students  were
not as forthcoming with questions as  we  would  have  liked.  However,  the
following issues did arise and were answered by the Committee Chairperson:

    • The possibility of SANDF members giving up  their  right  to  vote  to
      ensure that the SANDF remains non-partisan;
    • The possibility of SANDF members being exempt from taxation;
    • The future of civilian-military relations in South Africa; and
    • The budget of the Military Academy is insufficient for student  intake
      levels and needs.

Students elect a  student  captain  and  other  representatives  from  among
themselves to  constitute  a  student  council,  which  represents  them  on
faculty and other committees.

3.2.7 Relationship with the University of Stellenbosch

Subsequent to its oversight visit,  the  Committee  received  a  copy  of  a
letter from University of  Stellenbosch  Rector  and  Vice-Chancellor  Chris
Brink to Brigadier General  TZ  Manyama,  the  Commandant  of  the  Military
Academy. At the time this report was being prepared, the Committee  had  not
yet seen a reply from Brig Gen Manyama, and it does not  endeavour  to  pass
judgement in this matter. However,  we  believe  that  Prof  Brink’s  letter
raises critical issues before the Academy, and as a result we  quote  it  at
some length.

Prof Brink writes that there appears to  be  a  misunderstanding  concerning
the military and academic lines of authority at the Academy. His  expression
of this view follows a meeting at which the Commandant of  the  Academy,  on
grounds of ensuring representivity, overruled a recommendation  made  by  an
academic committee to hire two  lecturers.  Prof  Brink  writes  that  “your
military authority (which is not in dispute) cannot be used in this  fashion
to overrule, by way of command, the academic  decision-making  process”.  He
indicates that the relevant documentation

      would seem to represent a clash between the  military  ethos  and  the
      academic ethos, which I am keen to avoid. It is quite  clearly  stated
      that you, as Commandant, represent the Department of Defence.  On  the
      other hand it is also indisputable that the University represents  the
      Department  of  Education.  While  the  Department   of   Defence   is
      responsible for the training of soldiers, the Department of  Education
      is responsible for the education of scholars.  These  two  Departments
      have agreed on a collaboration that can  generate  the  best  of  both
      worlds: the coupling of the Military Academy is  meant  to  produce  a
      cadre of academically trained officer-leaders, who are  both  soldiers
      and  scholars.  The  interaction  between  the  two   Departments   is
      manifested in the contract between the University and the SANDF, which
      governs the operations of the Military Academy. It is  in  our  mutual
      interest, and in the interest of South Africa,  to  ensure  that  this
      contract functions effectively.


      The contract is based on the fact that there are certain  things  only
      the defence force can do, and certain things only a university can do.
      Only a university can award degrees, or appoint professors.

Prof Brink says that it would be  completely  “within  the  spirit  and  the
letter of the interaction between  the  SANDF  and  the  University  if  you
wished  to  raise  an  objection   against   any   recommendation   of   the
Subcommittee…. But issuing an order to an academic committee is a  different
matter altogether, which is neither within the spirit nor the letter of  the
contract.”

It is not clear as to how this impasse has been resolved. In  addition,  the
Committee has been informed that under the agreement between the  University
of Stellenbosch and the Department of  Defence,  consultation  has  to  take
place between the two as to the appointment of the  Dean  (consultation  did
take place) and the appointment of the Commandant (no consultation).
3.3 The Future of the Academy

In addition to the  Military  Academy,  South  Africa  maintains  two  other
military-educational institutions:

    • The South African National Defence College, the purpose of which is to
      prepare selected officers and officials for senior appointments in the
      SANDF. The focus is on national security and  international  politics.
      It runs two programmes per year, each over 19 weeks, with 30  entrants
      per session. Eligible participants are military entrants from the rank
      of colonel and those  of  equivalent  civilian  status  in  government
      departments. Approximately one-quarter  of  participants  are  foreign
      officers; and

    • The War College, which takes in 100 students per year. It concentrates
      on operational issues,  namely  preparing  SANDF  officers  to  become
      commanders of deployed divisions. All participants are  officers,  and
      it has fewer foreign participants.

Considering  the  specialised  roles  of  these  institutions,  with   their
emphasis on short courses, the Military Academy is clearly the  place  where
the fundamental education and training of  the  future  officer  corps  must
take place.

Government is committed  to  maintaining  a  single,  undivided  SANDF.  The
relationship between the military and civilian staff at  the  Academy  needs
to support the achievement of that vision and adhere to the mission  of  the
Academy.  The Academy’s  focus  should  be  the  academic  and  professional
training of officers for the  SANDF.  There  is  a  need  to  reconfirm  the
mission of the Academy and to determine how best to achieve this  objective,
as well as to examine how the specific training needs of the  four  services
within the SANDF can best be incorporated.

South Africa’s ability to train an officer corps that is intellectually  and
militarily up to the challenges of the present epoch is an  issue  not  only
of national importance, but continental significance. The  Military  Academy
needs to accomplish several things simultaneously:

    • Promote academic excellence;
    • Offer professional qualifications of the kind that will be  attractive
      to students of all backgrounds;
    • Provide value-for-money training fully in step with the needs  of  the
      four services within the SANDF;
    • Become the military academy of choice for talented young  people  from
      throughout Africa; and
    • Deepen the transformation process.

In order to help the Academy accomplish this challenging set of  objectives,
the Committee offers its findings and recommendations.

4.    Findings

The Committee believes that the Academy stands at a critical turning  point.
The principal findings of the Committee are outlined below.

4.1 The Role and Functioning of the Academy

    • There is confusion between the military and academic functions of  the
      Academy. This is the very least that can be deduced from the  evidence
      before  the  Committee.  Such  confusion   will   lead   to   damaging
      consequences;
    • The Academy appears to be run on a strict authoritarian approach,  not
      like a higher education institution with a special mission;
    • The appropriate balance between academic and  military  education  has
      not been struck; and
    • It is doubtful that the four arms of the SANDF are getting  value  for
      money.

4.2 Representivity

In the Committee’s view, the majority of the staff  support  transformation,
and some progress has been registered with  regard  to  representivity,  but
there remains a large gap between the stated objectives  of  the  SANDF  and
the make-up  of  the  Academy.  The  Department  of  Defence  representivity
guidelines, which serve as a guide for the Academy, are as follows:

    • 64.88% African
    • 24.35% white
    • 10.22% Coloured
    • 0.75% Asian


In 2000, 8% of faculty were black (African, Indian and Coloured); today  30%
of faculty are black. In 2000, 30% of  undergraduate  students  were  black;
today 76% are black. In  2000,  9%  of  postgraduate  students  were  black;
today, 53% are black. There is clearly some progress here.

In terms of gender, of first-year students, 169 are male and 49  female;  of
post-graduates, 69 male and 31 female; of academic assistants, 57  male  and
43 female; and of lecturers, 83 male and 17 female. There  appears  to  have
been a decline in the ratio of female faculty from 22% in  2000  to  20%  in
2005. The Committee has not received corresponding figures  for  a  previous
year with regard to student gender.

The Committee has received little information on the number of persons  with
disabilities at the Academy.

The full degree of demographic progress can  be  charted  by  reviewing  the
statistics provided by the Academy, which appear in Appendix 3.

The  time  has  come  to  draw  up  a  systematic   programme   to   achieve
representivity, rather than ad  hoc  responses  as  far  as  the  staff  are
concerned, with an emphasis on intensive  mentoring,  aggressive  recruiting
and a proper career path.

4.3 Curriculum

Curriculum  plays  a  crucial  role  in  developing  a  common  culture  and
integrity within any  educational  institution.  In  the  Committee’s  view,
however, the curriculum in  place  at  the  Academy  does  not  reflect  the
changing nature of  the  world,  nor  the  changing  nature  of  Africa.  In
general, the Committee finds the balance inadequate to the  broad  needs  of
the officer corps. While there is an impressive list of  technical  subjects
covered, there is insufficient grounding in the humanities.

To develop the kind of officer corps we  have  described  above,  study  and
discussion of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa  must  occupy
pride of place in the curriculum. Judging by  the  materials  given  to  the
Committee, it is hard to discern such a priority. Students of  Military  Law
or Political Science do obtain some exposure to the Constitution.  But  this
should surely be a foundational element for every student at the  Academy  –
and not merely to be understood as a set of rules, but as a living  document
that is the outcome of a tremendous struggle  waged  in  this  country  over
many decades. Not a few commentators have pointed out that our  Constitution
is one of the most progressive constitutions on the face of the  earth,  and
the basis for all in  our  interrelationships.  Surely,  then,  the  officer
corps must be grounded in this document.

Similarly, the Constitution is of enormous  relevance  when  developing  the
kind of respect and  sensitivity  to  diverse  cultures  required  of  SANDF
officers at home and abroad. This should be part of the coursework of  every
student, but it  does  not  appear  to  be  the  case.  Our  review  of  the
curriculum locates a module called “The Management  of  Cultural  Diversity”
presented under Industrial Psychology. This  seems  anomalous,  as  part  of
transformation  is  the  capacity  of  the  institution  to  celebrate   our
diversity and to ensure sensitivity to our distinctive languages,  religions
and cultures.

The Committee is also of the view  that,  not  least  given  South  Africa’s
continental responsibilities, every student should be exposed to more  study
and discussion of Africa’s history and contemporary  affairs.  Much  of  the
Africa-related course material  in  undergraduate  programmes  seems  to  be
limited to Military History,  reflecting  the  present  staff  academic  and
research interests.  This needs to be reviewed urgently.

The library is  in  appalling  condition,  with  a  shortage  of  books  and
periodicals. This is alarming.  The  department  cannot  train  the  officer
corps that South Africa needs without such basic materials.

4.4 Staff, Posts, Research and Qualifications

Staff appears to be in disarray. A total of 21 posts are  currently  vacant,
including 12 Faculty of Military Science positions and  4  Section  Military
Development positions, and many of them have  been  vacant  for  some  time.
This delay harms the students and has a demoralising effect on  the  Academy
as a whole. It indicates that something  is  wrong  with  the  institutional
culture.

In addition, the Committee has been led to believe that some posts have  not
been filled because there were no black candidates available to  fill  them.
While  such  action  may  appear  justified  in  the   name   of   improving
representivity, this is not the case.

Where will the Academy find  appropriately  qualified  black  faculty?  Like
every other section of our society, which is burdened with the  consequences
of apartheid, it must play an active part in training  them.  The  Committee
did not see any evidence of  a  staff  development  programme.  The  Academy
needs one, and it must include mentoring. The tone  and  atmosphere  of  the
Academy must also be congenial to those previously excluded.

The Committee has requested detailed  information  on  research  papers  and
publications emanating from the Academy.  The  latest  information  we  have
received covers the years 1994-2003. During the  Committee’s  visit  it  was
informed that the 2003 output was 56 papers and  41  publications.  However,
there seems to be some confusion  between  conference  papers  and  research
papers – many of the former are listed as the  latter.  In  addition,  there
needs to be greater emphasis on publication in peer-reviewed journals.

In terms of the academic staff, 20% hold doctorates, and  25%  are  enrolled
in PhD programmes.

Judging by the material the Committee have reviewed,  in  general  terms  it
seems to members that some of  the  senior  officers  may  not  be  properly
qualified for their positions.

4.5 Physical infrastructure and resources

    • The Academy appears to be underfunded;
    • The library,  especially  for  an  institution  that  seeks  to  be  a
      continental leader, is in an appalling state. There are  far  too  few
      books, journals and computers;
    • The science laboratory has only nine tables  for  120  students  at  a
      time, the Committee was told. It needs to be  upgraded,  expanded  and
      better resourced;
    • The computer laboratory takes four classes of more than  100  students
      each. The computers are outdated, students pay for printing, there are
      no laptops and internet facilities are limited. Students have  to  pay
      to use the internet. The management says  this  is  the  result  of  a
      funding shortfall from the Department of  Defence.  Clearly,  internet
      usage must be part of the Academy’s budget;
    • Two of the four barracks are in desperate need of repair  –  otherwise
      they risk being in violation of building safety regulations. The roofs
      leak, light fittings need to be upgraded, and so on; and
    • Physical training facilities  are  inadequate:  there  is  no  gym  or
      swimming pool. Minimum recreational facilities are needed.  After  the
      recent deaths by drowning of SANDF soldiers in  peacekeeping  missions
      abroad, one thing is for certain: our officers must know how to swim!

4.6 Military Training

The Section Military Development is responsible for development of  military
competencies. According to the information presented to  the  Committee,  it
organises drill sessions and parades; command communication;  spiritual  and
professional guidance; sport, shooting and physical fitness. It  also  takes
responsibility for regimental routine, military discipline, formal  dinners,
guest evenings and the like.

The expected outcomes of this programme,  particularly  as  they  relate  to
proficiency in, say, disassembling and assembling a rifle, are not  entirely
clear to the Committee.

4.7 Guest lecturers

In 2002-03 the Academy hosted two international guest speakers; in  2003-04,
four; and in 2004-05, two. In the  Committee’s  view,  this  is  not  nearly
enough international academic input. An institution of this type depends  on
international speakers, especially those who can  speak  to  issues  of  the
military in a democracy. Moreover, it is imperative to have  a  broad  range
of views on such subjects, not merely one, or even a handful.

The Committee was informed by a member of staff at the open meeting that  in
one case, the Commandant  forbade  an  invitation  to  an  overseas  speaker
because of his race. If true, this is clearly unacceptable.

4.8 HIV/AIDS
According to management, the impact and incidence of HIV  and  AIDS  at  the
Military Academy has been minimal. However, it is not  clear  whether  there
is systematic education  in  place  concerning  HIV/AIDS,  as  well  as  the
opportunistic diseases associated with HIV/AIDS.

4.9 Sexual Harassment

The process for reporting and addressing  complaints  of  sexual  harassment
needs to be reviewed. The Commandant states that since his  arrival  at  the
Academy there have been no such reports. The Committee  learned  during  its
visit that the complaints procedure  provides  for  students  and  staff  to
report to their commanding officers or to  the  Commandant,  nearly  all  of
whom are men. In addition, the military does not encourage personnel to  lay
charges against their superior officers,  or  to  circumvent  the  chain  of
command.

Subsequent to the Committee’s  visit,  it  received  a  statement  from  the
Chaplain of the Academy, dated 24 January of this year, which suggests  that
he is the first port of call for  people  alleging  sexual  harassment.  The
chaplain will then channel information to either  the  management  (most  of
whom are men) or his functional superior (the Chaplain on the next level  of
command).   The  Chaplain  will  also  refer  the  complainant  to   medical
practitioners, a clinical psychologist and the educational psychologist.

The Committee feels  this  system  would  be  more  effective  if  a  female
officer, who can be directly approached by members of  the  Academy,  is  in
charge of such complaints. This officer can then assist the  complainant  to
call on the services of the other staff referred to in the procedure.

In the light of what has happened at other military  academies,  it  appears
to the Committee that a formal system that  involves  women  officers  (and,
possibly, academic staff) is urgently needed at the Academy.

4.10 Outstanding reports

The  Committee  has  requested,  but  has  yet  to  receive,  the  following
documentation:

    • More information with regard to disability statistics;
    • Financial arrangements between the Military Academy, the Department of
      Defence and the University of Stellenbosch;  and
    • Material concerning problems between the University and the Academy.


5.    Conclusion and Recommendations

5.1 Conclusion

The Military Academy is a national asset of strategic  importance.  However,
the Committee believes that the approach adopted by  the  Academy  up  until
now fails to meet the needs of the officer training corps, and as  a  result
that neither the academic nor the military imperatives are being  adequately
served in the interests of South Africa. There is confusion  over  the  core
business of the Academy, and there must be  a  close  investigation  of  the
quality of its output.

The Academy has made some progress with regard to  transformation.  However,
there is much room for improvement. Representivity targets are  a  long  way
from being met. Progress in this area has been accompanied  by  some  racial
tension. And this process cannot be separated from the range of  managerial,
budgetary,  financial,   logistical,   maintenance,   academic   and   other
challenges facing the Academy.

If the Academy is to equip South Africa’s  future  officer  corps  with  the
intellectual  and  military  skills  it  will  need  to   function   in   an
exceptionally challenging global environment, these challenges  need  to  be
addressed as a matter of urgency by the leadership of the  Academy,  by  the
Department of Defence and by Stellenbosch University.  For  the  Academy  to
become a centre for officer training for the rest of Africa, as  well  as  a
source of  pride  and  accomplishment  in  South  Africa,  a  rehabilitative
process needs to  be  initiated.  The  Committee’s  recommendations  are  as
follows:

5.2 Recommendations

   i. There must be a close investigation of the  quality  of  the  Military
      Academy’s output, along with consideration of how to create  the  most
      cost-effective model;
  ii. The Academy, the Department of Defence  and  the  University  need  to
      settle on a firm definition of the Academy’s  core  business,  and  to
      explore the kind of leadership which  is  best-suited  to  taking  the
      Academy forward;
 iii. The agreement between  the  Department  of  Defence  and  Stellenbosch
      University establishes a Joint Advisory Committee, which advises on  a
      range of matters, but which is not mandated  to  meet  on  a  frequent
      basis. The Committee feels that this  body’s  work  should  either  be
      expanded, or that a Joint Board  of  Studies  should  be  established,
      chaired by the Dean, with the  participant  of  the  Commandant,  that
      handles all academic matters;
  iv. In general, there should be greater interplay between the faculty  and
      military,  and  confidence-building  measures  should  be   undertaken
      urgently;
   v. The Dean should be given security of tenure;
  vi. The curriculum should be carefully reviewed and improved;
 vii. The Academy should talk to the four arms of the SANDF to  ensure  that
      their officer corps training needs are part of the curriculum;
viii. There is a need for closer liaison  with  the  four  services  of  the
      SANDF, who pay the fees of the students, to assess  whether  they  are
      getting value for money with regards to the  Academy’s  graduates,  as
      well as how  the  money  spent  compares  to  the  costs  of  civilian
      universities;
  ix. There is a need to review continuously and evaluate  the  relationship
      between the University and the  Academy  with  explicit  reference  to
      degree accreditation and the conditions of employment of staff;
   x.  The  higher  education  assessment  committee  should  look  at   the
      professional degrees offered by the Academy;
  xi. Language policy needs to be reviewed with regard to practical  matters
      such as meetings at the Academy;
 xii. Stellenbosch University needs to ensure that the Academy continues  to
      achieve levels of academic excellence, but we need further scrutiny of
      the certificate and diploma courses;
xiii.  In  the  interest  of  academic  excellence,  the  system  of  paying
      lecturers according to SANDF salary scales should  be  terminated.  At
      present the Department of Defence is responsible for  remuneration  of
      academic personnel. It is very difficult to maintain quality when  pay
      grades are so low. The fact is that the Academy competes against other
      universities  and  the  private  sector  and  needs  to  be  resourced
      appropriately;
 xiv. There must be  no  further  postponement  of  the  filling  of  posts.
      Students suffer as a result of these long delays. Vacancies should  be
      advertised and filled within three months at the latest;
  xv. As noted above, the process for reporting and addressing complaints of
      sexual harassment needs to be addressed;
 xvi. The Academy, like every other higher education institution, must today
      grapple with the consequences of the criminal refusal of the apartheid
      government to provide quality education to black South Africans -- and
      to prevent black educators  from  assuming  high-ranking  professional
      positions. There needs  to  be  a  systematic  staff  development  and
      mentoring programme in place. The finest  educators  will  not  simply
      come ready made: they will be trained;
xvii. Highly motivated staff should be drawn into the effort  to  renew  the
      Academy;
xviii. Current funding levels are inadequate. Consideration should be  given
      to Department of Education funding, through the usual block grant,  to
      supplement  the  Department  of  Defence’s   allocation   for   higher
      education;
 xix. The Academy is planning to offer some distance education courses. This
      should be done in close cooperation with the Department of Education;
  xx. The Committee needs to interact regularly with the  Military  Academy,
      the University and the Department of Defence to help address the  many
      concerns raised during the visit, as well as  the  funding  and  other
      challenges facing the Academy;
 xxi. The Department of Public Works and the Department of Defence  need  to
      upgrade the barracks, buildings, recreational facilities, and computer
      and science libraries. The computer facilities for both  students  and
      staff need to be upgraded to the same level as those of  the  War  and
      Defence Colleges; and
xxii. In the Committee’s view, it  would  be  useful  for  a  South  African
      delegation to visit the Royal Military College of Canada,  to  observe
      how a multicultural society without a significant military posture  in
      world-power politics has restructured and  is  educating  its  officer
      corps.

                 FORMAL ADOPTION OF REPORT BY THE COMMITTEE


This report of the oversight visit to the Military Academy, having been put
to the committee, was adopted on Tuesday, 12 April 2005.

Report to be considered.

                                 Appendix 1
  Members of the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Defence Delegation to
             the South African Military Academy, 19 January 2005

Head of Delegation and Portfolio Committee Chairperson:

Professor Kader Asmal

Members of Parliament:

Mr LN Diale
Mr NB Fihla
Mr PJ Groenewald
Ms CB Johnson
Dr GW Koornhof
Mr GP Mngomezulu
Mr S Moatshe
Ms XC Makasi
Mr SB Ntuli
Mr OE Monareng
Mr KW Morwamoche
Mr MRS Shah

Parliamentary Staff:

Mr G Campher
Dr M Parks


                                 Appendix 2
    Military Academy Management Team Delegation to Meeting with Portfolio
              Committee on Defence Delegation, 19 January 2005

Commandant of the Military Academy:

Brigadier General TZ Manyama

Academic programmes:

Dean of the Faculty of Military Science: Professor DJ Malan
Vice-Rector (Teaching): Professor R Botman, University of Stellenbosch
Dean of Students: Dr E van Haarte, University of Stellenbosch

Military Professional Development Programmes:

Lieutenant Colonel SB Nombewu

Support Services:

Colonel GM Louw
Transformation Issues:

Lieutenant Colonel PI Daniels

Learnership Leadership:

Ensign S Ndlovu


                                 Appendix 3
                    Military Academy Demographic Profile
                        (figures provided by Academy)
Faculty:

|Population Group    |2000                   |2005                 |
|African Male        |2%                     |20%                  |
|African Female      |0%                     |3%                   |
|Coloured Male       |4%                     |6%                   |
|Coloured Female     |0%                     |0%                   |
|White Male          |71%                    |55%                  |
|White Female        |22%                    |17%                  |
|Indian Male         |2%                     |1%                   |
|Indian Female       |0%                     |0%                   |


Centre for Military Studies:

|Population Group     |2005                 |
|African Male         |17%                  |
|African Female       |0%                   |
|Coloured Male        |17%                  |
|Coloured Female      |0%                   |
|White Male           |33%                  |
|White Female         |33%                  |
|Indian Male          |0%                   |
|Indian Female        |0%                   |

In 1995 it was 100% white.  The first African male joined in 1996.

Students:

Undergraduate

|Population Group     |2000                 |2005                 |
|African              |20%                  |62%                  |
|Coloured             |10%                  |12%                  |
|White                |70%                  |24%                  |
|Indian               |0%                   |2%                   |



Postgraduate

|Population Group     |2000                 |2005                 |
|African              |3%                   |38%                  |
|Coloured             |6%                   |14%                  |
|White                |91%                  |47%                  |
|Indian               |0%                   |1%                   |


Academic Assistants:

|Population Group     |2002                 |2005                 |
|African Male         |7%                   |38%                  |
|African Female       |0%                   |5%                   |
|Coloured Male        |0%                   |14%                  |
|Coloured Female      |7%                   |14%                  |
|White Male           |72%                  |10%                  |
|White Female         |14%                  |19%                  |
|Indian Male          |0%                   |0%                   |
|Indian Female        |0%                   |0%                   |

Section Military Development:

|Population Group     |2002                 |2005                 |
|African Male         |40%                  |40%                  |
|African Female       |20%                  |20%                  |
|Coloured Male        |20%                  |20%                  |
|Coloured Female      |0%                   |0%                   |
|White Male           |10%                  |10%                  |
|White Female         |10%                  |10%                  |
|Indian Male          |0%                   |0%                   |
|Indian Female        |0%                   |0%                   |

In 2000 the section was 100% white.

Unit Headquarters:

|Population Group     |2005                 |
|African Male         |20%                  |
|African Female       |0%                   |
|Coloured Male        |10%                  |
|Coloured Female      |20%                  |
|White Male           |20%                  |
|White Female         |30%                  |
|Indian Male          |0%                   |
|Indian Female        |0%                   |

|Category           |Population Group |Male          |Female       |
|Military Skills    |Indian           |1             |3            |
|Development System |                 |              |             |
|                   |African          |91            |23           |
|                   |Coloured         |9             |6            |
|                   |White            |18            |6            |
|                   |                 |              |             |
|Junior Pupil Pilots|Indian           |2             |0            |
|                   |African          |17            |4            |
|                   |Coloured         |4             |0            |
|                   |White            |6             |3            |
|                   |                 |              |             |
|Senior Pupil Pilots|Indian           |0             |0            |
|                   |African          |14            |0            |
|                   |Coloured         |0             |0            |
|                   |White            |3             |0            |
|1st Year           |                 |              |             |
|                   |Indian           |0             |0            |
|                   |African          |4             |0            |
|                   |Coloured         |0             |1            |
|                   |White            |0             |0            |
|                   |                 |              |             |
|2nd Year           |Indian           |0             |0            |
|                   |African          |22            |17           |
|                   |Coloured         |5             |4            |
|                   |White            |11            |3            |
|                   |                 |              |             |
|3rd Year           |Indian           |0             |0            |
|                   |African          |23            |7            |
|                   |Coloured         |9             |2            |
|                   |White            |11            |5            |
|                   |                 |              |             |
|BMil Honours       |Indian           |0             |0            |
|                   |African          |22            |3            |
|                   |Coloured         |6             |4            |
|                   |White            |14            |10           |
|                   |                 |              |             |
|MMil               |Indian           |0             |0            |
|                   |African          |2             |0            |
|                   |Coloured         |2             |0            |
|                   |White            |6             |4            |


Breakdown of Certificate and Degree Students:

Support Services Section:

|Population Group     |2005                 |
|African Male         |21%                  |
|African Female       |4%                   |
|Coloured Male        |41.5%                |
|Coloured Female      |11.5%                |
|White Male           |11%                  |
|White Female         |11%                  |
|Indian Male          |0%                   |
|Indian Female        |0%                   |


                       Proposed Structural Amendments

Current post vacancies:

Head Quarters                1
Faculty of Military Science       12
Centre for Military Studies       1
Section Military Development 4
Support Services             3

Additional posts needed:

Head Quarters                1
Section Military Development 6
Support Services             1

Posts needing to be upgraded:

Support Services             3 “.



