---
title: 'National Assembly - 13 October 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-10-13
---

THURSDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Acting Speaker, Ms G L Mahlangu-Nkabinde, took the Chair and requested
members to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Acting Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I give notice
that I shall move:

   That –


     a) the House debates the shocking number of children abducted,
        abused and murdered in South Africa, and necessary measures to be
        put in place to combat such crimes and better protect our children;
        and


     b) the ACDP commends the Ravensmead Police, the community forum
        and other NGOs in Cape Town who are embarking on a campaign at 17
        schools and 3 crèches, taking fingerprints and photographs of
        children to assist police and the public to respond quicker to
        reports of missing children.

Thank you.

Mr S B FARROW: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move
on behalf of the DA:

   That the House, in the light of this month being Transport Month, debates
   the dismal, ageing and grossly inefficient freight transport system in
   South Africa and its impact on the economy.



                  GRADE 12 SENIOR CERTIFICATE EXAMINATIONS


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Acting Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that as from last Monday, 10 October, Grade 12 pupils
        began writing their final and most important examinations, the 2005
        Senior Certificate;


   (2)      acknowledges the isolated challenges that occurred during
        examination times in previous years and therefore commends the
        Department of Education on the stringent measures it has
        implemented to address the problems;


   (3)      calls upon parents and educators to support the learners, among
        others, by continually ensuring the creation of conditions
        conducive to studying; and


   (4)      wishes all the 2005 matriculants well in their final
        examinations.


Agreed to.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Are there any further motions without notice. Mr
Gibson?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Acting Speaker . . .
[Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Can I finish, and then you can
continue?
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: No, the Acting Speaker has already seen
me, Chief Whip. Far be it from me to contradict her.




               CONDOLENCES TO PAKISTAN, INDIA AND AFGHANISTAN


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I hereby move without notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      expresses its sympathies to the people of Pakistan, India and
        Afghanistan following the devastating earthquake four days ago,
        which claimed an estimated 40 000 lives and destroyed
        infrastructure and, in places, whole villages in Kashmir; and


   (2)      thanks all those people, particularly those South Africans, who
        have gone to the aid of the communities suffering as a result of
        the earthquake and recognises that our common humanity demands that
        we all help when some of us suffer.


Agreed to.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, before I read
this motion, I would just like to address you on a technicality.
We have, by agreement amongst all the parties, decided on a motion without
notice on the peer review process, but the matter is being considered by
the House. We approach the presidium to arrange that the motion be read
after the debate, if that is in order with you.

The ACTING SPEAKER: The Table says that is in order, so that will be done.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you very much, Acting Speaker.

                     BEST WISHES TO MUSLIMS FOR RAMADAN


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes with the advent of the Islamic lunar month of fasting,
        called Ramadan, Muslims worldwide and in our country, South Africa,
        will abstain daily from partaking of food and drink from dawn to
        dusk;


   (2)      observes that such voluntary abstinence enhances both their
        spirituality and their empathy with the poor, hungry and destitute
        in society and the world over;


   (3)      expresses the hope that this holy month of Ramadan will
        encourage Muslims and humanity at large to redouble their efforts
        to fight poverty and to support and empower the vulnerable and the
        weak in society; and


   (4)      conveys its best wishes to all Muslims in the country and the
        world and wishes them well over the fasting period and a Ramadan
        Mubarak.
Agreed to.


                         BEST WISHES FOR YOM KIPPUR


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

    That the House –

      1) notes that Thursday, 13 October, is Yom Kippur for the Jewish
         people and that they are in a 24-hour fasting period that started
         on Wednesday and will last until sunset today; and


      2) wishes the Jewish community a peaceful Day of Atonement.

Agreed to.


                             AFRICAN NATIONS CUP


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I hereby move
without notice:

    That the House -

    (1)     notes that –


        (a)      Bafana Bafana have qualified for the fifth consecutive
              time for Africa’s prestigious soccer competition, the African
              Nation’s Cup; and


        (b)      five African teams, namely Angola, Côte D’Ivoire, Ghana,
              Togo and Tunisia, participating in the competition, will go
              on to represent the continent in the upcoming World Cup to be
              staged in Germany next year and that these countries carry
              Africa’s dream of winning the World Cup;


    (2)     recalls that four of the five teams, namely Angola, Côte
        D’Ivoire, Ghana and Togo, are taking part in the Soccer World Cup
        for the first time; and


    (3)     congratulates –


        (a)      Bafana Bafana on qualifying for the prestigious
              continental competition and wishes them well in the
              competition; and


           b) Angola, Côte D’Ivoire, Ghana, Togo and Tunisia on their
              achievement to represent Africa in Germany next year.


Agreed to.




                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1)




                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Acting Speaker, I move the
motion as it stands on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party as follows:

   That Rule 253(1) which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
   Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days
   have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for
   the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on the Repeal of
   Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Bill [B 25B –
   2005] (National Assembly – sec 76) today.


Agreed to.


                        AFRICAN PEER REVIEW MECHANISM


                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Acting
Speaker, hon members, I would wish to thank this House for the opportunity
to address you on the African Peer Review Mechanism and South Africa’s
implementation process. In the words of Kwame Nkrumah:


   Freedom is not something that one people can bestow on another as a gift.
   They claim it as their own and none can keep it from them.


This is the spirit I would wish to believe that the South African people
should have as we enter the peer review process.

My address today will explain what the Africa Peer Review Mechanism is
about and how we are going to implement it, what has already been done and
what plans we have for the process over the coming nine months. It will
also reflect on the importance of that and what opportunities it presents
us.

The African Peer Review Mechanism is important to all of us as a country,
not as parliamentarians, not as members of the executive or as government
officials, not as members of civil society or representatives of any
structures but as citizens of our country – as South Africans.

We have been working on the Peer Review Mechanism for some time now, and I
would like to share some experiences with you and indicate that my honest
conclusion is that it is a wonderful and inspiring mechanism, and it will
be a wonderful process for all of us to engage in as a country.

Like many things from Africa, it seems simple at first, but this is
misleading. As you come to understand it better, you will realise that it
is an apparent simplicity that marks great complexity and subtlety, that it
offers opportunities to each of us, no matter how we choose to define
ourselves or to structure our lives as members of South African society.

So, today I’ll be talking more about the surprising challenges and
opportunities the African Peer Review Mechanism presents to our young
democracy. I also look forward to debating it here today. I know it will
allow us to deepen our understanding of the Peer Review Mechanism. The
debate will also contribute to building a shared understanding of the
mechanism and how it should be implemented.

The African Peer Review Mechanism is a system introduced by the African
Union and its development programme, Nepad, for countries to improve their
governance systems. It’s a way of planning for the future and looking
forward whilst taking into account where we are today. It involves the
development of African approaches to solving Africa’s problems.

Participation by countries in the system is voluntary. Ghana, Rwanda, Kenya
and Mauritius are ahead of us in the system and we aim to learn from their
lessons and build on their experiences. A panel of eminent persons oversees
the implementation of the system throughout Africa and is supported in its
work by the Nepad APRM Secretariat. In the instance of South Africa, the
eminent person responsible for our country is Professor Adedeji. I’ll speak
more about that later.

The system has a number of stages. The development of our country self-
assessment report - and I want to emphasise “country” - it’s not
government, it’s a country self-assessment report and a programme of
action. This is based on a questionnaire that looks at four thematic areas:
democracy and political governance; economic governance and management;
corporate governance; and socioeconomic development.

Once we have developed the country self-assessment report and a programme
of action that will be submitted to the APRM Secretariat, a country review
team led by the panel member responsible for South Africa will visit us to
consult a wide range of stakeholders on the report.

The country review team writes a response to our report, and all the
reports are submitted to the APRM forum and later publicly released. The
country review team will allow for an engagement with their comments on the
report. Progress by countries in implementing the programmes of action is
reviewed in later years. The point of these activities is to encourage
African countries to plan a way forward for themselves and to implement
their plans so that they can achieve their long-term development goals.

South Africa’s APR process will be overseen by our African Peer Review
Mechanism Governing Council, which has ten members representing civil
society and five members representing government. The members of the
African Peer Review Council are as follows: Mr Bheki Sibiya from Business
Unity SA; Mr Looks Matoto from the Disabled People of South Africa; Ms
Zanele Twala from the South African non-governmental organisation, SANGOCO;
Dr Nomonde Mqhayi from the SA Youth Council; Ms Thabisile Msezane from the
SA Council of Churches; Mr Randal Howard representing Cosatu; Dr Mongane
Wally Serote from our Arts and Culture sector; Mr Master Mahlobongoane from
SANCO; Mrs Laura Kganyago from the National Women’s Coalition; Mr Moemedi
Kepadisa from NACTU; the Minister of Finance, Mr Trevor Manuel; the
Minister of Trade and Industry, Mr Mandisi Mpahlwa; the Minister of Justice
and Constitutional Development, Miss Bridget Mabandla, the Minister in the
Presidency, Dr Essop Pahad.

I have been honoured, and I am honoured, to be appointed as the country
focal point and also chair the governing council. This means I lead the
collective responsibility that the governing council has for leading South
Africa’s involvement in the Peer Review Mechanism process. [Applause.] I
take responsibility for the co-ordination thereof.

Over the next two months, South Africans will become familiar with two
African Peer Review Mechanism structures, a country support mission and a
country review team. The country support mission will be arriving early in
November to assess our state of readiness and to review our approach to the
African Peer Review Mechanism. It will engage with the road map that will
be presented by the governing council and will point to areas that we can
sharpen. This country support mission will also be available for any group
who may want to make a submission before them.

The country review team will visit us once we have submitted our country
self-assessment report and will meet with many stakeholders to assess the
report and the programme of action attached to that. That meeting will take
place early in 2006.

The country review team will engage with parliamentarians. It will
obviously engage with the governing council, communities and broad
institutions in civil society. It will ensure that it is an inclusive
process.

Professor Adebayo Adedeji, as I indicated, is an eminent Nigerian leader
and academic, and he will lead both these visits. I am sure the House will
participate in the programmes for these important events and I look forward
to its involvement.

The APRM is based on a country self-assessment report. I repeat this
because there are many who make the assumption that this process is a
government process. This process is one where there is an assessment of
civil society, an assessment of the private sector, of business, and an
assessment of government.

I would like to reflect briefly on self-assessment as an approach. Self-
assessment is increasingly recognised as a valuable technique to encourage
growth and development at all levels: individually, as a group or as a
country. The value of the approach is that it is not imposing and it
ensures the ownership of the outcomes, as well as commitment to whatever
resolution emerges.

The danger of self-assessment, however, broadly, is that it could open old
wounds without necessarily providing the means to cope with old pain or
grief that arises. In our case, I believe that the participatory broad-
based nature of our process will ensure that this does not happen.

I believe that as a country we are moving beyond the healing of the wounds
of the past to formulate a new growth path for ourselves. This involves
agreeing with a clear national vision for the future and a plan for getting
there. This is exactly what the APRM offers us - the opportunity to reap
benefits of a negotiated, dialogue-based plan for our future.

The APRM will also allow us to build a deep and wide reserve of stakeholder
capital. This will help us to bind our diverse society. And I strongly
believe that the APRM is a way for us to create a shared collective future
in which all South Africans have a stake. Let me just restate that: Not
only to build but also to deepen a shared collective future in which all
South Africans have a stake.

How will we approach the APRM? As regards implementing this exciting
initiative, I wish to stress that this country’s process will be undertaken
on a partnership basis. Our process will be based on the principle that it
should be participatory and inclusive in order that the whole country
benefits.

In any event, we have a rich history of social dialogue, a rich history of
social engagement. This is almost natural. Look at our izimbizo processes:
They do not exclude anyone. I want to stress that there is no intention or
plot for any one partner to dominate the exercise. Indeed, anyone who
thinks that it is either desirable or possible clearly does not understand
the mechanism or what it intends to do.

We will be rolling out the process over the next nine months with extensive
civil society involvement. This will mainly take place through provincial
processes that will include local structures such as ward committees, as
well as other local and community-based bodies.

Community development workers will also be deployed to undertake community
consultations, while a network-based partnership will be set up under the
leadership of the governing council. This network will allow us to mobilise
all kinds of research bodies, as well as those with expertise in public
participation.

All these activities will be supported by a staffed and resourced
secretariat that will have components dealing with research, communication
and public participation. Government is making a significant contribution
to its expenses, as well as making personnel and other resources available.

One of the items to be discussed at tomorrow’s inaugural meeting of the
governing council is what else should be done and how we mobilise resources
to make our additional plans possible. Our plans for the APRM have a number
of different elements, including the implementation of a high-profile,
large-scale communication strategy to support our public participation
activities.

These strategies will target South Africans from all walks of life and in
all corners of our land, calling for them to make submissions on the
governance issues of their choice. We aim not only to inform and educate
people about the process, but also to get them involved and to get them to
contribute.

We want this to become a massive countrywide social conversation, the likes
of which we can only imagine, and it is pertinent that it is the 50th
anniversary of the Freedom Charter when we do this APRM, because those of
us who appreciate that process will remember that in 1955 there was a call
for 10 000 volunteers to go to the different corners of our country and get
the responses of our people. Let the APRM process be as inclusive as that
process. Let it be as inclusive as our constitution-making process, let it
be as inclusive as the processes that South Africans should undertake to
make it what it should be.

Our communication and participation strategies will generate contributions
and submissions that will be drawn upon in a research programme. In
addition to public submissions, we will also be seeking more structured
participation from research bodies. I cannot discuss the details thereof at
this point, because our governing council will preside over these
proposals. However, members of this House, rest assured, we are planning
exactly the kind of inclusive participatory process that concerned and
involved South Africans can expect and should receive.

Members should also be aware that our work will be presented at the second
national consultative conference. This conference will be a great
opportunity to consolidate our process and finalise our reports and
programme of action.

We do have major issues and challenges. South Africa’s civil society is
diverse and a vibrant sector that spans many different kinds of
organisations and institutions, from charities and welfare bodies to
development structures, cultural groups and sporting clubs. One of the
challenges facing the APRM is ensuring that our civil society participation
draws on the sector’s full diversity and does not overstate the interests
of certain interest groups. We also need to work harder to ensure that the
press helps build up a constructive momentum and does not take the easy
route of focusing on the premature complaints of marginal lobby groups.

In conclusion, as chairperson of the governing council, I want to thank
Parliament for its participation in this process and its activities in this
regard. It is important for us to avoid a multiplicity of parallel
processes. We must ensure that the mechanisms for public participation are
clearly understood and do not seem to be contradictory. It is in that vein
that I want to thank Parliament for having started its process, a process
that will form and feed into the governing council process, as much as it
will be distinctly separate, being part of the legislative arm of our
broader governance structures.

We should ensure that all elements of South Africa’s APR process should
dovetail and integrate with each other and lead to the formulation of a
convincing, excellent report and programme of action - one that will
clearly reflect the engagement of everyone. All the submissions that will
come in will be brought together in a common country report. When the final
report is done that will also be tabled before Parliament in order to
engage with it. Let us ensure that we take forward the call that says, “The
people shall govern”, and let’s ensure that it is a process that reflects
umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu [you are a person because of other people]. Thank
you. [Applause.]


                   DEBATE ON AFRICAN PEER REVIEW MECHANISM


Mr M R BALOYI: Madam Acting Speaker and hon House, I salute you. South
Africa is one of the countries of the continent of Africa that has actively
participated to establish the African Union and consequently the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development with a vision to eradicate poverty and
place countries on a path of sustainable growth and development in the
international kraal of nations.

South Africa is a member state of the AU that is actively participating in
the African Peer Review Mechanism, which is an aspect of the Nepad process.
The APRM is a self-monitoring mechanism voluntarily acceded to by member
states with the aim of fostering the adoption of policies, standards and
practices that will lead to political stability, high economic growth,
sustainable development and accelerated regional and economic integration.

This debate today comes at a point in time when our country has moved steps
to take forward the practical implementation of the APRM. We are being
reviewed! As the Minister has already stated, we are putting ourselves
against a mirror with a view for us to look at ourselves as a nation and as
a country, and to ask ourselves as to how we are performing in the areas of
the promotion of democracy and good political governance; the promotion of
sound economic governance and management; the promotion of corporate
governance; as well as the promotion of socioeconomic development.

We are also putting ourselves against a mirror for the participating member
states of the AU so that they may be in a position to assess our
performance against the focus areas that I have just referred to in my
speech, that is the promotion of democracy and good political governance;
the promotion of sound economic governance and management; the promotion of
corporate governance; and the promotion of socioeconomic development.

As Parliament we acknowledge that our country is hard at work to make the
country’s first self-assessment against the APRM a successful project and
we want to pledge our support to that process and the role that the
stakeholders are playing, and we will continue to play until the whole
review process is concluded.

We will monitor the process as we discharge our duties of oversight and
accountability to ensure that it is in line with the rest of the continent,
for ourselves and the whole world to see that the ANC-led government leads
by example in upholding those standards, codes and practices that we set
ourselves as individual countries or as collective member countries of the
AU.

It is clear, regarding the programme of action that will be developed as
the assessment process continues and also as the country’s report is
submitted, that we have a duty as Parliament to ensure that such a
programme is implemented, hence our commitment to support the programme
right from the start. It is also a fitting moment for me to commit
Parliament to support you, hon Minister, in your appointment as the
country’s focal point and chairperson of the governing council to lead the
review process. [Applause.]

We know that this responsibility places upon you a challenge to be at the
centre of contestation of those different people with different views as to
who we are against the APRM. Of course, we have already started to hear
some people saying this and that about the process.

One of the serious challenges that all of us have to be ready to face is to
encourage active participation of civil society in the process of country
review that is done in terms of the directive and structures as it is
called for and it is supposed to be managed, as per the memorandum of
understanding for the APRM.

We want to add our voice as Parliament to say to all the people of South
Africa that the time is now that their voices are loudly heard, to share
their views in the assessment process by participating in the process, by
availing themselves to attend public hearings or make written submissions.

We have a duty as Parliament to adopt an approach that seeks to see
ourselves operating in a manner implied in the doctrine of the separation
of powers between the three organs of state, namely Parliament, the
executive and the judiciary. And accordingly we are going to play an active
role to facilitate a parliamentary programme for the review process without
compromising our oversight role.

We want to state that our active participation is in no way suggesting a
competition with the country’s assessment process as championed by the
government and other stakeholders. It is just a democratic principle
located in the doctrine of the separation of powers that Parliament also
has a role to play in dealing with these very important projects.

Accordingly, we have already established a joint co-ordinating committee
that will soon present a programme of action for the parliamentary process
and also in participating in this process we want to make the same call as
we did earlier that South Africans, as individuals and as members of
various formations, should be ready to make a contribution in this process.

Hi vurile khale hi ri Afrika Dzonga leswaku ku humelela ka Afrika ku ta va
kona loko hi rhangisa emahlweni timhaka ta ku rhula, ku hluvukisa ikhonomi,
hi ku antswisa vutomi bya vanhu hinkwavo.

Pfhumba ra hina ra Nepad, leri vuriwa Peer Review Mechanism, ri hi lerisa
lesawku hi tixopaxopa hi ri tiko. Ndzi rhandza ku vula ka ha ri sweswi
leswaku hi ri tiko ra Afrika Dzonga, hi mintlawa ya hina ya ku hambana, hi
hina hi faneleke hi hoxa xandla leswaku hi tixopaxopa ku ya hi pfhumba
leri. Hi ku tixopaxopa hi kota ku vona loko ku ri kona laha hi kayivelaka
kona hi kota ku lunghisa. Hi kota ku vona laha hi nga tiya ngopfu kona, hi
tiyisisa hi ya emahlweni leswaku ku humelela ka Afrika ku nga vi norho ku
va mhaka ya ntiyiso. Inkomu. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[We have said for a long time here in South Africa that the success of
Africa will only come into being when we put the issue of peace first, and
then economic development, which will improve the lives of all people.

The programme of Nepad called the Peer Review Mechanism instructs us to do
some soul searching as a country. I would like to say right now that as the
country of South Africa, with our different cultural groups, it is we who
are supposed to be contributing so that we can scrutinise ourselves
according to this programme. By scrutinising ourselves we will be able to
see the area where we still fall short, so that we can rectify this. We are
able to see where we are strong and we should hold on to it, so that the
success of Africa should not become a pipe dream but a reality. [I thank
you.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Acting Speaker, while the Minister is still here, I
want to thank the Table for successfully battling with the gremlins that
took my name off the screen. I wasn’t sure that I was going to speak, but
they did a magnificent job and got it back on.

Let me put it on record that the importance of South Africa’s review under
the African Peer Review Mechanism cannot be underestimated. South Africa is
rightly regarded as the architect of Nepad and as being the leading force
behind the establishment of the Peer Review Mechanism.

This means that we are under extra pressure to ensure that our peer review
process is beyond reproach. This fact was acknowledged by President Thabo
Mbeki, who at the recent APRM consultative conference stated that:


   It is natural that the rest of the continent will watch this process
   carefully. They have expectations of this country – South Africa - that
   they don’t have of other countries on the continent.

The APRM is in many ways the most important part of Nepad as it empowers
African countries to ensure that they meet their own commitment to good
governance, which is inherent in Nepad. This is a welcome shift from the
previous position of many African countries that put protection of
sovereignty above all other considerations to the detriment of the
protection of the fundamental principles of good governance.

As the peer review process is ultimately an assessment of the government’s
performance it is absolutely essential that government does not play the
role of judge and jury. This is underscored by the experience from other
African countries that have already undertaken the APRM process. While the
government of Rwanda, for example, claim to have consulted extensively with
civil society on its submission to the APRM, the process of evaluating
Rwanda’s police, economic and corporate governance systems in reality bore
a heavy stamp of Kigali. This generated, justifiably, a negative reaction
from Rwandan civil society and it ultimately undermined the credibility of
the Rwandan review process.

A far better model is the Ghanaian process, which was largely driven by
civil society. The Ghanaian report, which is yet to be published, was a
more balanced, honest and productive assessment of where the country stands
and how to correct the shortcomings. Perhaps the most valuable lesson from
the Ghanaian process is that it took significant pressure from civil
society to make this happen.

Thus it is heartening to see that the South African civil society has taken
such an active interest in South Africa’s APRM, for without this kind of
pressure there is a danger and temptation that South Africa could more
closely replicate the Rwandan rather than the Ghanaian experience.

In this regard, while the DA welcomed the inclusion of ten civil society
representatives on the 15-member governing council of the APRM, we have
also voiced concerns about the government’s management of the process so
far. It is very unfortunate that the APRM has not got off to a good start.

This consultative conference was announced at such very short notice that
it did not give interested parties sufficient time to prepare. The actual
details of the conference were not properly communicated; participants did
not know, for example, whether they were required to make actual inputs
into the review process and even how they were expected to make these
inputs.

Furthermore, the governing council has yet to give the explicit assurance
that the final report will not be drafted and edited solely by the
government. If this were to happen it would make a mockery of any effort to
make the review as inclusive as possible and it would undermine the
report’s credibility.

We are not alone in being concerned that the report could and should not
become a government whitewash document. A number of civil society
organisations have established a shadow review to draft a review in
parallel to the actual official submission of the APRM. Their decision to
do so stems from the fact that the organ that chose the civil society
groups to serve on the governing council is closely affiliated to and even
funded by the Department of Foreign Affairs. Therefore, despite civil
society representation on the governing council, the independence of those
groups represented from government is a bit questionable.

In order to put the process back on track and to restore public confidence
in the APRM the governing council must communicate very clearly the
timetable for the review, how stakeholders can make submissions and,
finally, give the assurance that it will not write and edit the final
report.

Africa and indeed the whole world are watching our review. We dare not fail
them by having anything but a review which lives up to the highest possible
standards. Last, but not least, we need to enhance all that the Nepad
espouses, not only for our sake, but also for Africa’s sake. Thank you very
much. Inkomu. [I thank you.] [Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Acting Speaker, in supporting South Africa’s stated country-
inclusive approach to the APRM process the Speaker and the Chairperson of
the NCOP are also to be congratulated on their wisdom in courageously and
constructively exhorting us all to hold up a mirror to ourselves and to
this House as we embark on South Africa’s participation in the APRM.

This really is real democracy in action. It is only right that Parliament
embarks on an entirely separate but parallel peer review process to that
being conducted by government. In doing so the Speaker of Parliament and
the Chairperson of the NCOP are correctly re-enforcing the separation of
powers as they are defined in the Constitution of the Republic between
ourselves and the executive.

We are accountable to the people of South Africa and our presiding officers
are reminding us that we are independent, that we have oversight over the
executive and that we must properly exercise this authority as we see fit.
The APRM is not a one size fits all package. The fact that parliaments in
other countries in Africa, that have far been reviewed, have to date chosen
not to do this is irrelevant. It is intended that as we examine ourselves
and the effectiveness of this Parliament we will robustly do so along with
civil society and all the individuals and organisations that wish to
participate.

Madam Speaker knows, as does the Chairperson of the NCOP, that we may not
like what we see from time to time when we peer closely into this mirror
and as we adjust the angle from full face to side down and even a glance
from behind. The fact that we are holding that mirror up with a steady hand
and that we are looking critically at ourselves, warts and all, is what is
right and what we all support.

This is how we can earn the respect of Africa and indeed our own self-
respect and integrity as members of Parliament. Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Hon Acting Speaker, it is clear that the APRM represents a
new chapter in Africa’s history. It signifies Africa taking control of its
own destiny by countries finally measuring themselves according to an
agreed-upon set of standards drawn up by the countries themselves. It is
the ID’s wish that the APRM will become the new measure by which countries
are judged rather than those imposed by outside institutions like the World
Bank and the IMF.

However, for this to happen it is important that the process be run as
transparently and inclusively as possible. Engagement with civil society on
this issue must be real and cannot be allowed to simply fall into the
category of ticking off a box on consultation.

Already there have been certain allegations from some sectors that this
process has not been as transparent and inclusive as they would have liked.
It is important that government and civil society find each other on the
APRM and that we don’t see another process characterised by acrimony on
both sides.

To the ID it is vital that this process succeeds in South Africa not only
for our own country, but also for the continent as a whole. We are willing
and ready to play our part in this endeavour and we are honoured that two
of our members have been chosen to serve on the parliamentary committees
considering different aspects of the process.

We will certainly afford this issue our greatest priority and we hope to
see an honest and frank approach towards South Africa’s challenges both in
the parliamentary committees and in the broader society debate. I thank
you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Acting Speaker, the ACDP believes the APRM can be used
as a tool to break the bonds of poverty that have for so long enslaved the
African continent. The initiative of the APRM creates a structure in which
the principles of democracy and good governance can flourish. The ACDP
fully supports this initiative.

The litmus test, however, lies in the ability of South Africans from all
spheres to honestly recognise the challenges, as well as develop political
will and social commitment to deal with them swiftly. For example, South
Africa recently experienced the growing frustration of its citizens at the
slow pace of delivery in many areas, resulting in a spate of protests
across the country. Underserviced communities can result in severe health
risks for hundreds of individuals, as was the case in Delmas recently with
the typhoid outbreak that should easily have been avoided.

Improvement on the entire African continent will begin with improvement in
individual countries through the policies ratified in their respective
parliaments. We must therefore adopt an attitude where we do not shy away
from engaging with fellow African countries that undermine the role of
Parliament and do not uphold the principles of democracy.

In conclusion, the ACDP is optimistic but would caution that the APRM must
not be seen as a sham or reduced to a popularity contest, but executed as a
means of genuinely improving the state of any nation committed to upholding
principles of democracy. I thank you.
[Time expired.]

Ms L M MASHIANE: Thank you, Madam Acting Speaker, Ministers and Deputy
Ministers present here, hon members, delegates and my fiancé up there and
comrades somewhere up there. [Applause.]

Ke dumela gore tumellano e re tsenang mo go yona jaaka naga ya go thlolwa
le go thlodisisiwa ka mokgwa wa African Peer Review Mechanism, re tsena mo
go yona ka dipelo tse di tletseng jaaka Maaforikaborwa. Seo re tshwanetse
go se dira mmogo re sa tlogele ope ko ntle.

Ke utlwa go kare motlotlegi Seremane o setse a na le mathata a gore go kare
batho ba bang ba ya go tlogelwa ko ntle. (Translation of Setswana
paragraphs follows.)

[I believe that as South Africans we have to participate wholeheartedly in
this signed agreement of reviewing the country by way of the African Peer
Review Mechanism. We have to work together, ensuring that no one is left
behind.

It seems as if the hon Seremane already has some problems regarding other
people who will not be included in this process.]

That is not what we are intending to do.

Seo re batlang go se dira ke gore mongwe le mongwe o tshwanetse gore a bane
le tetla le kgonego ya gore a kgone go itsi gore seo se tla diragalang ke
eng. [We want to ensure that everybody has the right and the opportunity to
be informed about what will happen.]

In agreeing to a country review South Africans therefore clearly
demonstrate their willingness and collective commitment to a fight against
poverty, corruption and underdevelopment. Equally important in the review
process is the space it provides for identifying gaps in our policies and
government structures, and affording us the opportunity to improve.
[Interjections.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: Order! Order! Hon Mashiane, please take your seat.

Hon members, there are too many meetings and too many hon members moving up
and down, and I don’t think that helps the House. If there is any business
that needs to be conducted that is not relevant to what we are dealing with
now, we would appeal that members do that in the privacy of their offices
so that we continue with business - very, very important business of our
country. I plead with you, and that includes the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party who is moving around greeting members of his caucus, that he should
please take his seat and be attentive.

Hon member, please resume your speech.

Ms L M MASHIANE: The Peer Review Mechanism as an extension of Nepad is a
serious attempt at house cleaning and further providing us with the
opportunity to assess our performance and capacity to deliver. The outcomes
provided by this mechanism would provide deeper and practical meaning to
the concept of African development.

However, for this process to be credible the people must take ownership. We
must make use of our structures on the ground to explain the intentions of
the review process in order to ensure that our people engage and understand
its strategic importance, and that its outcomes can be welcomed without
fear of punishment in order for people to gain confidence in the machinery
of government.

This review process must be about people; it must seek to change people’s
lives for the better. It is in this context that we should intensify the
process of mass mobilisation so that we empower people and strengthen the
efforts we are making in order to secure a better South Africa and a
prosperous continent.

The socioeconomic development component of the review process is concerned
with the promotion of sustainable development and issues around the
protection of people’s rights. We have a lot of interest in this area, not
only because they are rights enshrined in our Constitution, but also to
check whether government programmes have indeed afforded people these
rights and how far people have access to these services that stand to
improve their lives.

While we have comprehensive programmes of social security, programmes to
tackle rural poverty and food security, the review process must point us in
the right direction and tell us if we are on course or have diverted from
our policies.

While this process is the voluntary practice, it would, however, help all
countries to learn from each other and would help accelerate the pace of
development and in understanding our collective challenges.

This process is again a clear message that Africa is taking responsibility
for its development and its future. The review process is carried out with
the view that people are not equally liberated from the chains of poverty
and that governments are at different levels of development and therefore
need help in order to put in place the correct programmes with the
necessary capacity to deliver.

The initiative of country assessment is but one of the steps to tackle
Africa’s poverty. With the help of the review process, it is hoped that
Africa would have the potential to move closer towards sustainable
development, the outcome of which must create the conditions of economic
development and sound governance.

One of the good things about this process is the space it offers to
ordinary people to hold their elected representatives accountable to what
they promised to deliver and what they can now deliver. We all have a
collective responsibility to see this process succeed and we’re counting on
all state organs for their support and co-operation.

The government has laid the foundation for socioeconomic reforms. We have
programmes that deal with issues of economic distribution, for example, BEE
programmes that target women and the girl-child, HIV/Aids comprehensive
plans, programmes specifically targeting the rural poor, housing projects,
local economic development strategies, etc.

These and others are but some of the core programmes that the ANC-led
government has engineered in order to push back the frontiers of poverty.
We would be counting on Parliament to continue playing its oversight role
and engaging with the public and state structures in explaining the reasons
why it is important for South Africa to take part in this process, and what
this process means for ordinary people.

The Presidential imbizos, ward committees and citizens forums are but some
of the people’s organs of power that are central to our democratic order in
engaging the masses on what they want their government to do on their
behalf.

Our spheres of government have been strengthened by the Intergovernmental
Relations Act, which was established to create a framework of greater co-
operation and integration.

The government structures and programmes I have mentioned all communicate
one message: That the ANC-led government is serious about people’s
participation in the administration of government. These structures give
people the right to be active participants in the government they chose and
enjoy equal opportunities as espoused in the Freedom Charter, which remains
the fundamental point of departure in our efforts to create a caring
society.

The ANC supports this review mechanism. Thank you, Acting Speaker.
[Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Deputy Speaker, how do we solve Africa’s problems?

Die VF Plus glo die Afrika-portuuroorsigmeganisme is ‘n belangrike deel van
dié oplossing, en daarom steun die VF Plus hierdie plan en meganisme. [The
FF Plus believes that the African Peer Review Mechanism is an important
element of this solution and therefore the FF Plus supports this plan and
this mechanism.]

The APRM is a crucial instrument developed by Africans for Africans. The
successful and credible implementation of the process will largely
determine the credibility that African countries may regain in the eyes of
the critical world for the past few years.

This is a brave step for those countries that take part because they depart
from the previous African practice, according to which everything
unpleasant was categorised as internal affairs.

Die VF Plus gaan deelneem aan dié portuuroorsigproses. Dis egter belangrik
dat die proses billik en regverdig teenoor almal moet wees, ook teenoor
minderhede. As besluite deur meerderhede deurgeforseer gaan word, sal die
proses nie eerlik en billik wees nie, en uiteindelik ‘n klugspel word.

‘n Belangrike toets wanneer regerings internasionaal gemeet word, is hoe
hulle teenoor minderhede optree. Die onderdrukking van minderhede is een
van Afrika se ernstigste probleme. Die VF Plus is daarom van plan om dit ‘n
belangrike deel van die beoordeling te maak. Ek dank u. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The FF Plus will participate in this peer review process. But it is
important that this process should be equitable and fair towards everyone,
also towards minorities. If decisions are forced through by majorities the
process will not be fair and equitable and eventually it will become a
farce.

When governments are assessed internationally, an important yardstick is
their behaviour toward minorities. The oppression of minorities is one of
Africa’s most serious problems. The FF Plus therefore plans to make this an
important component of the assessment. Thank you.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Deputy Speaker and hon members, there is truth in the
words “Black man, you are on your own”. The establishment of the APRM is
meant to remove the dependency syndrome from the people on the African
continent. They should learn and accept to stand on their own.

To us, the UCDP, it is as apt as when we said rena le lona [we support
you], we meant that we have no one to look up to but ourselves. The same
can be said of Africa at this point in time. There is no doubt that there
are some doubting Thomases in the West and elsewhere, who have the nagging
feeling that the New Partnership for Africa’s Development is doomed to
fail, but we have to prove to them that people on this continent are not
made of less valuable dust than those on other continents.

The UCDP applauds and supports the heads of state and government on the
mother continent for having come up with an instrument that will pull up
the continent from the quagmire by its bootstraps. The APRM is a bold,
unique and pioneering measure that encourages African countries to analyse
and assess their own progress and performance in important areas, and then
develop their own indigenous responses as they see fit.

With the few human resources at our disposal in the UCDP we shall do our
utmost to serve, support and stimulate interest in the course of the APRM.
We surely have to realise that Africa is for Africans and all who live in
it. I thank you.

Mr N T GODI: Madam Acting Speaker, comrades and hon members, the PAC adds
its voice in support of the concept of African self-appraisal or self-
criticism through the APRM. We are proud that South Africa is one of the
pioneers, the trailblazers in this process. We congratulate countries that
have already undergone the process and encourage all AU members to become
part of this revolutionary process.

For the past 500 years others have sought to define us, set standards for
us, think for us, and even claim to know us better than we know ourselves.
This racist notion never should have been and the bold and nationalist
stance of the AU to seek to do things for ourselves, not at the behest or
prodding of others, is a step in consolidating African sovereignty and
dignity.

The PAC, however, wishes to caution that the evaluation of the four areas
of self-assessment should never be viewed through the tinted lenses of the
Washington Consensus, and that we need at all times to be guided by the
revolutionary principle of the massline in the first instance. And, also,
that we should not fall into the shallow gorge of the bourgeoisie with
their misleading overemphasis on the political superstructure to the total
oblivion of the economic base or relations of production.

The PAC would also like to believe that the APRM and all other processes of
the AU must not be seen as ends in themselves, but as pebbles preceding the
landslide towards the unification and integration of the continent
politically, economically and militarily - from Cape to Cairo, Morocco to
Madagascar – thus giving Africa a zone of manoeuvre and resistance to
external pressure and manipulation.

The PAC accordingly therefore calls on all our people and societal
formations to rally behind the process, participate enthusiastically, and
give it popular support. If the leaders of the continent continue on this
path of independent thought and action unwaveringly, we can confidently
borrow from Chairman Mao Ze Dong on his declaration of the People’s
Republic of China on 1 October 1949, and also say Africa has stood up, we
shall never be insulted again. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Acting Speaker, in support of this process,
Azapo understands that the APRM is a programme meant to be driven by the
masses and governments of Africa, a continental process that seeks to
encourage the people of Africa to adopt laws, policies and practices that
promote the establishment of democratic institutions in Africa.

We should therefore use this opportunity to advance our own democracy, as
well as critically examine our own practices and democratic institutions,
with a view to improve these when the need arises. In doing so we should
take into consideration the fact that we owe it to ourselves to improve the
conditions of our existence in our country and the African continent.

In one of Nkrumah’s books, “Africa Must Unite”, he states:

The resources of Africa can be used to the best advantage and the maximum
benefit to all only if they are set within an overall framework of a
continentally planned development. An overall economic plan, covering an
Africa united on a continental basis, would increase our total industrial
and economic power.

Azapo believes that when Africa shall have adopted democratic practices
that are aimed at eradicating poverty and promoting economic growth,
continental stability and sustainable development, Nkrumah’s dream will be
realisable. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D J SITHOLE: Acting Speaker, Ministers present here, the APRM is a
mutually agreed instrument for self-monitoring by participating member
states. This is the first instrument put in place by the African states to
evaluate and monitor the implementation of their policies.

This is historic because for many decades institutions like the IMF, the
World Bank and donor countries had the monopoly to evaluate our governments
and decide what course of action must be taken by those governments. It is
true that such evaluation resulted in untold misery on the continent, where
essential services were cut to advance the goals of the structural
adjustment programmes.

Many African states had no influence on the compilation of these reports,
even if they had differed with the outcome of the report. Nevertheless, the
donor countries decided what programme to fund and what programme not to
fund. Thus, their influence diminished in the process, despite the fact
that it was they who were being evaluated.

The primary purpose of the APRM, as stated by the speakers before me, is to
foster the adoption of appropriate laws, policies, standards and practices
that lead to political stability, high economic growth, sustainable
development and accelerate subregional and continental economic
integration. This will be achieved by African countries sharing experiences
and defining the best practices for themselves and their peers.

This is a process, not a once-off event, as other people want us to
believe. That when the report is issued, that is the end of the process.
Parliament has agreed to participate in the first four stages, as we think
they relate directly to the constitutional obligation of Parliament as an
oversight body.

Whilst we will participate in these stages, we are mindful of the
responsibility to perform oversight to ensure that the recommendations of
the report are implemented. There are many of us who complain about the
timeframes that are being given. It is true that the Minister has been
criticised for setting such timeframes, but this exposes one critical
problem, namely that those who live in such criticism have not informed
themselves sufficiently that, in fact, the Minister is only complying with
the requirements of the mechanism. The period is prescribed and therefore
it is important for us to comply and not seek to change the period to suit
our own desires.

We hear that certain sections of our civil society are concerned about the
report, as elaborated on by hon Seremane - the report of the country, and
that the government shall not edit the report. It is clear again from this
assertion that those who complain of such an editing possibility have not
made an effort to inform themselves and understand how the process will
unfold, how it will work.

The report is a country report; it’s not a government report. The
government did issue its own report, the ten-year review. And it went to
elections after that ten-year review, and the ANC, whilst evaluated by the
electorate, was given another mandate to govern, suggesting that the
electorate accepted its evaluation and accepted that it can continue to
govern.

The peer review process deals with the country report and therefore it goes
beyond political parties and the executive. It is the APRM panel that will
process and give the final report, not the Minister, not the country
governing council, nor the executive, and therefore, hon Seremane, those
who complain about the fact that the government possesses the possibility
to edit the report are actually incorrect.

Yes, the final report will be given to government for the government to be
able to respond to specific areas that are raised in the report, but when
the panel finalises the report it will attach the response of government in
the final report; they will not amend the report itself. They will attach
that response as an annexure to the final report of the government.
Therefore, I suggest that the civil society that sought to write a shadow
report should consider that and actually seek to inform themselves as to
how the process will be working.

The APRM provides the opportunity for the country to evaluate itself, and
therefore the civil society that we all speak about, and the civil society
that is so concerned, should also take this opportunity to evaluate itself
as to who they really represent, how they represent that constituency, and
how effectively they are representing that constituency, so that they,
themselves, will have the capacity to identify weaknesses and learn from
the process.

We trust that those organisations that have always proclaimed that they
represent ordinary men and women of this country will use this opportunity
to mobilise the masses to make a direct input in the process, as opposed to
them speaking for the masses. We must avoid presenting judgements as to how
the process should unfold and how processes have unfolded in other
countries.

Hon Seremane raised the fact that the Ghana option is and was the better
option. However, we must accept that the peer review process in itself is a
developing concept, and therefore we all contribute in shaping what will be
the best practice that will come out of the process. It is difficult and
dangerous for us to criticise other options that were adopted by other
countries when we, at the same time, proclaim to be learning together. We
shall continue to learn together and take on what we think is better, and
discard what we think is not correct. But, for us to argue that one process
is better than another, defeats the object of the exercise.

I want to draw attention to the fact that Parliament, whilst participating
in this process, has a critical role in the finalisation of this process.
It will be Parliament that will be responsible for oversight to ensure that
government does execute the recommendations as made by the panel, and
therefore Parliament and civil society shall join hands and work together
to ensure that the recommendations are implemented. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Hon Acting Speaker,
hon members, I want to reflect on the creativity and opportunities that are
there in the APRM process. And I’m sure all of us use cellphones outside of
this House and across the country - except hon Seremane. I don’t think he
knows how to use the cellphone message mechanism. But what I am raising on
creativity is the fact that regarding the Kenya process, young people used
SMSs in order to be able to overcome the question of time for contact, as
well as ensuring that they reached the far-flung sectors of the country.

In our situation, wireless technology is being used by young and old,
whether they are in edolobheni noma emaphandleni, in other words in towns
or in rural communities, whether in taxis or elsewhere. And I think hon
member Hendrickse today has just helped us regarding how to be creative
about sending a message to encourage people to talk around the APRM.

We’d like to have a situation wherein people speak in taxis. We’d like to
have a situation wherein people speak in pubs. We’d like people to speak in
churches, temples and mosques. We’d like people to speak about the APRM all
over. But we’d want them to be informed. In order to do that, there is a
need for them to have an understanding of what exactly this process is
about. And for them to have an understanding, we need to ensure that hon
members, like hon Seremane, go on a training course so that they can have a
better understanding of the APRM.

At no point in time had we suggested that this process would not be
participatory and inclusive. At no time had we suggested that there’d be
anyone left out. So for anybody to even entertain that there could be a
consideration by fringe elements to write a shadow report is actually about
not understanding the importance of representative and elected democracy in
this country. That is because of people who don’t choose to appreciate who
it is that is actually serving on the governing council. It shows that
there are elements that are suggesting that civil society, as constituted,
is problematic.

Now, maybe, having heard the question that probably because Foreign Affairs
pays the budget to the Ecosoc chapter of the AU and that who pays the piper
calls the tune, what does that tell us about those civil society structures
that get funding from all over? What does it tell us about how we perceive
the ability of constituencies and organisations to intervene robustly?

I have never had the sense that the constituencies that I have mentioned
have had any fear about their participation. So let’s not see this process
as a government process. Let’s look at the Peer Review Council and judge
the council on their credentials as they deliver on the work required.
After all, that’s why there is a parliamentary process because reports will
also come to Parliament, and Parliament will be able to engage the process.

It’s not about who’s being the judge and the jury at the same time. What
hon Seremane chose not to remember is that Dr Stals indicated that the
reason Ghana, amongst others, decided to place its peer review in four
independent institutions was due to the fact that it coincided with a
general election. The head of state of Ghana said that they did not want a
disruption of the process, hence they did not have a member of the
executive leading the process because if there had been a change in
government that would have disrupted the process. Let’s not be selective
about what we remember. It’s our responsibility to inform our constituency
about all aspects.

I want to thank hon members for their engagement in this debate this
afternoon, and I want to thank you for the issues that you have raised.
Indeed, as Minister of the Public Service, focal point in South Africa, and
Chair of the Peer Review Council, I will raise these matters and we will
consider the points that have been raised. But I don’t think we should
start out with fear that the peer review process is flawed. It is not
flawed. It is a necessary process that will engage everyone.

I think our responsibility is to ensure that South Africans are talking,
that South Africans talk about the peer review wherever they are. Use your
cellphones. Put good messages in them that will stimulate discussion,
because South Africans utilise their cellphones wherever they are.

Let’s speak in taxis, let’s speak at weddings, and let’s speak where we
come together because we are in dialogue. We are doing a self-assessment.
As has already been stated by other members, we are doing a self-assessment
through which we want to look at sustainable development in the area of the
economy, in the area of social development, in the area of corporate
governance, and in the area of politics and democracy. Be part of it.

Go out into your constituency and inform them about this; engage them. Be
with the people. Our strength will be the extent to which we use civic
structures and the extent to which we use communities. Our schoolchildren
must write and reflect on how they see the peer review. I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.


            AFRICAN PEER REVIEW MECHANISM PROCESS IN SOUTH AFRICA


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Acting Speaker, with leave, I move
without notice:


   That the House –

   (1)      notes that -


        (a)      the decision to establish the African Peer Review
              Mechanism (APRM) was taken at the founding conference of the
              African Union held in Durban in 2002; and


         (b)     South Africa will be the eighth country to be reviewed by
              the APRM;


   (2)      recognises that the mandate of the APRM is to ensure that the
        policies and practices of participating states conform to the
        agreed political, economic and corporate governance values, codes
        and standards contained in the Declaration on Democracy, Political,
        Economic and Corporate Governance;


   (3)      acknowledges that at a meeting at Gallagher Estate in Midrand,
        Gauteng, on Wednesday, 28 September 2005,
        representatives of the people of South Africa conducted
        deliberations on the APRM process in our country and that delegates
        from government, business, trade unions, academia, and the entire
        spectrum of civil society were present;


   (4)      believes that every review exercise carried out under the
        authority of the APRM must be technically competent, credible and
        free of political manipulation and that these stipulations together
        constitute the core guiding principles of the APRM;


   (5)      observes that Parliament has set up joint committees to inform
        and engage the public in the process of the APRM;


   (6)      congratulates the African Union and President Thabo Mbeki for
        ensuring that our country plays a progressive role in the
        reconstruction and development of the African continent; and


   (7)      wishes the African Peer Review Mechanism success in its work in
        our country.

Agreed to.


               ORDER OF PRECEDENCE: ORDER NO 6 AND ORDER NO 7


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Acting Speaker, I move:


   That precedence be given to Order No 6 and Order No 7 on the Order Paper.

Agreed to.

           ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION

The ACTING SPEAKER: The election of the members of the Judicial Service
Commission is done in terms of section 178(1)(h) of the Constitution. Six
of the members of the Judicial Service Commission are designated from among
the members of the NA. Section 178(1)(h) further determines that three of
those designated must be members of the opposition parties represented in
the Assembly.

With effect from 1 September 2005, Mr N P Nhleko of the ANC, who had been
elected to serve on the Judicial Service Commission, has resigned as member
of the NA. On 14 September 2005, Mr C V Burgess who had also been elected
by the House to serve on the Judicial Service Commission as an opposition
party representative left the ID and joined the ANC.

It is therefore necessary for the Assembly to designate one member from the
majority party, and one member from the opposition parties to replace Mr
Nhleko and Mr Burgess respectively.

We will first elect the candidate from the majority party. We have in our
possession the nomination of Mr J B Sibanyoni from the ANC. Are there any
further nominations from the majority party? None. Mr J B Sibanyoni is
accordingly designated as a member of the Judicial Service Commission.
[Applause.]

I will now take nominations for the candidates from the opposition parties.
Are there any nominations?

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Acting Speaker, I stand to nominate hon C P Mulder. Thank
you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I second that. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: Thank you for seconding the name, but I never asked for
you to second. [Laughter.] Dr C P Mulder is accordingly nominated and
elected to this position. [Applause.]

              ELECTION OF MEMBER TO THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

The ACTING SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to remind members that of five
representatives to the Pan African Parliament, three are nominated from the
majority party, and two from the opposition parties. On 8 September 2005,
Adv Madasa left the ACDP and joined the ANC. It is therefore necessary for
the Assembly to designate one member from the opposition parties to replace
Adv Madasa. Are there any nominations?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Acting Speaker, I would like to
nominate Mr W J Seremane. [Interjections.]

Mr N T GODI: Acting Speaker, it is my pleasure and honour to nominate
Comrade P J Nefolovhodwe.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Are there any further nominations? None. The candidates
from the opposition parties are, as follows: Mr W J Seremane, from the DA,
and Mr P J Nefolovhodwe from Azapo. I will put each nomination separately
to the House for decision. Members should vote for each candidate when the
name is put. The candidate with the largest number of votes will be elected
to the Pan African Parliament. The bells will be rung for 10 minutes to
alert members to the vote being taken.

Question put: That Mr W J Seremane be elected as a member of the Pan
African Parliament.


   AYES - 46: Bekker, H J; Bhengu , M J; Blanché, J P I; Botha, C-S;
   Camerer, S M; Chang, E S; Coetzee, R; Cupido, H B ; Davidson, I O;
   Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S
   B; Gibson, D H M; Groenewald, P J; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; King, R
   J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T D; Lowe, C M; Minnie, K J;
   Morgan, G R; Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Seaton, S A; Selfe, J; Seremane,
   W J; Sibuyana, M W; Smuts, M; Stephens, M; Swart, P; Swart, S N; Swathe,
   M M; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Vezi, T E; Vos, S
   C; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille, H; Zulu, N E.


   NOES - 201: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Balfour, B
   M N; Baloyi, M R; Batyi, F; Benjamin, J; Bici, J; Bogopane-Zulu, H I;
   Bonhomme, T J; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I;
   Cele, M A; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C;
   Dambuza, B N; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L;
   Doidge, G Q M; Du Toit, D C ; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Gaum, A
   H; Gcwabaza, N E; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Godi, N T; Gogotya, N J;
   Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Gore, V C; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M;
   Gumede, M M; Hendrickse, PAC; Holomisa, S P; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ;
   Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J;
   Kekana, C D; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khumalo, M S; Khunou, N P;
   Komphela, B M; Kota, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M K;
   Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Maake, J J; Mabandla, B S; Mabena, D
   C; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madella, A F; Madikiza, G T; Maduma , L D; Madumise,
   M M; Magau, K R; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed,
   F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Malahlela, M J; Maloyi, P D N;
   Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S; Martins, B A D; Maserumule,
   F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Masutha, T M;
   Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M
   J J ; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlose, M M; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M
   V; Mfundisi, IS; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A;
   Mnyandu, B J; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D;
   Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Moloto, K A; Montsitsi, S D;
   Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M; Morobi, D M; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Mshudulu,
   S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndzanga, R
   A; Nefolovhodwe, P J; Nel, A C; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D;
   Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngiba,
   B C; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A;
   Nkabinde, N C; Nkem-Abonta, E; Nogumla, R Z; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C;
   Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M
   D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G;
   Oosthuizen, G C; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A;
   Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H; Reid, L R
   R; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Schippers, J; Schoeman, E
   A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni,
   J B; Siboza, S ; Sigcau , Sylvia N; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sithole, D
   J; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
   M; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tobias, T V; Tsenoli, S L;
   Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Vadi, I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van der Heever,
   R P Z; Van Wyk, A; Wang, Y; Woods, G G; Yengeni, L L; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: It
would seem to me, from this count, that the majority party has voted,
whereas what we are doing is appointing a representative of the opposition.
I would suggest to you that we should revote and allow the opposition to
vote, and to choose their candidate. Otherwise, it is the ANC that is
choosing the opposition representative. [Interjections.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: Order, hon members. Let me just take that point that
was raised . . . [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY: I was going to help you quickly. But anyway
. . . [Interjections.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: I don’t need help. When I do I will shout for help. Hon
members, we all know that we are not going to play games here. It is the
House that elects. Members of the ANC are members of this House. They have
the right to elect anybody that they feel they would like to support. So,
that is not a point of order.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam, may I rise on a different point of
order?

The ACTING SPEAKER: On a different one? How many points of order are you
going to raise?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: This is the only one I am raising at the
moment, Madam. The candidate is supposed to represent the opposition. Now
Mr Seremane serves in a party that is the largest opposition party. The
other candidate who is being nominated serves in a party that is in the
government. Therefore it can’t possibly be an opposition party.

Azapo is represented in the government, and it is a governing party
together with the ANC. On that basis, I submit to you that there is only
one opposition candidate, and he should be declared elected. [Applause.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: Hon members, I am not even inviting you, Deputy Chief
Whip, to address me on this matter, because that is out of order. Mr
Gibson, I don’t know whether year in and year out you are going to be
raising the same things. Fortunately for me I was chairing when the first
five people were elected, and the same arguments that you are advancing
today, which were rejected then, can never be correct.

Mr R COETZEE: This is a farce!

The ACTING SPEAKER: Fortunately, all of us . . . [Interjections.]

Hon Gibson, as a member of this House, I would like to appeal to you, for
the last time, to allow the process of the House to be completed. If there
is anything flawed, I don’t know of Azapo being in government. I know that
there is a member of Azapo who is in Cabinet, but Azapo as a party is not
with the ANC in government. You know that, I don’t understand why you are
distorting that.

Mr R COETZEE: It’s pure semantics!

The ACTING SPEAKER: Well, it may sound like semantics, but I am not in the
process of being in an English lesson. I therefore rule both the points
that you were raising as out of order. I would like us to continue.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, I had
wanted to raise the issue that clearly the process is being abused, because
exactly the same points have been raised over and over. [Applause.] I think
you have already ruled on that.

The further point that I want to raise is that whilst we were dealing with
this matter, a member of the DA interjected to say that this is a farce.
[Interjections.]
Mr C M LOWE: It is a farce!

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Now we had raised the same
point of order the last time. I don’t think it can be parliamentary and in
order for a legitimate process of this House to be described as farcical.
It can’t be in order, and we ask that that be withdrawn.

The ACTING SPEAKER: I think, hon Lowe, you are mentioning it again as a
point of order is raised. I am going to ask you to please respect the
Chair. Irrespective of how you feel, we are going to conduct ourselves in
this House in a manner becoming of hon members. So, Mr Lowe, any
parliamentary process that we are engaged in being referred to as a farce,
is unparliamentary. I would like you to withdraw that.

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am terribly sorry. This is a farce and
there is nothing democratic happening here this afternoon. Government is
deciding for itself who the opposition’s representative will be. It is a
farce, and it’s actually worse than a farce. It is a slight on democracy. I
am not prepared to withdraw it.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Mr Lowe, I think you are insulting the House. You
continuously insult the . . . [Interjections.] You can applaud him for
insulting the House, which is what you are applauding. I am ruling against
what he is doing, because he is wasting our time, unnecessarily so.

There is a protocol governing the Pan-African Parliament. If this Assembly
was wrong in arriving at any decision, we will be found guilty for that. It
is not for you to come and call our processes as farcical, because you know
very well that it is not a farce. I would like to come back to that ruling,
Deputy Chief Whip, if you can allow us. Let us conclude what we are busy
dealing with.

We will get the copies of Hansard, but I heard Mr Lowe myself. But previous
to that, other people said it, and we will make a ruling, because I don’t
want us to be diverted. This House is engaged in a very important matter ,
and we are going to continue and conclude that, whether some people like it
or not. I now proceed.

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I address you on a point of order,
please? [Interjections.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: I beg your pardon?

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I address you on a point of order,
please? [Interjections.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: No. The point that I’m waiting for you to address me on
is that of withdrawing your words.
Mr C M LOWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s no need to check Hansard. I did
use the word “farce”. I called it a farce. It is also an insult to the
democratic process and an insult to my colleague, the hon Joe Seremane.
[Interjections.] I’m not prepared to withdraw, with respect, Madam Deputy
Speaker. I will not withdraw.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Hon member, am I making myself clear? Are you going to
withdraw?

Mr C M LOWE: No, with respect, I will not withdraw.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Will you please leave the Chamber.

Mr C M LOWE: I will. [Interjections.]

Mr C M Louwe, having disregarded the authority of the Chair, was ordered to
withdraw from the chamber for the remainder of the day’s sitting whereupon
the member withdrew.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Hon member, I can’t hear you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: That hon
member shouted it’s a farce. I would ask you to ask him to withdraw it –
he’s shouting it still. If he doesn’t, please get him to leave the Chamber.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Who is?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: He’s
shouting there. Ryan Coetzee, the hon Ryan Coetzee.
The ACTING SPEAKER: Will you please withdraw?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: And Mike
Waters as well, but I’ll leave him for now. [Interjections.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: Are you, Ryan Coetzee? Will you please take the
microphone and withdraw.

Mr R COETZEE: [Inaudible.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: You are not going to withdraw? Move out of the Chamber
then. Anybody who is associated with this – saying that this is a farce –
should move out. You are an hon member, will you please take the
microphone.

Mr M WATERS: Yes, Madam Acting Speaker?

The ACTING SPEAKER: You just shouted: “It is a farce. It remains a farce.”

Mr M WATERS: That’s a fact.

The ACTING SPEAKER: And I’m saying, withdraw, because it is not a farce.

Mr M WATERS: The ruling party has no right to determine the opposition
candidate . . . [Interjections.] . . . and it is a blatant farce. It’s like
the ruling party determining who the candidates are going to be in an
election for the opposition parties.

The ACTING SPEAKER: I don’t need a lecture! Hon member, I don’t need a
lecture! Are you going to withdraw, or move out of the Chamber?

Mr M WATERS: Certainly not.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Then move out of the Chamber. Move out of the Chamber,
please. [Interjections.]

Mr M WATERS, having disregarded the authority of the chair was ordered to
withdraw from the Chamber for the remainder of the day’s sitting. Whereupon
the member withdrew.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Mr Coetzee, you wanted to address me? [Interjections.]
Hon members, please! We are continuing with voting. We have a national
responsibility, and we want to continue doing what the nation expects us to
do. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: He’s
shouting still, “It’s a farce.”

The ACTING SPEAKER: I now put the question that ... Deputy Minister De
Lange, please! Otherwise you will join them outside. [Laughter.] Then you
can continue the debate outside.

Question put: That Mr P J Nefolovhodwe be elected as a member of the Pan
African Parliament.

   AYES - 201: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Balfour, B
   M N; Baloyi, M R; Batyi, F; Benjamin, J; Bici, J; Bogopane-Zulu, H I;
   Bonhomme, T J; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I;
   Cele, M A; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C;
   Dambuza, B N; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L;
   Doidge, G Q M; Du Toit, D C ; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Gaum, A
   H; Gcwabaza, N E; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Godi, N T; Gogotya, N J;
   Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Gore, V C; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M;
   Gumede, M M; Hendrickse, PAC; Holomisa, S P; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ;
   Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J;
   Kekana, C D; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khumalo, M S; Khunou, N P;
   Komphela, B M; Kota, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M K;
   Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Maake, J J; Mabandla, B S; Mabena, D
   C; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madella, A F; Madikiza, G T; Maduma , L D; Madumise,
   M M; Magau, K R; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed,
   F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Malahlela, M J; Maloyi, P D N;
   Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S; Martins, B A D; Maserumule,
   F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Masutha, T M;
   Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M
   J J ; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlose, M M; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M
   V; Mfundisi, IS; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A;
   Mnyandu, B J; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D;
   Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Moloto, K A; Montsitsi, S D;
   Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M; Morobi, D M; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Mshudulu,
   S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndzanga, R
   A; Nefolovhodwe, P J; Nel, A C; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D;
   Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngiba,
   B C; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A;
   Nkabinde, N C; Nkem-Abonta, E; Nogumla, R Z; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C;
   Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M
   D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G;
   Oosthuizen, G C; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A;
   Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H; Reid, L R
   R; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Schippers, J; Schoeman, E
   A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni,
   J B; Siboza, S ; Sigcau , Sylvia N; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sithole, D
   J; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
   M; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tobias, T V; Tsenoli, S L;
   Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Vadi, I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van der Heever,
   R P Z; Van Wyk, A; Wang, Y; Woods, G G; Yengeni, L L; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 39: Bekker, H J; Bhengu , M J; Blanché, J P I; Botha, C-S;
   Camerer, S M; Chang, E S; Coetzee, R; Cupido, H B ; Davidson, I O;
   Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S
   B; Gibson, D H M; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard,
   D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T D; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Rabie, P J;
   Seaton, S A; Selfe, J; Sibuyana, M W; Smuts, M; Stephens, M; Swart, P;
   Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Vezi, T E; Vos,
   S C; Weber, H; Zulu, N E.


   ABSTAIN - 1: Seremane, W J.


Mr P J Nefolovhodwe was accordingly elected as a member of the Pan-African
Parliament.


                             MEMBERS’ STATEMENTS


  ANC DEPUTY PRESIDENT’S COURT APPEARANCE AND APPEAL TO SUPPORTERS TO SHOW
                       RESPECT TOWARDS THE PRESIDENCY


                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr L J MODISENYANE (ANC): Madam Speaker, on Tuesday, 11 October 2005, the
ANC deputy president, Comrade Jacob Zuma, appeared in the Durban
magistrate’s court. The Constitution of South Africa, inspired by the
vision of the Freedom Charter, recognises the equality of all citizens
before the law.
This perspective of fundamental human rights recognises the presumption of
innocence until proven guilty. In his closing remarks at the ANC national
general council, President Mbeki noted that, and I quote:

   Correctly, the national general council has expressed its support for our
   deputy president during these trying and painful times. Once more, we
   have emphasised the point that it is an imperative of national justice
   that he should have an opportunity to defend himself against whatever
   accusations have been made against him. We are all united around these
   principled positions and join him in hoping that the judicial processes
   will not be delayed unnecessarily.


We welcome the support demonstrated by the leadership and masses of our
people when the deputy president appeared in the Durban magistrate’s court.
However, we condemn the opportunistic elements that abuse our democracy and
engage in acts of lawlessness, including disrespect for the Office of the
Presidency of the Republic. We urge our supporters to take the greatest
care not to act in any manner that compromises the image of both the deputy
president and the ANC. I thank you. [Applause.]


                    THE STATE OF SOUTH AFRICAN HOSPITALS


                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): Chairperson, since the DA released its five worst
hospitals report, I have received a flood of messages from patients across
the country who have commented that, surely the hospital they attend, is in
fact the worst in the country.

In light of this damning indictment on current health policies, which the
Minister of Health bizarrely claims to be amongst the best in the world, I
have been amazed at the health authorities’ response. Rather than admitting
to these failures and assuring South Africans that they will work to put
them right, they have attempted and failed, I might add, to discredit me
and the work that this party has done.

To add to this crisis, a damning report on the state of this country’s
ambulances has revealed outrageous neglect. One has to ask, as it is clear
that the health authorities are not working at resolving the health crisis
that we face: What on earth, in fact, are they doing? [Applause.]


   UNFINISHED BUSINESS IN AGENDA FOR RAISING STANDARD OF LIVING OF PEOPLE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Prince N E ZULU:(IFP): Chairperson, for some time now, Business Unity South
Africa, Busa, has been warning that there is unfinished business in the
national agenda of our country intended to raise the standard of living of
our people; improve the educational standard of the population, both young
and old; and elevate the health status of every citizen, from the cradle to
the grave.

Social indicators and the human development index don’t reflect kindly on
the greatest number of people in the second economy. In recent weeks, the
CEO of Busa highlighted two of the agenda issues, namely the imbalance
between the costs of implementing regulations and what we produce as gross
domestic product. He noted the gap between the real wages and the rate of
productivity and called for a review of our programmes because, should wage
rates outstrip productivity, employment is certain to stagnate.

If gold production has dropped to levels last seen in 1931, it is
everyone’s guess as to how much progress we are making in that regard. In
the months and years to come, the country will expect six per cent growth
in the economy to be a reality and not a mirage. We are sensing mixed
fortunes in the economy as the labour aristocrats continue to put pressure
on investment potential.

Efforts have been made to address unemployment and inequality, but your
brother and my sister in the bundu, who were unemployed six years ago are,
up to now, still unemployed.


              WORKING FOR PEACE IN THE CONTINENT AND THE WORLD


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B J MNYANDU (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government will continue in
its efforts to work for peace in the continent and the world in general.
Tuesday, 13 October 2005, will forever remain in the minds of many in
Liberia, in the region of West Africa and the continent in general, as a
day when Liberia said with one voice that they want peace.

Liberia indicated what the people of our continent are doing practically,
in keeping with the commitments Africa has made in the context of both the
African Union and Nepad. The ANC and the African continent at large
congratulate the people of Liberia on holding a successful process of
democratic elections. I thank you. [Applause.]


           STRATEGY TO ADDRESS ABDUCTION AND KIDNAPPING OF PEOPLE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): Chairperson, the UDM repeats its earlier call to the
Minister of Safety and Security for a co-ordinated strategy to address the
abduction and kidnapping of people, especially women and children. In
recent months, there has been a spate of such incidents, and the majority
of them have ended in tears for the families.

Clearly, what we are facing is an epidemic. What was once a rarity has now
become a crime that occurs with sickening regularity. As we have suggested
previously, the time has come for the establishment of specialised
antikidnap task teams within the SA Police Service, with at least one team
per province. These teams can consist of the best and brightest detectives
and forensic specialists.

Whenever a kidnapping or suspected abduction is reported, these teams can
be assembled to deal with the investigation. The purpose of such a system
would be to develop a core group of specialists in abduction, without
permanently depriving the SAPS of their services for other types of cases.
For such task teams to be successful, they need to be assembled and
deployed quickly, and have adequate resources at their disposal. I thank
you. [Applause.]


          ROLE OF NEW PARTIES IN STRENGTHENING MULTIPARTY DEMOCRACY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M MORKEL (PIM): Chairperson, we note that the floor-crossing period
has resulted in a smaller official opposition and the creation of new
parties represented here in the NA today. The Progressive Independent
Movement, PIM, congratulates the smaller parties on their efforts to
promote multiparty democracy and notes that because the governing party
already has a two-thirds majority, the contribution of opposition parties
to the solutions required to address challenges in the national interest
will be determined by the quality of their input, not how loudly they
scream or how pompously and arrogantly they execute their agenda.

The PIM also acknowledges that we speak on behalf of patriotic, progressive
and pragmatic South Africans who want to make their positive contribution
without being co-opted by either the ANC or the DA. As a party, we intend
to support the national agenda of promoting and affirming socioeconomic
transformation whilst reserving the right to differ on modalities to
achieve our patriotic, progressive and constitutional goals. I thank you.
[Applause.]


           CRIME AND THE NEED FOR EFFECTIVE POLICING IN ALL AREAS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms F BATYI (ID): Chairperson, today I want to focus on crime in our
communities that ranges from gangsterism, child abduction, rape, murder to
the operation of unlicensed shebeens. The business of shebeens has
consequences and repercussions for our communities such as Lavender Hill
and Sea Winds. In Sea Winds a drunk driver coming from an unlicensed
shebeen ran over six young boys innocently sitting on a pavement. Two of
those boys were killed.

Fellow members, I am sure that you will agree with me that incidents like
these can be avoided through better governance and administration. Why is
it that the police don’t permanently shut down these illegal stores? Why
must communities tolerate the operation of these establishments and witness
the deterioration of moral values in our society?

The state has an obligation to protect all people who live in this country.
We, as elected public representatives, must fight for effective and
efficient service provision, not only in affluent areas, but also in the
poorer communities such as Sea Winds and Lavender Hill. The divide between
the rich and the poor must be bridged and all should receive the same
quality of protection.

To conclude, the drop in the crime statistics as reported by the Department
of Safety and Security is all good and well, but we must remember that
statistics do not have a human face. Numbers cannot symbolise the emotional
suffering and frustration experienced by the disillusioned citizens of this
country. I thank you.


     WOMEN’S CONFERENCE ON EMPOWERMENT AND TRANSFORMATION IN THE SA NAVY


                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms A VAN WYK (ANC): Chairperson, on Monday, 10 October, women in the SA
Navy gathered to discuss issues of empowerment and transformation in the
force and in society in general. The women’s conference, the first in the
83 years of our navy’s existence, was held in Milnerton with the theme
“Celebrating the spirit of womanhood within you”.

The ANC commends the SA Navy on its effort to empower women by opening up
the debate on the role of women in the navy and on its efforts to close the
gap between the participation of women and men in policy formulation and
decision-making.

The three-day conference covered various themes, including health,
HIV/Aids, leadership, trust issues, networking, role modelling, unity, and
sharing women’s experiences within the military and in the corporate and
public sectors.

The ANC recognises the important work done by the Minister of Defence and
the SA Navy to establish a gender-sensitive navy, and we wish them very
well in their endeavours.


                      MISSING CHILDREN IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Acting Deputy Speaker, a week seldom goes by in South
Africa without newspapers displaying the face of yet another missing child.
More often than not the child is found murdered. In the light of this
crisis, the government’s conspicuous silence is shameful.

The DA proposes that the government take the following steps urgently:
using cellphone companies and radio stations to instantly transmit
information about missing children across the country; legislating for the
compulsory inclusion of fingerprints on birth certificates after the age of
one year, and including this information in a national database linked to
the SAPS; linking up with packaging manufacturers to have safety messages
printed on sweet bags and cool drink cans; and, following the example of
the US and Canada, declaring the 25th of May as National Missing Children’s
Day to serve as an annual reminder to renew our efforts to reunite missing
children with their families.


                    RACISM IN THE WESTERN CAPE JUDICIARY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE (Azapo): Chairperson, racism and racial remarks are
again rearing their ugly heads within the Western Cape judicial circle,
particularly the remarks directed at the office of Cape Judge President
Hlophe.

In a statement issued by the chairperson of the Black Lawyers Association
in the Western Cape, which statement appeared in the Cape Times of 11
October 2005, he had this to say:


   Attempts to undermine the office of Judge President John Hlophe were a
   serious threat to the judiciary’s integrity. In the history of the
   judiciary we cannot recall such vituperative reporting.


Azapo believes that the attacks on Judge Hlophe are indicative of a desire
by those who hitherto have been in charge of the judiciary to protect
vested interests that favoured the rich. Whilst Azapo is aware that changes
and transformation of the judiciary cannot happen overnight, we
nevertheless insist that this kind of resistance to transformation in the
Western Cape judiciary not be left unchallenged.

It is clear to Azapo that there is a deliberate campaign to discredit the
office of Cape Judge President Hlophe and to undermine efforts to appoint
black people as judges. To Azapo this matter cannot be left to continue.
Strong steps should be taken against those perpetrating these attacks. I
thank you. [Applause.]

                  HEALTH SERVICES AND THE CHALLENGES FACED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M M MADUMISE (ANC): Acting Deputy Speaker, the struggle to provide a
better life for all continues. This struggle encompasses the ANC
government’s consistent efforts to provide quality and affordable health
services.

The challenges facing our health services should not be used by the DA to
cloud the huge and meritorious success we have scored in providing a better
health care system to all. The DA is in a crisis – an irreversible crisis.
It will stop at nothing to cling on, especially after its dramatic losses
during the floor-crossing period.

The ANC is proud of the good work done by the staff that work daily in
hospitals and clinics to save the lives of our people. We are certain that
the health workers will not be demoralised by the hollow cries of those
like the DA ...[Interjections.] . . . yes, yes, yes - who do nothing
practical to address the challenges our country faces.

The ANC calls on all people, governments, business and civil society to
continue to unite in a people’s contract to strive progressively to improve
the quality of our health care system. I thank you. [Applause.]


                           HIGH NUMBER OF PROTESTS


                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr R JANKIELSOHN (DA): Chairperson, 5 085 legal and 881 illegal protests
took place in South Africa in the past financial year. The high number of
protests is indicative of countrywide dissatisfaction with the ANC’s
mismanagement of municipalities and its inability to achieve meaningful
service delivery.

The number of illegal protests, in particular, points to the fact that
communities are rising up in legitimate and spontaneous displays of anger
over the slow rate of service delivery. The often-violent nature of these
protests is underscored by the fact that 66 members of the SA Police
Service were injured during these protests.

It should not be forgotten that, oftentimes, vast amounts of police
resources have to be committed to policing such processes, which means that
these vital resources are diverted from the fight against crime. The people
of South Africa should not have to pay the price for the ANC’s inability to
govern effectively.

With the local government elections only months away, it is becoming
increasingly clear that the ANC will pay a political price at the polls for
its failure to deliver. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]


                      KING SHAKA AIRPORT AND DUBE PORT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Hon Acting Deputy Speaker, the IFP in the past
continually enquired about the status of the development and construction
of the King Shaka International Airport at La Mercy in KwaZulu-Natal and
the progress of planning regarding the Dube Port.

The IFP therefore wishes to place on record its appreciation to the
Minister for Public Enterprises who, in no uncertain terms, has given the
assurance that this airport is absolutely essential for the future
development of KwaZulu-Natal and South Africa, and that construction is to
be proceeded with expeditiously. We hope that it will be in commission in
time for the Soccer World Cup in 2010.

We further express our appreciation for the successful conclusion of the
negotiations in terms of which the shareholdings of Aeroporti di Roma in
the Airports Company of SA could be bought back by a South African entity,
being the Public Investment Corporation – the PIC. This takeover deal by
the PIC must have contributed, in no uncertain terms, to the bold statement
of Minister Erwin regarding the King Shaka International Airport at La
Mercy. We in the IFP support and endorse these actions. I thank you.


               SA-MALI TIMBUKTU MANUSCRIPTS PROJECT COMMENDED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Nkskz N D MBOMBO (ANC): Mgcinisihlalo, umbutho wesizwe i-ANC uyalixhasa
kwaye ulikhuthaza iphulo likarhulumente okhokelwa ngumbutho wesizwe,
ebambisene norhulumente waseMali, lokulondoloza imibhalo engaphaya kwewaka
leminyaka ubudala. Le mibhalo ibonakalisa ngokumhlophe inkcubeko kunye
nezifundo zemfundo ephakamileyo, ezifana nezibalo, izifundo ngeenkwenkwezi
kunye nezinye.

Kwimpelaveki egqithileyo uMongameli uThabo Mbeki ebenesidlo sokuqokelela
imali ngeenjongo zokukhusela eli lifa leAfrika. Siyababulela abantu kunye
noosomashishini abathe benza igalelo kule ngxowa-mali.

Le mibhalo ikhankanywe apha ngentla ibonakalisa ukuba iAfrika inendima
enkulu ethe yayidlala kuphuhliso lomntu ngokubanzi. IAfrika asiyondawo
yabantu abangqondo-bugqwirha, njengoko abanye abantu abakule Ndlu yoWiso-
mthetho befuna ukuba sikholelwe.

Umbutho wesizwe uhlaba ikhwelo kuma-Afrika ngokubanzi ukuba afake isandla
kweli galelo. Yeyele ma-Afrika, ifuna ukwanyulwa! Ndiyabulela. (Translation
of Xhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs N D MBOMBO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government supports and
encourages the project that is run by the South African government and the
government of Mali to protect the manuscripts that are more than 1 000
years old. These manuscripts contain items of culture, higher education in
mathematics, astrology etc.

Last week President Thabo Mbeki organised a fund-raising dinner and the
funds would be used to preserve this African Heritage. We express our
sincere gratitude to all who contributed towards the fund, including
businesspeople.

The above-mentioned manuscripts are proof of the fact that Africa played a
big role in the development of the individual in general. Africa is not
just a home for the evil-minded, as some members in this House would want
us to believe.

The ANC is making a call on Africa in general to support this project.
Africans must lend a helping hand. Thank you.]
MINISTER’S RESPONSES

   NATION’S COLLECTIVE GRIEF, SADNESS AND HORROR REGARDING CHILD RAPES AND
                                   MURDERS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I’m rising merely to
record my appreciation to the three women from the opposition benches who
spoke in regard to the issue of missing, killed and raped children. What
they said was an expression of our collective grief, sadness and horror at
this spectre in South Africa where our children are being murdered and
raped in this fashion.

They were speaking about an issue that, at this time, is uniting all of our
people behind an effort to try to find permanent ways to deal with the
matter. This issue also spoke to the fact that our people are making
suggestions, as they have done before, and are also involved physically and
personally in assisting the police to investigate these matters. I
therefore appreciate the fact that this is one issue around which all of us
are uniting in order to deal with it. Thank you.


   APPEAL FOR PROBLEMS IN HEALTH SYSTEM NOT TO BE BLOWN OUT OF PROPORTION


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, I’m
rising to respond to the matter that has been raised by hon member Kohler-
Barnard, the whole question of the state of hospitals in our country. What
I actually would like to bring to the fore is that, as reflected in the
City Press, when we deal with the challenges of service delivery we must
not deal with them as if they are a theatrical matter; we must deal with
them as a matter around which we take seriously our oversight role, and
then intervene in a manner that is constructive, proactive and supportive
of government initiatives that look at the whole issue of the hospital
revitalisation programme.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: [Inaudible.]

The ACTING DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order! Order, hon Minister! Could I
appeal to hon members to give one another a chance to be heard, please.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Absolutely!

The ACTING DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister sat very quietly, listening to you,
hon Kohler-Barnard, and I think we should accord her the same respect.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you,
Chairperson, for the protection. I think if we listened more, then we would
be able to understand what is required, going forward.

As government we have never, at any point, under-rated the challenges
confronting us as we try to improve hospital services and the health
system. We have never underestimated the fact that the minute there is
greater access to health for all, as is the case in this country, there
will be greater challenges on the health system.

We have also reflected repeatedly on the reality of staff shortages in the
health profession. The Minister of Health has, once again, expressed
commitment to ensuring that the hospital revitalisation process and
programme are deepened and sharpened. She has also reflected her concerns
regarding the system.

Let’s not be theatrical about it; let’s ensure that in our oversight we
pool together the initiatives required to resolve a very difficult problem.
But, let’s not see this as an opportunity for sensationalism, now that we
come together as a country and intervene to improve where there are
difficulties. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A H NEL: The DEPUTY WHIP OF THE CHIEF MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, on a point
of order, I know that the protection of the Rules extends, generally, only
to members of the House, but is it in order for an hon member to call the
editor of a newspaper such as City Press an idiot, just because he exposed
them?

The ACTING DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Mr Nel, I’ll come back to the point of
order, because the Deputy Minister was actually at the microphone.


      FURTHER APPEAL FOR DONATIONS FOR THE TIMBUKTU MANUSCRIPTS PROJECT


                            (Minister’s Response)

USEKELA-MPHATHISWA WEZOBUGCISA NENKCUBEKO: Sihlalo, ndiyabulela kwilungu
elibekekileyo uMama uMbombo. Kananjalo siyabulela naseluntwini,
koosomashishini nakuluntu lwenkolo yobuSlamsi oluthe lwafaka isandla kweli
galelo laseTimbuktu.

Ngaphambili ndikhe ndatsho kule ndlu ukuba inkcubeko yeAfrika ibikade
ingaziwa kodwa ikhona. Namhlanje, ngenxa yokuba uMongameli wethu ethe waya
eTimbuktu wayibona imibhalo ekhoyo phaya, uthe makangathi cwaka,
abonakalise ukuba nathi apha eAfrika sibhadlile, singabantu abanolwazi.

Kodwa ke ndiyafuna nokuhlaba ikhwelo kuluntu ngokubanzi ukuba luncedisane
norhulumente waseMali ukuze kulondolozwe laa mibhalo. Ewe, sinalo igalelo
esilenzileyo, kodwa kuse kuninzi ekulindeleke ukuba kwenziwe.

Sithetha nje imali esele iqokelelwe ingaphezu kwezigidi ezithathu zeerandi,
evele kuluntu lwenkolo yobuSlamsi. Kule nyanga izayo siza kuya kuphethula
isoyi apho kuza kwakhiwa khona iziko lolondolozo lwale mibhalo.

Ngoko ke eli phulo liyaqhuba. Sicela izandla kumntu wonke, ukuze
sincedisane noluntu lwaseMali ukuze kulondolozwe ulwazi lwethu apha
eAfrika. Enkosi. (Translation of Xhosa Minister’s response follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Chairperson, I am thankful to the
hon member known as mother Mbombo. At the same time we also thank the
community, the business owners as well as the community of the Islamic
faith who also contributed or donated to the Timbuktu Manuscripts Project.

Previously I did mention in this house that African culture was not well
known in practice. Today, because our President has visited Timbuktu and
has seen the writings or manuscripts in existence there, he has decided not
to keep silent, but to show that we here in Africa do reason and that we
are people with knowledge.

But I also want to make an appeal to the community at large to assist the
government of Mali in order to protect those writings or manuscripts. Yes,
we have made an input, but there is still a lot that needs to be done.

As we are speaking, an amount in excess of R3 billion has already been
raised, which has come from the community of the Islamic faith. Next month
we shall be going to this site where they will construct a building in
which these writings or manuscripts will be conserved as part of our
heritage.

Therefore this initiative shall proceed. We appeal for assistance from all
members of the community, so that we may assist the community of Mali in
order to keep and conserve our knowledge here in Africa. Thank you.]

The ACTING DEPUTY SPEAKER: On a point of order raised by Mr Nel, we’d like
to appeal to members of the House to moderate their language, especially
when it comes to mentioning the names of members of the public who are
unable to defend themselves in this House.


                            NATIONAL CREDIT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Acting Deputy Speaker, hon members, it
is indeed a pleasure to present the National Credit Bill to the House.

The promulgation of this Bill marks yet another milestone in the
government’s effort to build an economy that meets the needs of all South
Africans. The credit market that developed over the past decades is
inappropriate for the present economic and social context of South Africa.

It is a market that both reflects and reinforces the economic disparities
in our society. It is a market that is characterised by a lack of
transparency, limited competition, high cost of credit and limited consumer
protection. For these reasons, it is imperative that government takes
proactive steps to regulate this industry.

The National Credit Bill constitutes government’s efforts to regulate the
credit industry. It is the product of extensive research, widespread and
thorough consultation.

By replacing the current Usury Act, the Credit Agreements Act, and the
Usury Exemption Notice, the Bill will ensure a consistent approach to
interest rate regulation, minimise arbitrage and address circumvention. It
will apply to all credit transactions and to all credit providers.

However, any regulation of the credit market must recognise that there are
differences between, for example, a pawn transaction, a mortgage and a
credit card or overdraft facility. These differences relate primarily to
disclosure, the treatment of accounts and contracts.

The Bill provides for differential treatment to accommodate differences in
products and in costs associated with smaller transactions, but overall
will introduce a common regulatory scheme.

Specifically, the Bill sets out, firstly, to address the historical legacy
of systematic discrimination against the majority black population by
improving and increasing access to credit at reasonable rates from
reputable credit providers; secondly, to increase the availability of
alternative finance at reasonable costs for small enterprises and for
housing; thirdly, to make the credit market function more cost-effectively
and competitively by promoting a fair, competitive and sustainable credit
market; fourthly, to improve the understanding and knowledge of the market
by informing and educating consumers to enable them to make better choices
and to ensure that increased access to credit will not lead to over-
indebtedness; fifthly, to ensure protection for consumers and secure
redress for unacceptable practices; and sixthly, to ensure compliance with
regulatory requirements and provide for necessary co-operation between
national and provincial governments, industry consumers and protection
agencies to ensure a coherent and integrated regulatory framework.

During the public hearings conducted by the portfolio committee a great
number of submissions, especially those representing consumers, lauded the
emphasis in the Bill on the protection of consumer rights.

The National Credit Bill heralds a new era for consumers by entrenching the
following rights: the right to apply for credit, but not to receive credit;
protection against discrimination in credit granting; the right to reasons
for credit being refused; the right to information in plain and
understandable language; the right to receive documents; the right to
confidential treatment; the right to have information acquired, held and
reported by credit bureaus to meet national norms and standards and to have
records of debt adjustment expunged; the right to access information held
by credit bureaus and the National Credit Register; to be notified when
prescribed adverse information is reported; and to demand investigation of
disputed information and correction of erroneous information.

Furthermore, as a direct result of the discriminatory practices employed by
credit bureaus and the dysfunctional credit market many consumers were
effectively locked out of the credit market. As a result, a number of
community stakeholders called for the Bill to include a general amnesty for
blacklisted consumers. After careful consideration, it was decided to
provide for a data verification process and removal of certain types of
information from the consumer credit records currently held by credit
bureaus.

Thus the Bill determines that the Minister of Trade and Industry must
publish regulations prescribing the nature, timeframe, form and manner in
which consumer credit information held by credit bureaus must be reviewed,
verified or removed within a period of one year after the regulations are
promulgated. In addition, the Bill entitles consumers to one free copy of
their credit information records per year.

Regulations will only be published after consultation with the affected
stakeholders and due consideration of the predictive nature of certain
types of consumer credit information, and the socioeconomic impact on
consumers of the removal of such information. The regulator will therefore
play a vital role in ensuring enforcement and promotion of access to
redress.

The National Credit Regulator is established to ensure proper
implementation of the provisions of the Bill, for without the required
resources and mechanisms to enforce the provisions, the Bill will be
ineffective and redundant.

It will be structured and resourced to ensure delivery on the very strict
mandate as set out in the Bill. It will be required to register consumer
credit providers, to perform inspections and to generally monitor
compliance with the Bill.

The regulator will resolve complaints against credit providers, refer
matters to appropriate institutions, but most importantly proactively
investigate systemic market conduct problems and violations of consumer
rights.

This function is particularly important if one considers the fundamental
inequality between consumers and credit providers in the credit market, and
the inability of consumers, especially low-income consumers, to negotiate.
The regulator will further monitor the levels of access to credit and
report on this annually. In addition, the regulator will be tasked with
promoting consumer education and establishing a network of accredited debt
councillors.

The National Credit Regulator will be directed by a board consisting of
members appointed by the Ministers of Trade and Industry, Finance and
Social Development, as well as individuals with specific expertise in the
area of credit extension and consumer protection. It will be accountable to
Parliament through the Minister of Trade and Industry.

A consumer tribunal will also be established to adjudicate contraventions
of the Bill and to ensure quick and effective redress for consumers.
Members are to be appointed by the President. The tribunal will primarily
deal with administrative and disciplinary matters, as well as the
prohibited activities of registered or unregistered entities.

Tribunal decisions are subject to appeal or review by the High Court. The
role of the ordinary courts is confirmed in the Bill in that courts will
hear matters related to, among other things, the interpretation of law and
legal principles, the amendment or suspension of contracts, and the
sanctioning of offences.

The Bill encourages the utilisation of alternative dispute resolution prior
to going to court, which might be inaccessible, expensive and adversarial
in nature. In addition, debt counsellors will assist consumers to
reorganise their debts and work on a financial plan that would suit both
the consumer and his or her creditors. They will empower consumers by
providing financial debt and credit management skills.
Since national and provincial government have concurrent jurisdiction with
regard to consumer protection, co-operation and co-ordination between these
levels of government are crucial to the success of the Bill. The Bill
specifically provides for shared responsibility for education, dispute
resolution, registering of credit providers and inspections.

The fact that a wide range of stakeholders participated in the portfolio
committee’s public hearings and the general support expressed for the Bill
from across the board was heartening. It underlines the success of the
thorough and widespread consultation embarked upon by the department.

May I conclude by expressing my appreciation for the manner in which the
portfolio committee conducted the public hearings and deliberations on the
National Credit Bill. The in-depth probing of all the issues significantly
contributed to a well-considered and balanced piece of legislation. The
manner in which the Bill was interrogated, and ensuing debate between the
different arms of government, illustrated the level to which our democracy
has matured.

I would also like to thank the team from the DTI, including the technical
committee and the Micro Finance Regulatory Council, for their tireless
efforts over the past two years to produce such a comprehensive and well-
researched piece of legislation.

The Bill will undoubtedly facilitate the creation of a fair, balanced and
transparent credit market, which will in turn contribute towards a
transformed and adaptive economy, an economy that is characterised by a
higher level of economic growth that generates employment and reduces
levels of inequality. I commend this Bill to the House. Thank you very
much, Acting Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr B A D MARTINS: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, the National
Credit Bill gives expression to the ANC government’s will and conscious
effort to reform and regulate the credit industry. It does so by addressing
the historical legacy of systemic discrimination against the majority of
black people by, firstly, improving and increasing access to credit at
reasonable rates from reputable credit providers; secondly, increasing the
availability of alternative finance at reasonable cost for individuals and
small enterprises; and thirdly, promoting a fair, competitive and
sustainable credit market.

The ANC is of the view that the achievement of the broad objectives and
aims of the Bill, namely to promote and enhance consumer protection, to
control overindebtedness and reckless lending, and to promote competition
and transparency will make a major contribution towards improved access to
finance and to lowering the cost of finance, ultimately offering greater
opportunities for a better life for the least-paid workers and the poor in
particular, and for economically active citizens in general.

The National Credit Bill will replace the Usury Act, which presently
governs the operations of banks, the exemption notice to the Usury Act
under which microlenders presently function and the Credit Agreements Act,
which governs instalment sales.

During the public hearings held by the portfolio committee, stakeholders
and consumers pointed out that many credit providers used a legal
technicality to prevent consumers against whom they have obtained debt
judgments from having the judgments set aside, even when they had paid
their debt. As a result the consumers’ names remained on the so-called
blacklists of credit bureaus for five years, with the result that it made
it very difficult or impossible to access credit or open accounts. Chapter
4 of the Bill addresses this issue and other related issues adequately.

The Bill also addresses and defines overindebtedness and reckless credit.
It also gives protection to all borrowers, irrespective of the size of the
loan or the type of credit involved. The ANC supports the passage of the
Bill through Parliament. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M STEPHENS: Mr Chairman, this Bill essentially does what a responsible
government should have done years ago; protects the rights and interests of
its citizens against all who would abuse them. Adam Smith it was who
already recognised that one of the three basic functions of government in a
market economy is to protect every member of society from injustice or
oppression by another member.

Credit is an essential element of a market economy. Access to credit is
internationally recognised as essential in the development of the informal
sector and in the reduction of inequality. Its importance in providing
income opportunities for the poor is no longer open to debate.

My colleague, the hon Labuschagne, will deal in more detail with certain
aspects and provisions of the Bill that give the DA cause for concern, but
the DA supports this Bill, not because we believe it to be flawless – that
it is definitely not – and certainly not because we did not have serious
concerns about some of its provisions – we do, as will appear later – but
because it fundamentally promotes and protects the rights of individuals
and equality before the law.

In a credit grantor-debtor relationship there is no equality of power. The
scales are vertically tipped against the debtor, and only government
intervention can provide redress. The same applies to the gathering,
holding, use and especially the abuse of personal credit information.
During the public hearings there was ample evidence of such abuse, even
from credit grantors themselves.

Let it be said that the interests of some members of society can never be
allowed to take precedence and override the ordinary common-law rights of
others. The rights of individuals to fair treatment, due process of law and
to be heard in their own defence must be sacrosanct. Any civilised state
must vigilantly ensure that these rights are scrupulously observed at all
times.

The Bill is structured to regulate these matters in a manner that we trust
will result in a fair and equitable credit market, but it requires a
balancing act that will not always be easy to achieve. A balance must be
struck between the rights of individuals and the reasonable rights of firms
in the credit business. If the scales are tipped the other way, credit will
become harder to come by and more expensive as credit grantors perceive the
risk of lending to escalate.

Prospective debtors must also not be given the impression that they are now
at liberty to take advantage of the protective provisions in this Bill.
There must be a general realisation that people are not relieved of the
duty to treat debt responsibly. People will get into trouble if they do not
make full disclosure of their financial situation when credit is applied
for. They will not be getting debt relief. All debts have to be paid and
paid timeously. These laws are not changed.

The National Credit Regulator will play a pivotal role in the success of
this endeavour. They will have to be seen to be fair and just in their
administration. They will need to be fair and just to all parties so that
the credit industry is strengthened by their actions rather than weakened.

Although the extension of reckless credit must cease, the provisions must
not be implemented in a manner that inhibits lenders to grant credit where
credit is due. The DA believes in strong individuals, and they can only be
strong if their rights are protected, if they are allowed to compete on a
level playing field and if their access to the credit market is not
subverted by overregulation.

The DA will observe the performance of the NCR closely, we shall monitor
the outcomes of this legislation carefully and we shall expect from all
role-players the highest integrity and devotion to the stated principles in
order to achieve the laudable aims of this legislation. I thank you.

Prof E S CHANG: Chairperson, Minister and chairperson of the committee, all
hon members, after months of hard work and listening to various
submissions, the Bill has finally reached its end. It has been a tough
process. Submissions ranged from the banking industries, life assurance
companies to AMC Cookware.

The IFP fully supports the review of the current credit legislation and
concurs with all its objectives and claims. We believe it is time for an
overhaul of the current system - too many people are living on debt. Take,
for example, pension paypoints: Loan sharks are often waiting for their
payback, leaving very little for the poor. The poor cannot be left out on a
limb.

The positives of the Bill include the protection of consumers, the addition
of debt counsellors, ending reckless debt and encouraging responsible
borrowing. However, despite the good nature of the Bill there are a number
of concerns. Let me by begin by citing one example: A customer buys a motor
vehicle and decides within five days to end the agreement and to return the
car. What happens? Immediately, the car, even if it was brand-new, becomes
preowned. The car price depreciates. Who will bear the brunt of this?

Sure enough, we need consumer protection, and we need consumer rights and
education, but what about the volume of cases? The magistrates’ courts are
already so overloaded.

While the Bill encourages responsible borrowing, we support the fact that
we need to correct the imbalances in the negotiation power between
consumers and credit providers. The Bill does not address how consumer
rights will be dealt with. The IFP is also concerned about the
retrospective application of the Bill. What happens to pre-existing
agreements?

Contracts need to be simple. Most of the time consumers simply sign for
their purchases without reading the fine print. Every day consumers are
buying clothes, not even knowing they are entering into a credit agreement.
Therefore these agreements must be in English and another official
language, with full disclosure of terms and conditions.

Another issue is that of credit reports. While we welcome this, the truth
is that there are 18 million active credit consumers. Who will bear the
cost of these reports? Inevitably, it comes back to the consumer. The
protection of the consumer is paramount and we should ensure that
consumers, who are often vulnerable, are not abused by the financial
industry.

The IFP welcomes this legislation, dear hon Minister, but let us not forget
the success of the Bill will be in helping eliminate credit abuse and
reckless credit. The IFP will continuously champion the cause of the poor.
Thank you very much.

Ms D M RAMODIBE: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon Deputy Ministers, hon
members and the House at large, the ANC supports the Bill.
An HON MEMBER: Including Nkem?

An HON MEMBER: Yes, Nkem also.

The ACTING DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Ms D M RAMODIBE: The National Credit Bill protects both the credit provider
and the consumer from abuse. When we talk about credit, we are referring to
housing loans and mortgages, overdrafts, personal loans, instalment sales,
microloans, leases, credit cards and retail credit. Institutions like
banks, microlenders and other bank financial intermediaries provide all
this credit.

The enormous exploitation and abuse by some credit providers will be put to
an end by the regulation of this industry, which is in line with the
national transformation agenda, as we continue to change and improve the
lives of the people.

Section 60(1) of the Bill says: “Every adult, natural person and every
juristic person or association of persons has a right to apply to a credit
provider for credit”, but at the same time, a credit provider has a right
to refuse to grant credit on reasonable grounds.

Section 61(1) says that a credit provider must not unfairly discriminate
against any natural or juristic person or association on one or more
grounds set out in section 9(3) of the Constitution, or Chapter 2 of the
Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act.

Many of our historically disadvantaged people have been denied access to
credit, especially in housing, and these are mostly women. A consumer has a
right to reasons as to why credit is being refused, and this must be done
in writing. The Bill allows the consumer to receive any required document
in terms of the Act, in an official language that the consumer can read or
understand.

It is also the right of the consumer to receive every required document
delivered, in terms of the Act in the manner prescribed. A credit provider
must not discriminate against a consumer directly or indirectly, in
response to a consumer who exercises, assents to or seeks to uphold any
right set out in this Act.

Mona re bua ka hore, ha moreki a lwanela ditokelo tsa hae, ba fanang ka
mekitlane ba seke ba mo hanela ho fumana mokitlane, hobane ha motho a se a
tseba ditokelo tsa hae mme a kgona ho ipuella, ho na le hona hore ba fanang
ka mekitlane ba ka hana ho mo fa mokitlane. (Translation of Sesotho
paragraph follows.)

[We mean that when a consumer fights for his rights, the creditors should
not deny him credit, because he now knows his rights and he can talk for
himself. There is a possibility that the creditors could deny him credit.]
There is another area that has been viewed, which we already viewed as a
monster, and that is the credit bureaus. The credit bureaus used to
exchange information with the credit provider. In turn, the credit bureaus
stored the information, for profit motives, without even verifying it.
Here, again, the poor consumers are not told or informed that they are
blacklisted. The only time that the consumer becomes aware of this is when
trying to access credit.

The manner in which this is handled is that you are told that you do not
qualify, without any reasons being provided. During this process, the poor
consumer does not know where to go and who to challenge. Sometimes, because
of adverse information, the poor consumer gets prejudiced.

What was said by the credit bureaus during our interaction was that they
have to deal with thousands of pieces of information and it is therefore
not possible for them to verify information. The consumer in that instance
must bear the consequences.

We also welcome the fact that the consumer whose debts have been rearranged
may apply to a debt counsellor for a clearance certificate relating to that
debt rearrangement. The Bill provides that upon receiving a copy of a court
order rescinding any judgment a credit bureau must expunge from its records
all information relating to that judgment.

An HON MEMBER: Does Nkem agree with that?
Ms D M RAMODIBE: You are an empty tin, that is why you are making noise.

It is vital that as we seek to empower our previously disadvantaged people,
in particular women who are a majority in this country, we also try and
work on the mind-set of the credit providers. Women can also access the
Apex Fund, which is the SA Microfinance Apex Fund, a company established by
government to address poverty and unemployment. It provides for loans of up
to R10 000 to households and micro enterprises that depend on their
business enterprises for their living.

Many households are headed by women and earn less than R1 500, which makes
them ineligible for the poverty alleviation fund. Microcredit for micro
enterprise development is one of the products which will assist these
women. Women own the majority of the micro enterprises. It is only through
emancipating women that a nation can be empowered. No nation can be
empowered as long as women are not empowered. With this Act in place women
will even find credit more accessible.

Consumer education will be very important in this instance to educate women
on their rights so that they are competent in running their household cash
flow. Their knowledge will assist them to dispute resolutions as well.

In terms of section 73(1) which deals with verification, review and removal
of consumer credit information, the Minister must within a period of six
months after the effective date prescribe the nature of timeframes, form
and manner in which consumer credit information held by the credit bureaus
must be reviewed, verified, corrected or removed; the timeframe and
schedule for the exercise by consumers of their rights within a period of
one year after the negotiations have been promulgated.

When prescribing the Minister must consider, amongst other things, the
predictive nature of such information and the socioeconomic impact on the
consumer of the removal of such information and engage in consultation with
affected stakeholders. Any regulations to be made in terms of this section
must be submitted to the relevant parliamentary committee for the necessary
consultation prior to their promulgation.

In terms of section 74(1) of the Bill a credit provider is not allowed to
automatically make an offer to enter into a credit agreement with a person.
[Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr J BICI: Chairperson, hon members, the National Credit Bill is more than
a breath of fresh air for the consumer. Indeed, it should be an
irresistible force before which the exploiters will not be able to stand.
The number of consumers who have fallen prey to exploitation, unwarranted
and malicious blacklisting and financial ruin due to the practices
prevalent in the credit industry is staggering.

Importantly, the Bill does not merely provide a regulatory framework but
also provides two regulatory institutions, which will continuously ensure
the operation of the industry in the interests of the stakeholders. These
are the National Credit Regulator and National Consumer Tribunal.

The Bill also defines the fundamental rights of consumers in the credit
market - a step, which has been long overdue. It will provide consumers
with a benchmark of what treatment they are entitled to. The Bill further
defines and outlaws some of the worst abuses of credit agreements and
marketing - another step, which has also been long overdue. The UDM
supports the Bill. Thank you. [Time Expired.] [Applause.]

Mr V C GORE: Acting Deputy Speaker, the ID is fully in support of the
government’s initiatives to build an economy that meets the needs of all of
its economic citizens - all of its people and all of the enterprises. In
order for this to be done it is essential that the credit industry - a R362
billion industry - must be regulated and, more importantly, must be
transparent to ensure that consumer abuse of all sorts is minimised in the
short term and eliminated in the long term. All possible measures must be
put in place to ensure that the poor in our country will be positively
affected by this Bill.

Those disadvantaged most, such as those living in rural areas and women,
must by all means not be subjected to any regulations that could lead them
into a debt trap. It is therefore imperative that the public’s comments on
the Bill, especially from a human rights point of view, are taken very
seriously, specifically with regard to the reckless granting of credit. In
addition, amnesty must be granted to blacklisted people to ensure that they
are able to climb out of their levels of poverty and become contributing
members to our South African economy.

Civil society has made substantial inputs into this Bill but doubt looms as
to whether these inputs have been taken as seriously as they should have
been. The ID would therefore support any further consultation with the
public with regard to the implementation of this Act. Thank you, Chair.
[Time expired.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Acting Deputy Speaker, the National Credit Bill heralds the
start of a whole new era for the citizens of South Africa. Our
dysfunctional credit system has led to generations of South Africans living
in debt for most of their lives. The ACDP welcomes the fact that the
relationship between the consumer and the credit provider is now a
regulated relationship. This will put an end to exorbitant interest rates
and other exploitative practices used by credit providers.

The ACDP favours a cash-orientated society that believes in regular monthly
savings. However, with the poorest of our people basically living from hand
to mouth saving is impossible and credit becomes one way of raising
standards of living. The sad part of this scenario is that low-income
earners not only struggle to obtain credit, but also are charged unusually
high interest rates once credit has been obtained.

The National Credit Bill will make sure that all South Africans across all
income spectrums will be treated in the same manner. It further provides
for counsellors who will educate our people so that they do not become easy
prey to unscrupulous credit providers. Financial counselling will pave the
way for a culture of saving to be entrenched among citizens so that our
people are no longer trapped in this horrible cycle of debt. The National
Credit Bill could not have come at a better time and the ACDP supports this
Bill. Thank you.

Mrs F MAHOMED: I begin with a prayer: In the name of God most gracious,
most merciful. Acting Deputy Speaker, Minister, Deputy Minister, colleagues
and friends, our young democracy has seen substantial economic growth,
which has, once again, been benefited by the existing big white
conglomerates and monopolies and has failed to include the poorest of the
poor to participate in the mainstream economy.

Since 1994 we have seen the emergence of the bourgeoisie black elite and
very few women are involved in mega business, but the challenge still
remains - that is to include the majority of our people in our
developmental agenda. Access to finance is fundamental to allow the masses
of our people to engage in entrepreneurial activity and the acquisition of
a strong asset base. Deliberate social engineering of the poorest of the
poor needs to be done so that we are able to enter into the mainstream
economy without discrimination or prejudice.

The National Credit Bill is a key piece of legislation, with its regulatory
framework, to address the sustainability of the developmental microfinance
organisations. To have equitable access to information or finance we need
to have a fundamental paradigm shift from the legacy of apartheid and of
expropriation of land and assets to the challenge of overcoming the two
economy divide, which now requires a deliberate intervention of pumping
vast amounts of resources into the second economy.

If we make constructive strides to enable the financial sector to provide
access to finance and regulatory credit for the poor, we will see
significant changes in the economy and in the financial landscape of our
country and we will move towards the goal of equitable redistribution of
wealth. Economic growth and job creation will be stimulated and small
business development and access to housing and finance will generate new
cycles of accumulation and contribute to higher levels of effective demand.
In a capitalistic society like ours almost all South Africans function on a
day-to-day basis on credit. I am quite sure that many of us sitting here
have a bond and many of us have a car on hire purchase, and we have bought
some furniture on credit. Yes, we also have flashed those flashy credit
cards to feed our resourceful appetites to further indulge in more and more
debt.

Yes, indeed, whether we like it or not, credit is very much part of our
lives. The question is: How do we ensure that we embrace a moral high
ground in terms of honouring a commitment of servicing a debt?

Responsible acquisition of credit is paramount to effect the developmental
goal of any individual, company, conglomerate or the nation. The question
one needs to ask is: Do we understand the fine print of a
contract/agreement of a debt? We also need to ask: Do we have a clear
understanding of the principal debt, of the asset or goods and services or
the car that we buy? And then also we must be able to calculate the amounts
of fixed or variable interest accrued for the period of the loan of credit
acquired. Another fundamental question is: Do we have the capacity and the
ability, and the good will and commitment to pay back the debt? In order to
do that we need to ask ourselves: Are we creditworthy?

The National Credit Bill is long overdue and is a very important piece of
legislation. It provides a legislative reform so that the poor and the
disenfranchised people of our country who were previously marginalised and
ghettoised in confined special compartments will now have some sort of
leeway to access finance. It will also ensure that they have improved
protection for consumers so that there is increased opportunity for asset
accumulation for previously disadvantaged South Africans.

It allows for improved standards and easy access to consumer information
and also aspires to promote black economic empowerment and ownership within
the consumer credit industry. It also attempts to regulate negative effects
of irresponsible marketing of credit.

We all know that unscrupulous business people inundate consumers with
tempting offers of goods and services often not fully explaining the entire
contractual obligation of the consumer. We see this every day via
telemarketing, media and e-mail marketing. Consequently, the person becomes
heavily indebted unfairly and is unable to meet any of the repayments. We
see this marketing every day where consumers are bombarded with tons of
letters of pre-approved loans and credit facilities. This is when poor and
desperate people become vulnerable. They end up caught up in the debt trap
with severe repercussions.

Another instance is an example of a consumer who is misinformed about the
purchase of a vehicle, which is advertised either in print media or on
television. You know, I think, many of us have seen this. It’s the low
premium price per a repayment of a car/vehicle and the advert does not say
anything about the residual value. Sometimes the residual value of that
motorcar is 45%, which is effectively the amount that needs to be paid by
the consumer. All this is due to the lack of clear information and this
Bill addresses that adequately so that such abuse does not take place.
Fortunately, this Bill provides a framework for lawful credit agreements
and further clarifies the disclosure form and the effect of credit
agreements.

Since 1994 there has been increasing income flows of previously
disadvantaged South Africans. Only a few have entered the bourgeois market.
The majority of the poor consumers are still denied credit from some of the
mainstream credit providers, which is really sad. Thus the only finance
that is available is microfinance and retail consumer finance. There are,
however, noticeable shortcomings in the products that are available and
increasing concern about the cost of finance, and the indications of the
over-indebtedness that becomes evident.

Another dangerous and erroneous system is information sharing by companies
and institutions that collude with each other. They share the consumers’
records and other credit providers do it by copying and exchanging notes.
And in this case the consumer suffers because this information which is not
updated and it could be stale and the account may have been settled, has
adverse negative effects on the consumer.
I have chosen to highlight the provisions of the Bill in depth, because
they influence the poorest of the poor in our economy and also we need to
see the relationship of the credit market. I want to say that the
establishment of the National Loans Register is playing a pivotal role in
ensuring that credit providers do not give more credit than the consumers
can afford. This is critical to curb overindebtedness and reckless credit.
However, the Bill makes the following provision in case of reckless credit:
“The consumer is given the option to voluntarily approach a debt counsellor
or the credit provider refers him or her to the debt counsellor.” Another
instance is when a court refers the consumer to a debt counsellor. This is
quite clearly spelt out in the Bill.

I want to say a little bit more about a restructured debt. Once a debt
counsellor comes to terms with what the consumer owes, there is a
restructuring of the debt and when all this restructuring of the debt is
paid off, this issue can then be expunged from the records. I want to give
an example by explaining this. I will give some hypothetical figures. Let’s
say a person has taken a loan from the bank and the principal debt is R60
000 and after 10 years of nonpayment the accrued amount becomes R120 000.
The bank appoints a debt collector or sells the debt to the debt counsellor
and then there is a restructuring of the debt and the consumer is then
allowed to pay a negotiated settlement according to the agreement, which is
compromised or restructured, which is about R45 000. I thank you. [Time
expired.][Applause.]
Mnr W D SPIES: Waarnemende Adjunkspeaker, die nuwe nasionale
kredietwetgewing kom in die plek van die twee wette, die Wet op
Kredietooreenkomste aan die een kant en die Woekerwet aan die ander kant.
Tot dusver is 25% van alle litigasie in die land gebaseer op dié wetgewing.
Hierdie persentasie wys ook die ingrypendheid en die belangrikheid van dié
wetgewing, ook vir ons ekonomie. Daarom moet enige wysiging aan die wet met
groot omsigtigheid gehanteer word, en moet daar seker gemaak word dat dit
op die regte manier én met die nodige omsigtigheid gedoen is.

Die beginsel van kontrakteervryheid aan die een kant, en die beginsel dat
kontrakte daar is om nagekom te word aan die ander kant, is twee beginsels
wat eeue oud is en wat lank bestaan. Die VF Plus is bekommerd dat dié twee
regte ingrypend beperk word, en dat die skaal in ‘n baie groot mate
weggeswaai het van die beskerming van die skuldeiser, wat enersyds goed is,
en oordrewe in die rigting van die beskerming van die skuldenaar is. Die VF
Plus sien uit na die dag waarin daar ‘n perfekte balans tussen die twee
gevind word. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Acting Deputy Speaker, the new national credit legislation
replaces the following two Acts: the Credit Agreement Act on the one hand
and the Usury Act on the other. Up to now 25% of all litigation in the
country has been based on this legislation. This percentage shows the far-
reaching effects and the importance of this legislation, also for our
economy. Therefore any amendment to this law must be treated with great
circumspection, and care must be taken to ensure that it is carried out in
the proper manner and with the necessary caution.

The principle of contractual freedom on the one hand, and the principle
that contracts have to be honoured on the other, are two age-old principles
that have been in existence for a long time. The FF Plus is concerned that
these two rights are being drastically restricted, and that on balance the
scale has tipped against protecting the creditor, which is a good thing on
the one hand, and is now excessively tipped towards protecting the debtor.
The FF Plus looks forward to the day when a perfect balance can be struck
between the two. Thank you very much.]

Mr N T GODI: Acting Deputy Speaker, comrades and hon members, Comrade
Minister, the PAC joins all those who love fairness, transparency and
progressive regulation of the markets in supporting this Bill. This Bill is
long, long overdue and marks the end of what had become a perpetual
nightmare, especially for the African people in general, and the working
class in particular.

The credit industry has been almost like a pirate’s paradise, with no
regulations and accountable to no one. Credit bureaus have blacklisted
millions of consumers, consigning them to a life of untold misery.

The PAC welcomes the fact that these credit bureaus will now have to
register with the regulator, and will be held liable for the information
they keep and give. Many people have become overindebted as a result of
reckless credit granting, deception, unfair and fraudulent actions of
credit providers.

The banks and retailers are equally as deceptive and brutally effective as
the mashonisa in informal settlements. The mashonisa may be crude and the
banks smooth, but they all bleed the consumer dry.

This Bill and the regulations it sets must dramatically change the
situation in favour of the poor. The consumers, however, do also need to be
constantly educated that credit is not charity. They should indulge in
credit purchases out of unavoidable necessity.

As we pass this Bill, millions of our people will heave a sigh of relief
that at long last they have their protection in the law, their lives and
dignity in their hands again. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Acting Deputy Speaker, today Parliament is debating
issues relating to access to credit, as well as the regulatory framework
that accompanies access to credit.

Looking at it from the poor’s perspective most blacks in our country know
and understand that most credit facilities, as well as financial
institutions, have for centuries not been accessible to them. Poor people
know that access to credit is either nonexistent, with the result that many
of them resort to mashonisas, or they get credit at a very high cost. To
this end the poor were systematically marginalised and that is why we talk
about the second economy.

This Bill puts to rest many of the difficulties that the poor face in
obtaining credit, an important step indeed. But time will tell whether
those that have money and those that are rich will heed the provisions of
this Bill.

Parliament has a responsibility to monitor closely the implementation of
this Bill. Azapo has learnt and noticed that those opposed to
transformation have always found other ways of dodging provisions of laws
passed by this Parliament. Be that as it may, this Bill goes a long way in
attempting to bring transformation to the credit facility industry. Azapo
supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr C M MORKEL: Mr Acting Deputy Speaker - I’ve got it right this time,
earlier I referred to you as Mr Chairman – I wish to highlight certain
objectives of the National Credit Bill, and to make a practical proposal
that, if implemented, seeks to restore the dignity of debtors who remain
blacklisted or redlined for a five-year period, even after they have made
full and final settlement of a bad debt.

The national consumer tribunal therefore has an important role to play in
achieving the objectives of the Bill dealing with, amongst others, fair and
non-discriminatory access to consumer credit; responsibility and
accountability; transparency, and other provisions dealing with the
consumer credit market. The tribunal is enabled to adjudicate, amongst
others, in a wide variety of applications, and to conduct hearings into
complaints, make consent orders reflecting any resolution arrived at, and
impose declaratory orders.

So, I therefore propose that the national consumer tribunal must be
empowered to deal with and adjudicate on rehabilitation applications by
default debtors, taking into account the rights of consumers to have access
to credit, while being sensitive to the concomitant rights of businesses
and credit grantors. Upon application to the tribunal, to be declared a
rehabilitated debtor, the business or credit grantor must be given the
burden of proof to provide good cause why a debtor, who had been in default
with that creditor but has since paid their debt to that creditor in full
and final settlement, should not be considered a rehabilitated debtor.

Obviously, the intention here is to have a debtor’s negative credit record
expunged with the assistance of the creditor, who would have reported such
a debtor to a credit bureau, but only upon full and final settlement of the
debt in question by such a debtor. We believe this would be a pragmatic
alternative to the effective five-year sentence that debtors would
otherwise need to endure after they had settled their debt in full. Thank
you.

Mnu S J NJIKELANA: Somlomo obambeleyo, hayi obekekileyo kuphela kodwa ke
nothandekayo . . . [Kwahlekwa.] . . . Baphathiswa abahloniphekileyo,
malungu ePalamente kunye nabemi bonke baseMzantsi Afrika, namhlanje mawethu
senza imbali ngalo Mthetho uyilwayo siwuqulunqayo, kuba uya kanye kundoqo
wezoqoqosho, futhi wenza indlela yokubuyisa isidima sabo bahlelekileyo.
Ukwavula indlela, ibe sithabazi, koosomashishini abasantshulayo, ikakhulu
abamnyama.

Ngokubhekisele kwiikontraka ezakhayo ezikolweni nezisebenzisana neSebe
lezeMisebenzi yoLuntu, xa ukhangela amafama asakhasayo ezilalini
nakwiilokishi, ufumanisa ukuba asoloko elila esimantshiyane engakwazi
ukuboleka imali, maxa wambi engakwazi ukuvula iiakhawunti ezibhankini
ngenxa yamagama awo akwezi-credit bureau. Siyathemba ke ngoku ukuba noko
izinto azizikuba mntakaNgqika. Umbele uza kukhe ubhonxe. (Translation of
Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S J NJIKELANA: Acting Speaker, not only honourable but also handsome .
. . [Laughter.] . . . honourable Ministers, members of Parliament and all
South African citizens, today we are making history with this Bill that we
are debating, because it deals directly with real economic matters, thereby
presenting a way of restoring the dignity of the disadvantaged. It also
opens wide the avenues for emerging business people, especially blacks.

With regard to the contractors who build schools in co-operation with the
Department of Public Works, and looking at the emerging farmers in rural
areas and the townships, you will find that they always voice the plight of
their inability to secure loans. Sometimes they cannot open bank accounts
in banks, because their names are listed with the credit bureau. We hope
that from now on things will not be so bad. There will be a lot of
benefits.]

Acting Deputy Speaker, the ANC has always had a vision of decent work and
living standards for all in the context of qualitatively improved equity
and ownership - I would like to emphasise that – improved equity and
ownership, and access to opportunities.

Achieving this vision requires substantial growth in small and micro
enterprises based in large part on land reform, as well as improved access
to finance, and I would like us to emphasise, once again, improved access
to finance, infrastructure and markets. This was the decision of the 51st
National Conference of the ANC.

The impact of a transformed credit market as a result of this outstanding
legislation would be quite significant on the economic empowerment of the
formerly disadvantaged, especially emerging businesses. For any economy to
thrive sustainably the active economic citizenry must first increase
quantitatively, and, once again, advance qualitatively. Appropriate access
to credit is one of the fundamental requisites for such outcomes,
especially the qualitative advancement.

The ANC-led government has through relentless effort ensured that access to
credit is made available to those who have the genuine need for credit, to
improve the quality of their lives in our country, as Comrade Godi says:
The unavoidable need. Without any doubt the Bill is definitely
transformative in its character and content.

This Bill definitely provides appropriate protection for consumers for the
first time. I would just like to highlight one area: The credit agreements
will, in future, be crafted in a manner that will ensure that consumers do
not blindly enter into contractual arrangements without thorough
explanation – I’m one of the victims in that.
Even the exclusion of stokvels from the credit agreements within the scope
of this Bill – I view it as the noble recognition of the uniqueness of
stokvels, because they have a significant role to play in the credit market
- is definitely a reflection and a manifestation of the extent to which
consultation and thorough processing of this piece of legislation has been
done.

The firmness of the regulatory framework as expressed through the
introduction of the National Credit Regulator, the tribunal and even debt
review mechanisms must be applauded. The introduction of these structures
will ensure that those who consciously induce overindebtedness and allow
reckless credit will face the wrath of the law.

What has been lacking in the past is an operation shake-up for credit
providers who have had their feast by subjugating consumers to misery and
anguish in the past. This has definitely triggered a change in mind-sets
within the credit industry. It will not be business as usual, although, on
the other hand, it will enhance access to credit.

Let us acknowledge that the credit market has been distorted and logically
such distortions, with their grotesque impact on the economy, would
definitely have stifled prospects of their sustainability. The removal of
such distortions will definitely enhance economic prosperity, especially
black economic empowerment programmes. Let us also take cognisance of the
legacy that has resulted in two economies in our country, and the credit
market was definitely one of the victims of such a misnomer.

However, there are challenges that lie ahead in spite of the introduction
of such a powerful law: the need for the creation of a dynamic and vibrant
consumer movement that will ensure public education and promotion of this
law, continuing unbridled consumerism, which is always one of the
inducements of overindebtedness and reckless lending, as hon Farida Mahomed
has already mentioned. Yes, also, the initial stages of implementation will
be difficult, but ultimately the benefits will make such difficulties
insignificant.

Let us remember the President of this country at the beginning of this year
when he made a clarion call for eradicating poverty and underdevelopment
within the context of a thriving and growing first economy, and the
successful transformation of the second economy. As we wind up this year,
celebrating the Freedom Charter, which also calls for access to economic
opportunities, our response to the President’s calls must include a
resounding success in creating a dynamic credit market through this
legislation.

Iyabulela ilali. [Thank you.]

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Hon Chairperson, the road to hell is paved with good
intentions. I have concerns that the admirable intentions of the Bill as
enunciated by my colleague, may flounder on the uncharted seas of
unintended consequences, which could impact negatively on the extension of
credit and the cost thereof.

South Africa, like many countries of the developing world, both in and out
of Africa, has two economies, the modern and the informal. On the one hand
we have a comprehensive, sophisticated system of credit, the work of which
has received high marks from international financial institutions, and on
the other hand we have the struggling informal sector or second economy
seeking credit, often not available to improve the quality of their lives.

The dilemma is how to satisfy both. This Bill, like the curate’s egg, is
good in parts. There are areas that we feel can impact negatively on our
free market system, which have not been adequately addressed. On reckless
credit, the practical application of the Bill leaves room for abuse.
However, we are pleased to note that the Bill now allows the court to
mitigate this potential area of concern.

However, there is still an imbalance of responsibility between borrowers
and lenders, with a major burden on the lenders, although section 81(4)(a)
and (b) does go some way to place an obligation on borrowers to be truthful
and forthcoming. And only time will tell whether this legislation is
effective. Risk predictive data is an important element in all credit
transactions. Accuracy is important and one must be careful about reckless
expunging of such information.

It is noted that the Minister can by regulation decide which data must be
expunged or retained. The fact that the Bill provides that the pro forma
regulations are to be put to the portfolio committee, is in itself an
indication of the regulatory concerns. Excessive regulation is contrary to
the development of a market economy, and we can only urge the Minister to
ensure that regulations have a minimum impact on the conduct of business.

There is too often a tendency in this government to bypass Parliament with
the promulgation of excessive regulation. Regulation should be minimised
and we realise, of course, that it cannot be eliminated. We are concerned
about the excessive bureaucracy created by this Bill. Only time will again
tell whether we have created a regulatory monster, whose tentacles will
either assist access to credit at a reasonable cost or not.

The lack of an impact assessment of the positive and negative consequences
on both borrowers and the credit industry is also cause for concern. And,
finally, there is an area where the poor will be exploited if formal access
to credit is denied due to reasons of the Bill and that the illegal . . .
[Time expired.][Applause.]

Ngaka M SEFULARO: Mmusakgotla, maloko a a tlotlegang, Ditona le Batlatsa-
Ditona, ka molao o, setšhaba sa rona sa Aforika Borwa se na le tšhono ya go
rola joko le go kgaola diketane tsa tsamaiso e e sotlang ya sekoloto se ba
godileng ka sona ba bo ba godisa bana ba bona ka sona. Lenyatso le
tlontlololo ya go amogwa dithoto, go tshwarisiwa le go tswalelwa ditsela mo
kgwebisanong go tla fela.

Ka Molao o, re tlosa masaledi a tlhaolele a a kabong a fedile le di- nag
spešele, di-stans bermete, di-werk soek spešele le tse dingwe. Ka ona re
busetsa batho ba rona seriti. Re tiisa tshireletso ya bona mo mabakeng a
theko-khiro le go oketsa maatla le ditshwanelo tsa bona kgatlhanong le
ditheo tse di tshwanang le dibanka le marekelo a difenitšhara, diaparo le
tse dingwe.

Re ikemiseditse go fedisa mokgwa wa go sotla batsofe le batho ba ba
tlhokileng lesego la go ya sekolong, ba ba tshepisiwang legodimo le
lefatshe, ba mengwa gore ba itsenye mo mathateng a sekoloto go sa tlhaloswe
kotsi. Ba bontshiwa lee, lerapo le serilwe gore ba seke ba le bona.

Re utlwile dilelo tsa batho ba rona re le ANC. Re utlwile esitana le lona
lekgotla la makomunisi-SACP-fa ba ne ba re go itshwarelwe mme go tlosiwe mo
dibukeng tse dintsho botlhe ba ba thibetsweng ditsela, ba sentswe maina ke
ditheo tse di latelelang ba ba nang le melato, ba ka sekgowa ba bitswang
credit bureau.

Ka re utlwile re le lekgotla la batho, komiti ya rona e e neng e sekaseka
molao ona, e utlwane ka gore re tshegetse kopo e ya gore batho bangwe ba
itshwarelwe, mme re fe maatla ao Tona ya Lefapha la Kgwebisano le Madirelo
gore e nne ena a rebolang gore ke bo mang ba ba tla fiwang tshwarelo? Ka mo
tlase ga maemo afe? Ele tshwarelo ya mofuta ofe?

Dintlhakgolo tsa molao ona ke gore go tla nna le molaodi kgotsa modisa wa
kadimo ya ditšhelete kgotsa theko-khiro. Ya bobedi, go tla nna le lekgotla
kgotsa makgotlana a a kgethegileng a boipiletso a a tla utlwang dilelo tsa
ba ba sa itumelelang tsamaiso kgotsa maitshwaro a ba ba adimanang ka
ditšhelete kgotsa ba rekisa ka sekoloto.

Molaodi o tla tlhokomela dintlha tse di latelang: go adimana ka ditšhelete
kgotsa go fa motho sekoloto go go botlhaswa; ikwadiso ya botlhe ba ba
adimanang ka ditšhelete; go thaota le go phatlhalatsa sekoloto ka mokgwa o
o wetsang batho; kgethololo mo mabakeng a go adimana ka ditšhelete kgotsa
go fana ka theko-khiro; go gana go ntsha tlhaloso ya gore ke eng o gana go
fa motho sekoloto kgotsa go mo rekisetsa ka sekoloto; go gana go fana ka
makwalo a dikonteraka a a kwadilweng ka puo kgotsa leleme le le utlwiwang
ke moreki kgotsa go gana go fana ka diteitimente kgotsa ditshupamolato.

O tla tlhokomela gape mokgwa o go batliwang ka ona ditšhelete mo bathong ba
ba nang le melato mme o tla disa gape gore go kganelwe mekgwa e e
gatelelang ya go batla tšhelete ya sekoloto mo bathong.  Re kopa gore
motlhang re fedisitse molao ona, batho ba rona ba ithute maikarabelo le
dithata tsa motsamaisi gore batle ba itshireletse, ba ithuse.

Lekgotla le le kgethegileng lona le tla tlhokomela tse di latelang: go
thusa baadimi go bona ditshwanelo tsa bona gotswa mo go ba ba batlang go
duela molato; kganetsano ka ga kutlwisiso ya molao; boipelaetso jwa batho
ba ba imetsweng ke sekoloto; go batla morokotso o o fetang selekano; go se
kgotsofale ga modirisi ka diteitimente kgotsa dikonteraka; go gapiwa ga
dithoto tsa moadimi; go busiwa ga dithoto tse di neng di rekilwe ka
sekoloto; go busetsa moadimi tse di mo tshwanetseng; go tlhatlhoba le go
tshegetsa dikatlholo tsa magiseterata le makgotla a mangwe mo mererong ya
sekoloto.

Go bonala kwa ntle le pelaelo gore puso ya rona, e e eteletsweng pele ke
ANC, e utlwetse batho ba rona botlhoko. Re le ANC, ga re a lebala tshotlego
ya dingwagangwaga ya batsadi ba rona. Karolo ya rona ya go lwantsha tlala,
lehuma le botlhokatiro ka molao o, ke go kopa batho ba rona ba ithute molao
o, ba o dirise mme ba itshireletse.

Re kopa gore batho ba rona ba fetole mokgwa wa go ipolaisa sekoloto ka
kgaisano le go rata bontle jo bo sa tlhokegeng. Bolokang tšhelete! Rutang
bana! Fokotsang tlala! A monna le mosadi le badiri botlhe, ba bone gore ba
lema eng? Mofufutso wa bona o ba busetsa eng? Re le ANC, re re a molao ona
o fetisiwe ke Palamente e e tlotlegang ya batho. Ke a leboga. (Translation
of Setswana speech follows.)

[Dr M SEFULARO: Madam Speaker, hon members, Ministers and Deputy Ministers,
through this Act our people stand a chance to experience some relief by
being able to break the chains of suffering from long-standing debt which
has been in existence from previous generations through to the current one.
Although people were undermined and disrespected, their belongings taken
away from them, arrested and barred from participating in the economy,
there is  now hope that this will come to an end.

Through this Act, we are removing the remnants of apartheid which could
have been ended long ago with special night permits, travelling permits,
permits to look for employment and others. This Act will help us to restore
dignity to our people. We increase their protection in issues relating to
securing credit by increasing their bargaining power and rights against
institutions like banks, clothing and furniture stores and others.

We are prepared to end the exploitation of the elderly and the illiterate,
who have been promised heaven and earth and have had to incur debt without
being given proper guidance. They were lured into  debt without being
warned of the repercussions.

The ANC has acknowledged the concerns of our people. We also received a
list of concerns from the SACP, which suggested that amnesty be given to
all who were blacklisted and whose reputation had been tarnished by the
credit bureaus.

To prove that we are the people’s party, we acknowledged their concerns.
Our committee that looked into this Act decided to support these requests
that other people be indemnified. It also decided that the Minister of
Trade and Industry should determine who should be given amnesty, under what
conditions and what type of amnesty.

The main provisions of this Act include the establishment of a director or
an ombudsman for loan-making or credit-securing purposes. Secondly, there
will be special appeal boards to listen to the complaints of those who are
dissatisfied with the process of giving credit or with the creditors.

The director will be responsible for the following: the granting of loans
and addressing the improper way of granting credit; registration of all
creditors; to promote and market loans in a way that does not mislead
people; any discrimination regarding the granting of loans or credit; any
instance of failure to provide information on why a loan or credit was not
granted; and any failure to provide contracting letters or statements of
receipt written in a language understood by the customer.

There will be considerations to look into the ways in which people are
being persuaded to settle their debts. The director or ombudsman will
ensure that unfair ways of persuading debtors to settle their debts are
addressed by this Act. After abolishing these unfair practices, we would
like to see our people being responsible and aware of their rights, knowing
about the role of the ombudsman who will help and protect them.

The special boards will ensure that the following is taken care of: to help
creditors in getting paid their dues by debtors; discussions on people’s
understanding of the Act; the grievances of the debtors who cannot repay
their loans; the charging of exorbitant interest rates; dissatisfaction of
customers with receipts or contracts; taking the debtors’ belongings;
repossession of the goods that were purchased on credit; returning the
debtors’ dues; and to assess and support the judgments given by the
magistrate and other debt-recovery agencies.

There is no doubt that an ANC-led government sympathised with our people.
The ANC has not forgotten our parents’ long period in the struggle. Our
responsibility is to urge our people to use this Act to protect themselves
and fight hunger, poverty and unemployment.

We are making an appeal to our people to change their behaviour of
indulging in debts and competing unnecessarily. Learn to save money! Teach
children to do the same! Fight against hunger! Are both wife and husband
workers, and did you notice what they have planted? Do they benefit from
their efforts? The ANC supports the Bill. Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Chair, thanks to all the members
who have participated in this debate, and to all of the parties that have
supported this piece of legislation, because in spite of the concerns that
have been pointed out, generally there has been overwhelming support for
the National Credit Bill. And I would like to thank all the parties for
that.

In relation to some of the concerns that have been raised, I think if one
were to pick up on the points that were made by the hon Stephens, who I
think was really making the case for balance in respect of the rights of
people who are credit providers and people who are consumers. I think that
the Bill that we have, following the extensive consultation, as well as the
extensive amendments that have been effected to this Bill, actually does
give us the kind of balance that we are arguing for.

But I think an even more important massage, coming out of this Bill, is
that we are seeking to promote responsibility as well. So we are not only
protecting rights and imposing obligations, we are also seeking to promote
responsibility all round, by both the credit providers, as well as people
who are seeking credit.

And so, we want to avoid instances of reckless lending. We want to deal
with issues of overindebtedness. But we also want to make sure that those
who seek credit understand that they’ve got to take responsibility for
providing proper information so that credit providers can make due
assessments.

Hon Chang, in terms of what’s going to happen to consumer rights, I think
there is great clarity in the Bill and different institutions. We outlined
the rights, we enshrined the rights of consumers in the legislation, but we
have created different tiers of institutions, all of which are going to
play a role in promoting and protecting the rights of consumers. And so the
regulator, the tribunal and finally the courts, are all going to be playing
a role in ensuring that the rights of consumers are protected.

I’ve already made reference, hon Gore, to the fact that a lot of amendments
were effected to this legislation, and so if everything was not taken into
account it is precisely because we had to achieve the necessary balance in
this regard. And I think that it’s important to make the point, hon
Labuschagne, that the scales have been so tipped against the consumer in
South Africa and what we are seeking to achieve here is a better balance in
the power relationship. And that must not be seen as tilting the balance
against those who provide credit. We are seeking to correct historical
distortions that have been there. An excessively abusive system also
doesn’t make for growth of the economy. And I’m raising this in relation to
the point you made about excessive regulation.

And the final point I would like to make is that one would hope that our
banks, our microlenders, our retailers have heard the voice loud and clear
from what the political parties were saying here. Everybody is supportive
of what this legislation is trying to do. And we therefore hope that there
will be better attention given to issues of the rights of consumers; that
the game is changing in South Africa. Responsibility, access, broader
participation, but also that we are raising the issues of consumer rights
and consumer protection. Thank you. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.


                        FORESTRY LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, hon members and
hon Ministers, it gives me great pleasure today to be able to present to
the NA a Bill that proposes improvements to one of the first pieces of
national legislation that was passed by a new democratic South Africa. This
attests to the commitment of government to the nurturing, growth and
development of the environment to ensure that there is some for all
forever.

In South Africa we are blessed with wonderful and unique natural resources
that are not only aesthetically pleasing, but play a pivotal role in
meeting livelihood needs and creating natural resource-based opportunities.
The erosion of these resources undermines livelihood systems and enterprise
opportunities.

Recognition of this resulted in the drafting and promulgation of two pieces
of legislation in 1998 that attempted to regulate the forestry environment
to ensure the sustainable management and development of the forest resource
and associated biomes. The two pieces of legislation that I am referring to
are the National Forests Act of 1998 and the National Veld and Forest Fire
Act of 1998, respectively.

These pieces of legislation have received much acclaim for successfully
placing people at the centre of the environment. The legislation recognises
that a balance can be achieved between conservation and development and
that people’s needs and cultural practices can be met without undermining
environmental integrity. I therefore request your indulgence as I briefly
present the intentions of the principal Acts, before I present the reasons
for the proposed amendments to the Acts.

The purposes of the National Forests Act are to promote the sustainable
management and development of forests for the benefit of all, to create
conditions necessary to restructure forestry in state forests, and to
provide special measures for the protection of certain forests and trees,
and also to promote the sustainable use of forests for environmental,
economic, educational, recreational, cultural, health and spiritual
purposes, as well as to promote community forestry, greater participation
in all aspects of forestry and forest products, especially by those who
were previously excluded.


Parliament enacted this piece of legislation acknowledging that everyone
has the constitutional right to have the environment protected for the
benefit of present and future generations and recognising that natural
forests and woodlands form an important part of the environment and thus
need to be conserved and developed according to the principles of
sustainable management.


It was acknowledged that the economic, social and environmental benefits of
forests have been distributed unfairly in the past and thus this had to be
addressed. Seven years after the Act was passed by this Parliament, I am
satisfied that this amendment to the Act is appropriate and necessary and
that measurable gains have been achieved with the passing and
implementation of this legislation. The advantage of experience has now
shown where improvements in the legislation will assist in achieving
greater gains and bring these gains even closer to our people.

The proposed amendments to the National Forests Act address both editorial
improvements, as well as technical provisions that intend to facilitate
greater involvement of local people in the use and management of forest
resources. This greater participation is focused both at subsistence level
and at enterprise development. This is in line with the key objective in
forestry to maximise rural development and empowerment in a sustainable
manner.

In addition to tailoring the legislative framework to stimulate greater
access to resources and black empowerment, we are engaged in a policy
process to ensure the achievement of a transformed forest sector.

Section 27(a) that has been inserted is very significant because it
establishes a trust for holding lease rentals collected from private
companies leasing state forests. My department leased plantations in the
Eastern Cape to Singisi and Amathole, in KwaZulu-Natal to Siyaqhubeka and
in the Western Cape to Mountain to Ocean, and we collected R58 million,
including interest, from these tenants.

These moneys have been kept until now in a suspense account for the benefit
of the would-be beneficiaries or people who would be successful from land
claims. The Department of Land Affairs is in the process of finalising
communities’ land rights on these leased parcels of land. Once this process
has been finalised the rentals accumulated will be paid to the
beneficiaries.

Where claims are unsuccessful, lease moneys kept in trust are to be paid
over to the state. Where state forest land belongs to the Ingonyama Trust,
lease moneys kept for claimants whose claims fail will go to the Ingonyama
Trust. The Bill empowers the Minister to appoint and dismiss trustees and
he or she may even dismiss all of the trustees and perform their functions
him or herself in the interests of the beneficiaries.

The second piece of legislation being amended is the National Veld and
Forest Fire Act. It provides for the prevention and combating of veld,
forest and mountain fires throughout the Republic. It provides for a
variety of institutions, methods and practices for achieving this purpose.
This Act places obligations on owners of land on which there is a risk of
veld fires and citizens at large who may be affected or who may be at risk
of veld fires.

The level of veld fire risk in rural South Africa’s grasslands, woodlands
and fynbos biomes is very high. [Time expired.]

I see zero there. [Laughter.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, the Bill before us, as stated, is really a
Bill that brings together three different pieces of legislation, namely the
National Forests Act, the Wattle Bark Industry Act and the National Veld
and Forest Fire Act.

Initially, as much as we thought that the Bill provides for a technical and
clean-up process, the committee was very happy to see that the issues that
we had to deal with in the Bill do touch quite significantly on the
disadvantaged communities in South Africa in particular.

Importantly, regarding the National Forests Act, we are delighted to see
that as we asked the NA to adopt this Bill, at least now not only are
licences issued with regard to protected trees, but at least also
authorisation is brought on board, particularly around what we can produce
and the products that are derived from trees. Of course, there are benefits
that accrue from such products. If you look around this House, right in
front of all of us here, is an example of the products of forestry in South
Africa being protected.

Secondly, insignificant as it might be, the fact that the Bill asks that we
take into consideration all sorts of trees, whether dead or alive, is quite
significant because it means that when we use any of these trees we don’t
distinguish between dead trees or live trees, we are interested in the end
product. We think that it is quite significant that that matter has been
brought on board.

Now, in so far as the power of the Minister to prevent deforestation and to
make sure that we rehabilitate national forests or woodland is concerned,
indeed, it is significant that it goes completely beyond what is currently
protected and its current scope. This is important, for the following
reasons: If we look at woodlands, in particular, what they are important
for, is that they are the most extensive vegetation in South Africa; they
provide, first of all, wood for fuel; they provide for construction, which
is very important as we construct the new South Africa; they provide for
craft and timber; and they support quite a variety of non-timber products.

These products include some of the things we have in this room today, such
as fibre, and in some instances they also have medicinal qualities - I am
sure that some of you are using it to stay healthy. Of course, in
Parliament you might have noticed that most of the time, at lunch, members
do not take sugar, but honey. Honey also comes from this important
woodland. Of course, there is also the aspect of mushroom stew.

This is important because it contributes to overall economic development by
providing the protection provided for in the Bill. [Interjections.] Keep
quiet, Mike, or go and have tea, Mike. Woodlands are the dominant landcover
in our major catchment areas and they play quite a big role in our water
delivery.

The other things said in the Bill are, where state land is leased,
especially state forest land, and the Minister has alluded to the fact that
a trust is being created through this Bill, for us what is quite
significant in this area is the department aligning itself with Treasury
regulations. Moneys that are held in trust by communities living on leased
land would be seen as separated from the overall accounts of the
department. Of course, this is done because there is an ongoing process of
access to land and land claims in South Africa, and therefore, as this
process is completed, we are comfortable that at least these claimants
would have access to this money.

We are confident, Minister, that the interest derived from these accounts
would obviously be used for the good of the disadvantaged people in South
Africa. In this regard the committee felt that we need to make a further
amendment, and we are happy that this amendment has been taken on board. In
an instance where moneys need to go to the Ingonyama Trust, or any other
trust for that matter, our amendment now says that the Minister must be
satisfied that at least the moneys are going to that trust or, in this
instance, the Ingonyama Trust.

The Minister should satisfy herself that members of the trust are able to
account for this money and we have asked to include this so that the
objective of ensuring openness, transparency and accountability in
accounting for money in this country is taken on board. Furthermore, we
have also considered past financial statements of that particular trust.
Quite significant in this area is the process of consultation. We are quite
satisfied with the level of consultation with regard to this Bill – before,
during and after the process. A number of communities were consulted on
this aspect. Here, hon Minister, we would want to ask that those comments
that communities have made be taken on board, because really what the
communities are asking, is: How can they get involved more when it comes to
forestry? How can they make sure that the benefits that are derived from
forestry come to these communities? These communities are therefore asking
that we take on board the fact that they form themselves into small
organisations at that level.

On the National Veld and Forest Fire Act, of course, what is important is
the aspect of fire rating, and we are not only talking about dangerous
areas, but also about extremely dangerous ones. I think that hon members
would have seen in the past couple of days and weeks the effects of not
having a fire rating system in place, with fires having ravaged many, many
areas. The importance of alerting the country to extreme conditions is
quite important for everyone so that we are able to deal with these
problems when they arise, when fires do occur.

The fact that the entire wattle bark industry has been repealed now gives
us an opportunity. Again, it is very interesting that around one tree, the
wattle bark tree, an association was formed. This tree and its bark, of
course, and the benefits derived from this tree were quite significant. We
are quite happy that the Act has been repealed because it now means that
entry into that industry would be made easy.

So, as a committee, we have adopted this Bill. We are happy to present this
Bill to the NA.

Baie dankie. [Thank you very much.]

Mev D VAN DER WALT: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister en agb kollegas, ek gaan
nie deur die hele wet werk nie. Die doel van vandag is om deur die
wysigings te werk . . . [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek hoef nie te sit as jy vir my
so sê nie, agb lid; ek sal sit wanneer ek klaar is.

Maar, as lid van die Portefeuljekomitee oor Waterwese en Bosbou, het die DA
die wysigings, soos voorgelê aan die komitee, deeglik bestudeer. Ons het
ook met relevante en prominente rolspelers in die bedryf gekonsulteer oor
die voorgestelde wysigings.

Alhoewel daar tans geen drastiese besware teen die voorgestelde wysigings
geopper is nie, is daar tog kommer uitgespreek teen die wysiging van
artikel 10 van die Wet op Nasionale Veld- en Bosbrande, Wet 101 van 1998.
Sodanige kommer spruit uit die geweldige toename in veld- en bosbrande en
die ernstige gevare en nagevolge wat daarmee gepaard gaan.

Die gevoel is dat daar meer en nie minder nie kommunikasie nodig is om
sogenoemde vuurgevare aan te kondig. Soveel mense as moontlik moet so
gereeld moontlik en in hul eie taal gewaarsku word teen die gevare van dié
brande. Om ’n duur vuurgevaargraderingstelsel in plek te stel en dan nie
voldoende kommunikasie in plek te hê nie, is inderdaad kortsigtig.

Dit is ook nodig dat in terme van wetgewing die voorgestelde wysigings ook
na die Huis van Tradisionele Leiers verwys word, synde sekere voorstelle
met betrekking tot inheemse reg en gebruike van tradisioneel inheemse
gemeenskappe beïnvloed kan word.

Die DA ondersteun die voorgestelde wysigings van die Wet op Nasionale Bosse
van 1998. Ek wil ook egter graag ’n beroep op die Minister doen om die
kwellende kwessies aangaande Komatiland asseblief dringend te bestudeer. Ek
dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and hon colleagues, I
will not work through the whole Act. Today’s objective is to work through
the amendments . . .[Interjections.] I don’t have to sit because you told
me to, hon member; I will sit down when I am done.

But, as a member of the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry,
the DA has thoroughly studied the amendments as submitted to the committee.
We have also consulted with relevant and prominent role-players in the
industry regarding the proposed amendments.

Although there are no drastic objections to the proposed amendments at
present, concern has been expressed regarding the amendment of section 10
of the National Veld and Forest Fire Act, Act 101 of 1998. This concern
arises from the tremendous increase in veld and forest fires and the great
dangers and consequences associated with this.

The feeling is that more and not less communication is needed to announce
so-called fire hazards. As many people as possible have to be warned as
frequently as possible in their own language about the dangers of these
fires. To have an expensive fire hazard grading system in place and then
not have adequate communication in place is short-sighted indeed.

It is also necessary that in terms of legislation the proposed amendments
also be referred to the House of Traditional Leaders, since certain
proposals concerning indigenous law and customs of traditional indigenous
communities may be influenced.

The DA supports the proposed amendments to the National Forests Act of
1998. However, I would also like to appeal to the Minister please to study
the troubling issues regarding Komatiland as a matter of urgency. I thank
you. [Applause.]]

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Madam Chair, hon Chair of the Portfolio Committee on Water
Affairs and Forestry, my hon Minister, hon members of this House, we in the
IFP have always treated the issue of conservation with the seriousness that
it deserves.

Many people in South Africa are directly dependent on the natural resources
surrounding them. Forests and trees impact on the daily livelihood of many,
especially those in the rural areas of our land. Trees have in the past
been used and are still being used for firewood and, although this
eventually has a negative impact on our forests, many people have no
choice, as without these trees they will not be able to survive as they
have no alternate source of energy that they can afford.

Although this amending Bill before us today is very small in size, the
impact that it will have is immense. We do agree that the protection of our
indigenous trees and the forests is non-negotiable, but we must not lose
sight of the fact that these would impact directly on the lives of many
people.

It is because of this impact that the Bill will have on the lives of people
that we believe the consultation process should have been broader and
should have taken into consideration the views and comments of the very
same people and communities that will be directly affected by this Bill.
The IFP supports the Bill. Inkomu. [Thank you.]

Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members, the Forestry
Laws Amendment Bill effects a number of minor amendments, which should
enhance the management of forests as a national asset.

Firstly, the Minister’s powers under the present Act are broadened to allow
for protection against deforestation.
Secondly, the Minister will now be able to establish a trust to receive
moneys from leased forests against which claims are currently lodged. This
process will hopefully ensure that those rightfully entitled to this income
will receive it upon the successful completion of their application,
whether it be the applicants or the state.

Thirdly, the Bill amends the National Veld and Forest Fire Act in order to
create an additional tier for the description of fire danger. The intention
is to have an extreme rating, which will become the upper tier of fire
warnings for situations and areas that exceed the high rating, given the
importance of forests as a national asset and the massive damage that fires
have caused in the past.

This is a necessary change, which should reduce damage, loss of property
and life, associated with forest and veld fires. The UDM supports the Bill.
Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIPERSON (Mrs C-S BOTHA): Hon Simmons, I think this is a maiden
speech for his party. [Laughter.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, the United Party of South Africa supports the
Forestry Laws Amendment Bill serving before this House. In view of the
limited time available to me I will focus only on clause 5 of the Bill.

This Bill was well consulted with and supported by all stakeholders, which
includes the rural communities. The department also supports it and the
state law advisor also supports it.

The UPSA is, however, concerned about the reactive nature of clause 5(5),
which refers to trusts. We are of the opinion that this clause should have
made provision for proactive measures to ensure effective, efficient and
transparent financial practices. Therefore the UPSA is of the opinion . . .
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S BOTHA): Hon member, will you please take
your seat?

Mr N J GOGOTYA: Chairperson, on a point of order: The hon member says this
Bill was consulted on widely except for his party, but when the Bill was
consulted on his party did not exist. He is misleading the House.
[Laughter.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, therefore the UPSA is of the opinion that this
Bill should make provision for ensuring that proper mechanisms are put in
place to ensure effective, efficient and transparent financial practices.
Thank you.

And for the gentleman, I was present when all of these things took place.
It’s not the party; it’s me, in person.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the ACDP will comment on two specific areas. The first
is the land restitution process, as it relates to the Forestry Laws
Amendment Bill. It is very important that the communities that are affected
are consulted on an ongoing basis in that the land reform process can
become a highly emotional issue, as we all know, as it is closely linked to
heritage, culture and family.

Transparency will result in greater co-operation between all role-players,
and will therefore ensure that the Forestry Laws Amendment Bill achieves
its desired objectives. Regulation of any industry should always yield
economic benefits.

Issues such as land reform, rationalisation of trusts and traditional
authorities should be handled in as fair and democratic a manner as
possible and at the same should not impede the economic benefits that
should arise from the Forestry Laws Amendment Bill.

The second issue relates to the communication mechanisms for fire hazard
warnings. The reduction of existing channels is not advisable and
interaction and consultation between all role-players is important to
ensure that changes to fire warning and media channels would not have
disastrous consequences. The ACDP will vote in favour of this Bill. Thanks.
[Applause.]

Mr J D ARENDSE: Thank you very much, House Chairperson.
Die bekommernis van die DA is reeds deur die komitee gehanteer, terwyl ons
besig was om oor die wysiging te praat. Daar is geen vermindering van
kommunikasiekanale nie. Die probleem is dat in sekere plekke in ons land
waar hierdie soort brande voorkom, daar nie drie tot vier of vyf
verskillende kanale bestaan nie. Al wat gedoen is, is om dit vir die
Minister moontlik te maak om die kommunikasiekanale wat wel bestaan, te
gebruik, sonder dat die Minister gebind word deur die wet soos wat dit
huidiglik daar uitsien, om ander kanale te soek wat in elk geval nie in
daardie area bestaan nie. Die sogenaamde kortsigtigheid wat die DA genoem
het, bestaan glad nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[The concern of the DA was already addressed by the committee when we were
discussing the amendment. There is no reduction in the number of
communication channels. The problem is that in certain areas of our country
where such fires occur, three, four or five different channels simply do
not exist. All that has been done is to enable the Minister to use the
communication channels that do exist, without compelling the Minister by
way of the Act, as is in the case in its current format, to seek for other
channels, which in any event do not exist in that area. The so-called short-
sightedness cited by the DA does not exist at all. [Interjections.]]

Chairperson, formal and informal deliberations on the Forestry Laws
Amendment Bill, I think, went rather well, I mean compared to how it can
sometimes go when other pieces of legislation land in front of other
committees, as well as this committee. As a matter of fact, if it wasn’t
for two areas of contention, which I’m going to speak about, I would be the
first to say that we do not really need a debate here today.

The two bones of contention were points raised by the IFP delegate in the
committee and these are, as follows: There was the question of
accessibility to woodlands by poor rural people in rural areas. The other
point was the question of consultation, especially with traditional
leaders, which was raised by the IFP.


Now, these two questions were raised in such a manner that I believe that  a
perception could have been created,  that  because  of  this  amending  Bill
people would no longer have access to forests and that there was  no  proper
consultation process; this could not be further from the truth.

In relation to access to forests, section 19 of the National Forests Act,
Act 84 of 1998, clearly states that everyone has reasonable access to state
forests for purposes of recreation, education, culture or spiritual
fulfilment. Section 21 of the same Act makes provision for access to be
granted to forests other than state forests.

The Forestry Law Amendment Bill does not affect any of these sections at
all. The fear that was expressed by the IFP in the committee that people
would suddenly have no access has no basis whatsoever.

During the informal deliberations on the Bill, the committee was of the
opinion that the consultation process embarked upon by the department at
that time was insufficient and requested the department to redo the
process, and of course this was the ANC position. At the same time, the
Bill was also sent to the National House of Traditional Leaders for comment
and possible recommendations. The National House of Traditional Leaders had
30 days to comment on the Bill. The period of 30 days ended on 29
September.

The committee met on 7 October for formal deliberations and the adoption of
the Bill, thus providing an additional seven days to the National House of
Traditional Leaders to forward any comments it might have to the committee.

On the morning of 7 October, the Chairperson, in her wisdom, requested that
meeting to afford administration one last opportunity to ascertain whether
any comments had been received at that late stage before a decision was
taken to continue with the adoption of the Bill, that is, any comments by
the National House of Traditional Leaders. In other words, we had to wait a
while to make sure that they didn’t send anything - not a single comment
was forthcoming.
During the same 30 days, the department also undertook a further process of
consultation, as requested by the committee. The department has engaged
communities and other stakeholders in the consultation process,
specifically targeting identified stakeholders and the rural communities,
and had consultation with 31 different groups in 30 days.

The purpose of the consultation was to afford the rural communities, in
particular, an opportunity to comment on the draft Forestry Laws Amendment
Bill. The Bill was presented to communities using the local language in
that particular area. Also, a simplified version of the Bill was compiled
prior to the consultation to enable the communities to understand and
follow the presentations. Comments, inputs and concerns from stakeholders
and communities were recorded and incorporated into a report that was
handed to the committee.

As humans, we interact with each other on the basis of reason. It is
therefore only a totally unreasonable and irrational person who would still
insist today that consultation on this minor piece of legislation was not
sufficient. The ANC supports this Bill. I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Madam Chair, I have no doubt
that the process of consultation and public participation, was capably led
by a very capable woman, the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee - she
is very conscious, she would be very inclusive in her approach and I have
no doubt that she did that very well - and it is for that reason that I
want to thank her for her leadership, as well as thank all the participants
and the members of the portfolio committee for supporting this Bill. It is
an important piece of legislation and maybe I should just touch on a few
things that were raised by some of the members.

On the question of the establishment of the trust: It is in alignment with
the Treasury Regulations; we don’t have powers or a mandate to keep any
money as the department unless it is line with what the Treasury requires
from us. So, it is in that spirit that we need to have this trust
established. As I said earlier on, we have this R58 million that is in our
account and we have no right to keep it in our account, so that is why we
had to establish a trust.

On the issue of fires and the early warning system: I’m sure that the hon
member is aware of the fire rating system that we launched the other week
for exactly the purposes raising here. On the issue of communication: it
cannot be an early warning if there is no prior communication and I agree
with her that it is important that central to that should be the empowering
of people and the education of people so that they become aware of when
there is going to be a veld fire. So, that is being attended to by that
particular system.

On the issue of Komatiland, unfortunately, I cannot comment. I’m just
mentioning it because it was raised here as a concern, but presently it is
sub judice, so there is no way that I can make any more comments about it.
But what I can say about it is that when the case has been finalised in
court, we will be able, either Minister Alec Erwin or myself, because we
share that responsibility together, to come and report to Parliament. The
hon member may ask a question then, and we will be able to respond to that.

I want to thank everybody, as I initially said, for supporting this Bill.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
     CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT – REPEAL OF BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND
                       AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS BILL

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chairperson, I move:
   That the report be adopted.

Agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

    REPEAL OF BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson . . .
[Interjections.] Hello there! That’s very kind.

Mr M J ELLIS: You are a nice lady as well.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Oh my goodness, I
am pleased to hear that!

Chairperson, today we are here to celebrate the repeal of the Black
Administration Act of 1927. [Applause.] This omnibus administration tool
set the framework that contributed to the suffering of a great number of
our people.

The legislation contributed extensively to the systemic patterns of
inequality in our society. I think many of us who are sitting here are
aware that the deepening of poverty, especially regarding our people living
in remote parts away from the cities, is precisely because of the social
engineering visited upon our people through a tool such as this one.

Recently, the former chairperson of the Constitutional Assembly, my
comrade, Cyril Ramaphosa, had this to say about the impending repeal of
this Act. He said that the repeal of this Act would be a moment worth
marking, remembering and celebrating. It would mark a major milestone,
albeit largely symbolic, in the development of our society from one that
justified the statutory subjugation of one person by another to a society
which recognises, protects and advances the dignity and rights of each and
every person.

He concluded by saying that, for the sake of our collective future and in
the interests of a thriving and dynamic democracy, we should not forget
what these laws did to our people. And I want us to say we should not only
not forget, but we should commit ourselves to strengthening our democracy
and our constitutional state.

Since 1994, most of the older and outdated pieces of legislation have been
brought into line with our new constitutional dispensation. However, the 78-
year-old Black Administration Act has not had the benefits of much-needed
cosmetic surgery. The short title of this Act proclaims from the rooftops
that it is a relic from the past which we cannot get rid of with a single
swipe of the pen. As you would recall, when I began I indicated that this
was, in a sense, an omnibus administrative tool.

As strange and distasteful as it may sound, we still apply some of the
provisions of this Act on a daily basis. Its web has become so interwoven
into the daily lives of our people that its immediate repeal is simply not
possible, and this will explain partly, not completely, the reason why it
took so long for the Act to be repealed.

Let me now get to the Bill and indicate important aspects of this repeal.
The approach adopted in this Bill, which is incremental in approach, has
its roots in the interests of good governance and the rule of law. Because
there are still provisions of the Act that are applied every day and
because repealing all its provisions in one fell swoop could give rise to
unintended consequences, we in government have decided that those
provisions of the Act that can be repealed immediately must be repealed
immediately.

However, those provisions of the Act which require suitable substitute
legislation, be it at the national, provincial or local level of
government, should remain in place until such time as that substitute
legislation is passed and implemented. Some of the provisions that we have
to retain include the one that deals with the appointment or recognition of
chiefs and headmen, and the power to make regulations prescribing their
duties, powers, privileges and conditions of service. The provinces to
which these provisions have been assigned are in the process of preparing
legislation as envisaged in the Traditional Leadership and Governance
Framework Act of 2003.

I have taken note of the portfolio committee, which requires all role-
players to report by 18 January 2006 on progress in coming up with
substitute legislation. I welcome this and urge all authorities to assist
in facilitating the repeal of the Act in its entirety. The sooner this is
done, the sooner we can say to our compatriots and the world that we are
eventually rid of one of the notorious cornerstones of apartheid.

I would like to thank the Deputy Minister, my colleague – I wish you could
smile at least. I would also like to thank the department, our able
drafters. Of course, I must thank the portfolio committee and its
chairperson, Fatima Chohan-Khota, for the amendments. And I will rely on
you to truly have oversight over the process of amending legislation by all
the authorities, both at local and provincial government levels. We have to
move forward. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Chairperson, before I begin I must point out that the
report of the committee as published in the ATCs lacks the annexure to
which it refers. I’m told that it was an oversight that the annexure was
not published but that it will be available in members’ pigeonholes and
that it will appear in the ATCs tomorrow. So, that was just in case members
who have read the report wondered where the annexure was.

It is a pity that on such a momentous occasion we have to debate this
legislation pretty late in the afternoon when members are quite exhausted,
having had a full day of sitting. I see Comrade Mlangeni there. You are not
exhausted. You are the only one who is not exhausted.

If anything, the unravelling of apartheid legislation has proved to be more
involved than any of us ever thought possible. When I first joined the
Portfolio Committee on Justice in 1996, one of the first discussions that
took place was a review of our Statute Book in order to purge it of
apartheid legislation such as the Act that we are discussing today. Now,
nine years later, we stand on the brink of repealing the Black
Administration Act. Some of our older grandfathers and grandmothers will
know it by its old name – the Native Administration Act of 1927, which was
implemented in 1929.

With the advent of the Union of South Africa in 1910, the tendencies of the
various colonies towards segregation were maintained in that all laws of
the colonies remained in force, while the South Africa Act of 1909 provided
the framework for separate native administration; in other words, a system
of governance within a system of governance for Africans in particular and
blacks in general.

The Native Administration Act, Act 38 of 1927, provided the first uniform
framework for the Union for the system of separate governance for African
communities. The legislation evolved over a period of time, there having
been 47 amendments from 1929 onwards, including six amendments made after
the advent of democracy in 1994.

Over the apartheid years the Act was systematically amended to include all
facets of life, including marriages and divorces, laws on succession, land
rights, tribal courts, influx control, the geographical boundaries of
traditional communities and significantly restricted political activity
until the Abolition of Free Political Activity Act was promulgated in 1993.

In the time I have at my disposal it will be impossible for me to detail
every single aspect regulated by this Act, but the devastating effect of
this legislation on our people, on the soul of our country, doesn’t have to
be told in so many words, it is etched like branding or a permanent tattoo
on our history and on our hearts. It is a very shameful example of how our
legislatures of old were able to usurp, to bring untold harm and hardship
to the majority of the peoples of this land.

On this occasion, I think it is apt for us as members to reflect on our
role as legislators and the significance of the legislative arm of
government in the broader scheme of governance, and to endeavour with all
that we are worth and all that our ancestors had passed on to us to strive
to preserve at all costs justice and righteousness in all that we do, in
the laws that we pass; to err on the side of beneficence and to produce
laws that promote harmony, and fraternity amongst our peoples; and, above
all, hold solemn the dignity of our people as the most precious of
commodities. This must be our pledge and a trust we jealously guard. Let
these halls never ever again be shrouded in shame.

The reason it has taken some time for the repeal of this legislation is
that over the years the Black Administration Act became part of a myriad of
apartheid laws that created a labyrinth of intricate regulations governing
the African peoples of our country. It was one of the principle mechanisms
for regulating the lives of African peoples under apartheid.

The overall aim of the Bill before us is of course to repeal the Black
Administration Act as a whole, but there are measures, as the Minister has
mentioned to, that if immediately repealed without substitute legislation
being in place would cause lacunae in our law, and others which if repealed
may cause unintended consequences in that there remains a degree of
uncertainty as to the extent of the pervasiveness of the Act.

Section 1 of the Act reads:


   The Governor-General shall be the Supreme Chief of all Blacks in the
   Union and shall in respect of all Blacks in any part of the Union be
   vested with all such rights, immunities, powers and authorities as are or
   may be from time to time vested in him in respect of Blacks in the
   Province of Natal.

The philosophy underlining this provision can be traced back to the reign
of Sir Theophilus Shepstone. It was predominant thinking amongst the ruling
class of the time that Africans could not be governed by the law common to
the rest of the citizenry and the so-called native law should be utilised
to govern the indigenous peoples of this country.

Of course, the so-called natives could not be trusted to do the actual
governing. So, a law was passed in Natal in 1850 enabling administrators of
native law to be appointed to govern African peoples in accordance with
their own laws and customs, with an appeal mechanism to the Lieutenant-
Governor of Natal as the Supreme Chief of the African population, thus
effectively replacing the Zulu monarch.

This provision has been amended by section 2 of the Amendment Act of 1929
and then substituted by section 2 of the Black Administration Amendment Act
of 1956 and thereafter assigned to the Premiers of certain provinces in
terms of 235(8) of the interim constitution. Thus it has remained virtually
unchanged on the Statute Book to the present day.

The assignment to the relevant provinces of section 2(7) bis, (7) ter and
(8) of the Act relating to the recognition of traditional leaders in
governing matters such as the conditions of service of chiefs and other
traditional authorities find relevance in our country today. In this
regard, provision is made to allow for the relevant provinces to repeal and
adopt substitute legislation before 31 July 2006, failing which these
clauses will in effect lapse.
We have adopted the approach of the sunset clause of 31 July 2006 in
various other provisions, including those relating to traditional courts,
those relating to the province of KwaZulu-Natal in so far as it pertains to
the Code of Zulu Law, and also the issue of land that was delivered through
edicts to individuals during that time.

Staying with Land Affairs, the Bill as it was introduced required that any
restrictive condition attached to a title deed provided for in section 34
of the Act should, through an administrative process, be removed upon
application to the Registrar of Deeds. As we were not in a position to know
precisely what kind of restrictive conditions pertained in this regard and
whether these were discriminatory or protective in nature, we felt that it
was prudent to have the Minister for Land Affairs approve any such
application prior to the removal by the Registrar of Deeds.

In order to ensure that we did not inadvertently remove any vested rights
that may have been secured through the myriad of delegated legislation over
the last 76 years, we have inserted a general savings clause. It is hoped
that this will deal with any unintended consequences that may arise during
the investigation by Land Affairs.

The Bill, as introduced, retained the clause in the Black Administration
Act with some superficial changes, which provided that:
   A personal obligation incurred by a traditional leader would not bind his
   subjects unless a meeting was convened at which the majority of the
   members of that community agreed to be so bound.


This so-called protection clause, like everything else in the Act, has a
long and complicated history. Certain authorities on customary law suggest
that, based on the Western notion of monarchy, the king is synonymous with
the state and had only a public law persona and no private law persona. A
traditional leader could therefore bind his tribe to their detriment
without consulting his subjects and could not be sued for damages resulting
from his actions. As a result, this so-called protection clause was
included in the Act.

The Law Commission suggested the retention of this clause, based on a court
decision prior to the advent of the Constitution. The House of Traditional
Leaders in their submission state:


   This Act seems to suggest that traditional leaders act arbitrarily when
   dealing with the issue of land. No traditional leader may deal with the
   issue of land without consulting his council and the community at large.
   It must be pointed out that traditional leaders are supreme guardians of
   the land on behalf of traditional communities.


We respectfully share their views on this matter, and have removed this
clause, particularly since the Department of Provincial and Local
Government has reconsidered its position on this matter.

I would have liked to have concluded by saying that that casts the Black
Administration Act into the rubbish bin of history, but I’m afraid that in
this regard I will have to say, see you again in July 2006 or sometime
before that.

Let me immediately just thank the officials, in particular, Mr Lawrence
Basset and his team from the department, who have, as always, produced
sterling work. My gratitude too to the Department of Land Affairs and the
Department of Provincial and Local Government for their co-operation and
those officials who attended the committee meetings, and lastly to my
committee members, some of whom are still around today. I do thank you for
your support and your assistance in this regard. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Chair, the Black Administration Act now finally to be
repealed was at the core of apartheid legislation. It was legislated in
1927 as the Native Administration Act; and later referred to as the Bantu
Administration Act. Its final repeal truly marks the end of, if not
institutionalised racial discrimination, at least linguistic racial
discrimination.

I do wish to point out that one aspect which remains outstanding and needs
to be dealt with as soon as possible, is that of the lack of proprietary
rights of women, married according to customary law. Section 22 of the Act
will only be repealed in July 2006, as my colleague has mentioned, or once
substitute legislation has been passed, whichever happens at the later
date. We need to give urgent attention to this. I want to quote from
Hansard, as follows:

   It is true that the apartheid legislation could not bring about peace and
   prosperity, because legislation that seeks to bring about peace and
   prosperity has to be based on the basic principles of justice. It must
   have a moral basis.

This quote is from a speech I made in this Chamber 14 years ago on 28 May
1991, speaking on the abolition of the racially based Land Measures Bill. I
was a member of the select committee that drafted that Bill.

I want to emphasise again – because it is also true today – that no
legislation and no policy can bring about peace and prosperity if it is not
based on justice, if it is not morally defensible. Apartheid laws developed
over many years. In part these laws were the legal sanction given to
systems going back a hundred and more years ago – in part, going back to
the phenomenon of slavery.

Breaking down the apartheid laws took place a relatively short space of
time ago. In that same speech that I have already referred to, I also
stated:


   The search for justice goes through a tiresome process, a process of self-
   examination and of realism. That process is the process of searching for
   an honest basis on which we could build the future.

Die jaar 1994 het die begin van ’n nuwe era ingelei en ’n nuwe proses is in
aanvang geneem. Na die afbreek van apartheid het ’n nuwe kodewoord die nuwe
proses getipeer. Hierdie kodewoord is “transformasie”. Transformasie omvat
al die begrippe soos swart ekonomiese bemagtiging, regstellende optrede,
grondhervorming, gelyke indiensneming – almal aksies wat op die oog het om
onregte van die verlede uit te wis en om benadeeldes te help om “in te
haal”. Dit is alles in die strewe na die bereik van gelykheid vir almal.

Gelykheid, sê die Konstitusionele Hof, is ’n dinamiese begrip; dit is nie
net die passiewe verwydering van beletsels tot gelykheid nie. Dit behels en
vra aktiewe stappe om gelykheid te bereik, in besonder ook van die
regering. Die morele basis van transformasie, hierdie fase waarin ons nou
is, is voor-die-hand-liggend. Dit is goed en dit is reg dat voorheen
benadeeldes gehelp word, dat gelykheid vir almal nagestreef word.
Ek het dit al gesê en ek wil dit weer vandag sê oor die hele spektrum heen,
en al meer en meer sluip daar elemente van diskriminasie die toepassing van
transformasie binne. Neem kennis: as gelykheid vir almal bereik word ten
koste van die gelyke behandeling van almal, verval die morele basis van
transformasie. Jy kan nie deur af te trek en weg te neem van sommige
gelykheid bereik nie. Dit is deur opheffing en opbou dat jy gelykheid
bereik.

Apartheid het deur fases gegaan. Selfbeskerming is voorop gestel. Toe word
die selfbeskerming selfbevoordeling én toe word dit selfbevoordeling ten
koste van ander mense en daarná blatante benadeling van ander as ’n
aanvaarde norm, as ’n gegewe. Dit is wat met apartheid gebeur het.

En nou wil dit in baie eerlikheid vir u sê: transformasie kan deur
dieselfde fases as apartheid gaan, van beskerming wat reg en goed is, van
bevoordeling wat in hierdie stadium aanvaarbaar is, maar nie van
bevoordeling ten koste van ander mense nie. Dan vernietig transformasie sy
eie gesonde basis van moraliteit waarop dit gebou is.

Ek wil vir u sê: die Afrikaner wat tot 1994 die Suid-Afrikaanse regering
gedomineer het, en in die besonder die wit Afrikaners soos ek en die agb
Adjunkminister van Justisie, moes self in ons eie diepste wese en binneste
tot die besef kom dat daar nie ’n morele basis vir apartheid is nie, en dit
gaan vra ten opsigte van transformasie, en hoor as ek dit vir u sê, as
iemand wat self deur daardie proses van selfbesinning gegaan het, dit gaan
van u en die ANC ’n voortdurende besinning in die diepste van u wese vra;
om, soos ons agb voorsitter gesê het, om elke wet en elke beleid te toets
aan die vraag of dit op die lange duur, gelykheid, billikheid vir almal sal
meebring. Die versoeking is daar. Die versoeking was daar in die verlede,
dat wanneer jy oor die mag beskik om iets te bereik, om daardie mag buite
die grense van moraliteit te gebruik.

Ek glo dat in die ANC daar genoeg stemme is wat sal opdaag om te voorkom –
om te voorkom – en ek sê dit in soveel erns, om te voorkom dat op die lange
duur die geskiedenis transformasie, net soos apartheid, in sy toepassing as
’n skandbeleid gaan plaas. Mag dit nooit gebeur nie. Baie dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The year 1994 heralded the start of a new era and a new process was
commenced. After the dismantling of apartheid a new codeword characterised
the new process. This codeword was “transformation”. Transformation
encompasses all the concepts like black economic empowerment, affirmative
action, land reform, equal employment – all actions ostensibly aimed at
eradicating the injustices of the past and helping the disadvantaged to
“catch up”.  All of this had the objective of achieving equality for all.

Equality, says the Constitutional Court, is a dynamic concept; it is not
merely the passive removal of obstacles to equality. It implies and demands
active steps to achieve equality, in particular also from government. The
moral basis of transformation, this phase we are now in, is obvious. It is
fit and proper that the previously disadvantaged are being helped, that
equality for all is being pursued.

I have said it before and I want to say again today, that over the entire
spectrum more and more elements of discrimination are creeping into the
implementation of transformation. Take note: if equality for all is
achieved at the expense of equal treatment for all, the moral basis of
transformation will collapse. You cannot achieve equality by removing and
taking away from some. It is through upliftment and reconstruction that one
achieves equality.

Apartheid went through phases. Self-protection was paramount. Then self-
protection became self-favouring  and then it became self-favouring at the
expense of other people and thereafter blatant injustice to others as an
accepted norm, as a given. This is what happened with apartheid.

And now I want to tell you in all honesty: transformation could go through
the same phases that apartheid did, from the protection of what is fit and
proper, of favouring which is acceptable at this stage, but not of
favouring at the expense of other people. Then transformation will destroy
its own healthy foundation of morality on which it was built.

I’m telling you: the Afrikaners who dominated the South African government
until 1994, and especially the white Afrikaners like myself and the hon
Deputy Minister of Justice, had to come to the realisation deep within
ourselves that there was no moral foundation for apartheid, and this must
be asked with regard to transformation, and hear me when I tell you, as
someone who went through that process of introspection himself, that it
will require from you and the ANC continuous introspection in the depths of
your soul;  like our hon chairperson has said, to test every Act and every
policy by asking if it will bring equality and fairness for everyone in the
long run. The temptation is there. In the past there was the temptation,
when you had the power to do something, to use that power outside the
boundaries of morality.

I believe there are enough voices in the ANC to ring out and prevent – to
prevent, and I say this in all seriousness - history in the long run from
depicting the application of transformation as disgraceful policy, as
happened to apartheid. May this never happen. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Chair and hon members, the Bill before us has as its
main intention the repeal of the Black Administration Act. It is one of the
most satisfying aspects of serving as an MP in this democratic Parliament,
when we unite to dismantle the remaining legal architecture of apartheid.

The Black Administration Act is, like much of the legislation from the
previous dispensation, a despicable and degrading document that gave effect
to the repression and dehumanisation of the majority of the people in this
country. We should celebrate every occasion such as this when the people of
South Africa, at long last free and equal, unite in this Chamber to
relegate such legislation to the dustbin of history.

Regrettably, the complexity and extent of this previous dispensation covers
a wide scope of government departments over several spheres. The Bill
before us thus proposes an incremental repeal. The process depends upon
these other departments and spheres of government to provide alternative
legal remedies on certain of these aspects. The UDM supports the Bill.
[Time expired.][Applause.]

Rre P D N MALOYI: Modulasetulo, re kopane gompieno jaaka maloko a Palamente
ya Aforika Borwa go tla go boloka masaledi a tlhaolele. Re tlile go a
boloka gonne a ntse a re tshwenya thata. Re batla go a sutisa mo tseleng.
Molaonyana o o bitswang gore ke molao wa go busa batho-bantsho, o na le
dingwaga dile 78. Molao o fa o ne o dirwa ke borre ba tlhaolele ba ba
tshwanang le borre Delport, maikaelelo magolo e ne e le go bolelela rona
batho-bantsho gore re dire eng, re tshele jang, re tsoge leng, re robale
leng, re nyale mang, re seke ra nyala mang, jalo jalo.

Ka 1910 fa go ne go na le Union ya Aforika Borwa, ga baaka ba fetola molao
o, ba ile ba tswelela pele ka ona. Ba tswetse pele ka ona go fitlha ka 1927
ba ntse ba batla go laola batho-bantsho. Ka 1927, jaaka Modulasetulo le
Tona ba setse ba buile, maburu a ne a re go botlhokwa thata gore re kopanye
melaonyana e ya diporofense tse nne tse, e re fa re feditse go e kopanya re
be re laola batho-bantsho ba.

Go ne go na le sengwe se bitswa Governor General [Mmusi-Kakaretso] mme fela
ga ke itse gore se bitswa eng ka Setswana. Rre yo wa tlhaolele yo, go ne go
twe ke ena morena wa batho-bantsho. Ke ena a neng a swetsa gore go
tshwanetse go dirwe eng, leng, ko kae; mme batho-bantsho ba beetswe kwa
thoko, gore lona le le batho-bantsho le tla buswa ke ntate yo. Ntate yo ke
ena a tla swetsang ka matshelo a lona.

E ne e tsenyeletsa le magosi a rona. Ba le bantsi ba e leng maloko a ANC,
le ba ba kgaratlhetseng tokologo ya gompieno, ba tla gopola gore magosi a
rona mo Aforika Borwa, fa maburu a ne a ba gatelela ba ne ba bua nako nngwe
bare: nyaa, kana re utlwile, selo se se botlhoko thata. Re tla ema ka
maoto. Re tla thusa batho ba rona go lwantshana le mmuso wa tlhaolele.

Maburu a ipolelela gore okare bathonyana ba bantsho ba ba na le matlhale.
Go tla tlhokega gore rona jaaka maburu, e nne rona re ba bolelelang
jaanong. Fa kgosinyana e e bitswang Moroka okare e ya sokodisa, rona ka
mothaka yo re mmitsang Mmusi-Kakaretso yo, re tla ntsha kgosi eo re tsenye
ya rona. Le yona eo fa e sokodisa re tla e ntsha.

Ke dilo tse ba neng ba di dira mo nakong ya maloba. Malao o o tshwanang le
o, ke molao wa kgatelelo. Go ne go na le batho ba rona ba ba neng ba bitswa
ka mainaina. Ke tshaba le go bua mafoko ao, mme ke tla a bua e bile ga ke a
itse ka Setswana. Bangwe ba ba bitsa “bustards” kgotsa “Hottentots”. Ba
dirisa mafoko a a maswe go tlhalosa motho yo montsho.

Gompieno, mo ngwageng wa dingwaga dile 50 tsa Freedom Charter, re tlile go
boloka selo se. Re se boloke, re se kgaole mogatla. Mogatla wa teng re o
bese re dire pesonama e e monate. Re je re fetse ka yona. [Setshego.]

Rre yo o bitswang Mmusi-Kakaretso, jaaka ke ne ke setse ke buile, o ne a
itirile modimonyana yo o neng go tshwanetswe gore go utlwiwe ka ena. Sengwe
le sengwe re utlwe ka modimonyana yo. Ka 1994 fa re fetsa go tsaya puso,
Mopresidente o ile a tsaya makala mangwe a molao o a neelana ka ona kwa
Ditonakgolong tse di farologaneng tsa diporofense. Gore re kgone go fedisa
dilo tsotlhe, diporofense tseo di tshwanetse gore di dire melao e e tla
siamisang dilo tse.
Fa re dutse fa, re a gopola gore go na le sengwe se re se falotseng
malobanyana se se bitswang Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework
Act. Molaotlhomo oo o bua gore go botlhokwa thata gore go nne le melaonyana
kwa diporofenseng gore dilo dingwe di siamisiwe. Re itirela boikuelo thata
mo diporofenseng tsa rona le mo mafapheng a mangwe gore ba re thuse go
boloka selo se se maswe se gore ka bonako jo bo ka kgonagalang, ba dire
gore go nne le melawana kwa diporofenseng tseo. Fa ba sa dire jalo ka di 31
Phukwi, jaaka Modulasetulo a buile, re tla dira ka borona gore molao o o
nna teng.

Bangwe ba lona, bogolo ba ba dutseng ka fa, gore kwa KwaZulu-Natal gone go
na le sengwe se bidiwa KwaZulu-Natal Act on the Code of Zulu Law. Selo seo
se ne se bua ka melelwane, se bua ka molao wa setso, magadi, dingaka
(boraitse) gore batho ba ba laola jang. Selo se molao o o neng o se dira,
ke gore mo gare ga naga ya Aforika Borwa go nne le dinaganyana.

Rona re le mokgatlho wa ANC, ga re dumelele dilo tseo. Selo sa botlhokwa
thata mo nageng ya rona e batho ba rona ba e lwanetseng mo tlase ga
boetapele jwa ANC e ne ele gore go nne le naga e e kopaneng, e e sa
kgethololeng batho go ya ka mmala kgotsa ka bong. Re batla naga e ntle, e e
monate, e mongwe le mongwe a ka reng Aforika Borwa ke naga e re ka yang kwa
go yona. Ke se re se lwetseng e bile ke se re tla tswelelang pele go se
lwela.

Go swabisa thata gore bangwe ba rona ba ba neng ba dira melao e, jaaka rre
Delport, ba batla go bolelela ANC gompieno gore fa e dira diphetogo
(transformation) e di dire jang. Ke madimabe gore re le ANC, Democratic
Party kgotsa DA, ka moo o ka e bitsang, le ba ba neng ba dira molao o, ba
se laole lenanetema la ANC. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P D N MALOYI: Chairperson, we are gathered here today as members of
Parliament of South Africa to bury the remains of  racism. We have come to
bury them because they are still troubling us. We want to clear them out of
our way. This so-called Act, which was used to rule blacks for about 78
years, was formulated by men like Mr Delport. The main aim was to tell us
blacks what to do, how to live, when to get up, whom we were supposed to
marry and whom we must not marry, and so on.

In 1910, when they established the Union of South Africa, they did not
amend this Act, they simply continued with it. They continued with this Act
up until 1927, still trying to control the blacks. In 1927, as the
Chairperson and the Minister have already said, the Boers were saying that
it was imperative that they combine the smaller acts of the four provinces,
after which they could control
these black people.

There was this thing called Governor General but I don’t know the
right terminology in Setswana. This man of apartheid was called a
leader of the Natives. He was the only person to decide what was to
be done, when and where, because blacks were excluded. This man ruled them.
He was the only person to make decisions about our lives.

It also affected our traditional leaders. Most of the members of the ANC,
and those who fought for the freedom we experience today, will remember
that when traditional leaders in Sotuh Africa were under whites oppression,
they would sometimes say: no enough is enough, this is very painful. We
will stand our feet to helping our people to fight the apartheid
government.

The Boers told themselves: It seems as if the black people will become
clever. It is necessary that we, as the Boers, must be the ones who are
telling them what to do now. This little chief called Moroka seems as if he
is troublesome. Together with this man who is the Governor-General we will
remove him and then replace him with our chief. And that one too, if he is
troublesome, we will remove him and replace him too.

Those are the things that were done at that time.  This is an act of
oppression. Then our people were called names. I'm even afraid to say those
names, but I will say them because I don’t even know them in Setswana. Some
were called bastards or Hottentots. They were using these ugly names to
call a black person.

Today, after 50 years of the Freedom Charter, we are coming to bury that
thing. We must bury it and cut its tail off, and make a nice braai with
that tail and finish it. [Laughter.]

This man who was called Governor-General, as I have already said, had made
himself into a god who was supposed to be listened to. Everything was
supposed to be heard from that so-called god. In 1994, after we had taken
over the government, our President took some sections of the Act and handed
them over to different Ministers of the provinces so that we could
eradicate all those things. Those provinces must implement the legislation
that will rectify those things.

As we are sitting here, we remember that we passed the Traditional
Leadership and Governance Framework Bill. This Bill says that it is
imperative that there must be Acts in the provinces so that some other
things may be rectified. We appeal to the provinces and other departments
to help prevent this ugly thing as soon as possible, and make this
legislation to apply in the provinces. If they don’t do this by 31 June
2006, as the Chairperson has already said, we will draft legislation
ourselves and implement it.

Some of you, especially the ones who are sitting here, will recall that in
KwaZulu-Natal there was something called the KwaZulu-Natal Act on the Code
of Zulu Law. That legislation spoke about boundaries, about the acts of
culture, lobola, traditional healers and how they have to rule. What this
legislation was implying was that in South Africa there must be some
Bantustans.

We as the ANC party don’t believe in those things. The important thing in
the country, which our people fought for under the leadership of the ANC,
is that there must be one united country which doesn’t discriminate in
terms of culture or gender. We want a nice and beautiful country of which
every person can say that South Africa is the country that we can go to.
That’s what we fought for and will continue to fight for.

It is a disgrace that some of us who were implementing these Acts, like Mr
Delport, now want to tell the ANC, when we are practising transformation,
how we are supposed to do it. It is unfortunate that the ANC, the
Democratic Party or DA, whichever way you would address them, and the ones
who were implementing this Act, must not control the programme of the ANC.]

They can’t do that. The ANC will determine this agenda.

Go tlhabisa ditlhong thata gore rre Delport a batle go lekalekanya phetogo
le tlhaolele. Go swabisa thata. A dutse mo Palamenteng ya batho ba rona, a
ba a bua dipuo tse di tshwanang le tse. Ka gongwe a ka bo a ntse kwa Old
Assembly kwa go neng go dirwa melao e gone, e seng kafa.

Go swabisa thata, mme ke itumelela gore batho ba rona ba tla bona gore selo
se se bitswang Democratic Alliance se, fa se ntse se bua thata ga se batle
go direla batho ba bantsho sepe. Ke ka moo, batho ba rona ba tla itseng
gore le gompieno bao ba ba tshwanang le rona ka mmala, ba tswile mo selong
se, se se bitswang Democratic Alliance, ba tla mo ANC gonne ba lemogile
gore selo se se ka se thuse motho yo montsho ka sepe. Ke a leboga.
[Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[It is a disgrace that Mr Delport compares racism and transformation. It is
a very big disgrace. Why is he sitting in the Parliament of our people,
saying things like this? Because he is supposed to be sitting in the Old
Assembly, where this legislation was implemented, and not in this House.

It is a very big disgrace, but I’m very happy that our people realise that
this thing called the DA does not want to do anything for blacks. That’s
how today our people know that the people who look like us in colour, must
get out of this ugly thing that is called the Democratic Alliance and come
to the ANC because they have realised that this thing won’t benefit a black
person with anything. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, the incremental repeal of the
Black Administration Act is a historic event as many other speakers have
mentioned to. Many of the provisions being repealed are reminiscent of past
divisions and racial discrimination. However, it is ironic that whilst we
celebrate our 11th year of freedom, vulnerable members of our society,
women and children, have until now suffered the effects of discriminatory
legislation contained in customary law, which is now being addressed in
this piece of legislation.

As we know, countless women and children are evicted from homes in which
they have lived, where bereaved families have been left destitute as well
after their male heir did not meet his obligations to the wife of the
deceased in terms of customary law, and this Bill will seek to address this
issue although we will only be looking at that in June 2006.

It is a relief to witness the eradication of the last vestiges of apartheid
and yet, as one tries to reconcile customary law with constitutional law,
one does run the risk of treading upon sensitive ground and therefore there
is this incremental approach to make sure that vested rights are protected.
On this basis, and its being a last vestige of apartheid, the ACDP supports
and welcomes the provisions contained in this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, comrades and hon members, the PAC joins the House
in the celebration of the repeal of one of the obnoxious Acts of the past
oppressive dispensation. Its repeal represents our continuous
deconstruction of the past and reconstruction of the new.

We are repealing an Act that demonstrated powerfully and with absolute
clarity the paternalism of white domination towards Africans. This Act was
one of the key cogs in a battery of legislation that contributed to the
systematic marginalisation and pauperisation of our people.

This Act, coming after the Native Land Act of 1913, was a decisive nail in
the coffin of African subjugation. The Act regulated the lives of Africans
almost in totality, for example, the Act had total disregard for the
traditions and practices of Africans in their governance models, as the
state could appoint, remove or demote any chief or headman.
This led to the removal of patriotic chiefs and the appointment to
chieftaincy of puppets and active collaborators. This led to disputes that
are still with us today, all over the country, around the question of
chieftaincy. Secondly, African women, in line with the feudal practices of
African societies then, were treated as perpetual minors.

The repeal of this Act must wipe out of our collective political sight this
remnant of the past; this reminder of our years of subjugation, domination
and dehumanisation. The Act or, precisely, the undesirable parts thereof
that we are repealing, joins the many that have been consigned to the
irretrievable dustbin of history.

Indeed, as we construct the new, we have to deconstruct the past and the
PAC is proud of being part of this process as it has steadfastly done in
the past. We are, however, aware that the Act has become so intricate,
almost octopus-like, that it cannot be repealed all at once; that there are
certain provisions of the Act that still need to be used in the interim.
This, the PAC understands and supports.

Like chairman Mao Ze Dong said, the foolish man who removed the mountain,
we will continuously chip away at the Act until it is completely
obliterated. The forward march of transformation and of the progressive
forces is irreversible. The PAC supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr G B MAGWANISHE: Chairperson, hon members, today we are celebrating the
triumph of the human spirit over evil. It is a day of pride to us as great
grandchildren of the warrior men and women that Hintsa and Sekhukhune led;
the patriots that Cetshwayo and Mphephu took to battle; the soldiers that
Moshoeshoe and Ngungunyane taught never to dishonour the cause of freedom;
the young people who went to faraway lands singing . . .

   Sizobashiya abazali ekhaya
   Siyavuma, siyahamba
   Siyongena kwamanye amazwe
   Lapho kungazi khona ubaba nomama
   Silandela inkululeko


 . . . and the workers whose sweat created the wealth that some of us are
enjoying today. So, it is no coincidence that as we celebrated the 50th
anniversary of the Freedom Charter this year, we also started a process,
which marked the beginning of the end of the principal mechanisms that
regulated the lives of African people under apartheid.

The demand of the Freedom Charter has always been the restoration of
people’s dignity. The fact that today we are repealing this Act, which
referred to a section of our people as bastards, really represents the
triumph of the human spirit over evil. It is clear that the Black
Administration Act was meant to subjugate and humiliate the African people.
Therefore it cannot be consistent with either the values of the democratic
state or the Constitution of our country.

For us to appreciate the importance of this day, it is important to have a
brief history of this Act and of our country. With the formation of the
Union of South Africa in 1910 the South African party came to power. The
key challenge for the new government was to define a single land and labour
dispensation for South Africa. This challenge was resolved through the Land
Act of 1913.

The key provision of that Act was the creation of a number of African
reserves for the settlement of black South Africans, which would have
served as a pool for migrant labour for white-owned farms and urban-based
industries.

Solomon Plaatje had this to say about the legislation: “Awaking on Friday
morning, on 20 June 1913, the South African Native found himself, not
actually a slave, but a pariah in the land of his birth.”

The forerunner to the 1913 Land Act was the Glen Grey Act, introduced in
1894 to do away with communal land rights. By introducing limited
individual tenure it was hoped that Africans could be forced to become less
independent in relation to their participation in the colonial cash
economy. The result was that thousands of poorer African peasants were
forced off the land.

In addition to pushing Africans off the land, much was done to undermine
the chieftain system of traditional African society as these tribal
authorities acted as an independent political pole, which resisted these
changes.

There was a great deal of opposition from white farmers to the 1913 Land
Act. Rather than having African tenants removed to the reserves farmers
wanted tenants evicted and redistributed as farm labourers. The result was
that the state did not enforce that Act. Many farmers took advantage of the
provisions and ignored the moratorium on evictions in an effort to gain
control over African labourers.

The 1913 Land Act therefore did not in itself eliminate production in South
Africa. Rather, the Act was an important point in a long historical process
that already weakened the African peasants. The needs of white farmers were
addressed through a range of cohesive measures to enable greater control
over Africa tenants on white-owned farms.

Farm labour contracts were brought into the 19th century masters and
servants’ legislation. Taxation policies for African tenants on white-owned
land were tightened. White farmers were increasingly able to use foreign
labour and apprentice homeless children. Hence there was a need for the
introduction of this Act of 1927 – the Native Administration Act - which
later became the Black Administration Act. It then extended to labour
controls and rural areas, introducing pass laws to control the movement of
rural Africans.

This Act also provided for forced removals, providing the basis upon which
forced removals of the apartheid era were to take place. This Act
consolidated various pieces of regulations and previous laws which
regulated African people, into one complicated piece of legislation.

Comrade Cyril Ramaphosa had this to say about this Act: This is one of the
last remaining legislative pieces in a system, which brought misery and
suffering to millions of South Africans during the course of South African
colonial and apartheid history.

But this is a moment also to lament the wasted decades of colonial rule and
apartheid. Lives were ruined, human potential was brutally crushed, and a
nation's prosperity was held ransom to the fears of the prejudiced few.

Sitting here in a democratic South Africa it is easy to forget the hatred
and bitterness that laws such as the Black Administration Act generated.
Remembering such gross violations of human rights and dignity - the forms
they took and the results they produced - serves to inhibit the regrettable
human tendency to allow history to repeat itself. Memory should act as a
brake on the committing of future misdeeds.

As important as it may be to rid the Statute Book of all legislation that
violates the values set out in our new Constitution, it is equally
important to pursue policies and programmes which are going to eradicate
the profoundly damaging effects of these laws. In truth, the Black
Administration Act of 1927 will be history only once we have managed to
restore to our people the rights, resources and opportunities that it
stripped away.

The effects of these laws will remain with us as long as there is severe
rural poverty and underdevelopment; as long as there are South Africans
without access to clean water or adequate housing; and as long as there are
children forced to learn under trees, or without books.

The issue of land has always featured on the liberation agenda in South
Africa. The Freedom Charter demanded that the land should be shared amongst
those who work it, and it reflected many of the concerns of the rural poor.
This sentiment was also reflected at the ANC national conference in 1991,
where the ANC adopted the land reform policy guidelines, which envisaged a
central role for the state in the acquisition and allocation of land.
The Freedom Charter and our Constitution guarantee freedom, which was
denied to the majority of South Africans by the Black Administration Act
and other oppressive laws - freedoms, like  freedom of association,
equality and other freedoms.

It will be important for all South Africans to join hands with the
government in uplifting the standards of poor South Africans. The poor will
never tolerate the perpetuation of poverty and the rich cannot defeat the
anger of the poor masses.

Therefore the redistribution of wealth is not an act of charity but an act
of necessity for us to enjoy this freedom on a continuous basis. There can
be no genuine freedom in a sea of poverty, because poverty cannot live in
peace with poverty.

On behalf of the ANC I support this Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Let me begin by
thanking all those who participated in the debate. I think it was a very
good debate. I just want to be anecdotal for purposes of emphasising what I
think is an important follow-up that we have to undertake, and that was
when I spoke to many people including my colleagues in Cabinet that I was
introducing in Cabinet then, presenting the proposed repeal.

They were shocked, they said, “you mean after so many years you are only
doing it now, we were not aware, we thought you have already done it”. I
picked up even from comments generally in our society that people were
surprised that this was happening so many years down the line, in our new
dispensation.

What it then means is that working together, ourselves in the executive and
Parliament, all the relevant committees must really make sure that we have
a complete repeal of the Act, and that we meet the targets that have been
set by the portfolio committee.

But I do want to respond to the hon Delport. I do agree with the comrades
who pointed out that it is unacceptable to compare transformation and the
apartheid dispensation. It is so incongruous and it is offensive to an
extent. But I do think there is a point that the hon member is raising, and
that in the new dispensation we indeed should not have communities that
feel insecure, that feel they do not belong. That perhaps it is a challenge
not only of Parliament, of society, of all responsible people to make sure
that we increase dialogue amongst ourselves, and we begin to understand
concepts similarly.

It is correct; hon member Godi said we are deconstructing apartheid and we
begun deconstructing apartheid when we sat down to talk, because we then
signed a memorandum of agreement, the Groote Schuur Minute where we said
this is the framework for negotiations, and the hon Delport was there. He
should understand that surely, as one of the senior members of this House
and also one of the senior persons in this country who have been in
politics. I think it is an unacceptable paradigm, that of comparing that
period.

But it is true also that we must create environments in which we are able
to understand one another, that indeed in society a number of people do not
understand what basic concepts such as transformation mean, and it just
means transforming the bad to the good. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

       CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
 CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT – DETERMINATION OF THE MAGISTRATES COMMISSION TO
  WITHHOLD THE REMUNERATION OF MR H W MOLDENHAUER, FORMER CHIEF MAGISTRATE,
  PRETORIA; PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MR M S E KHUMALO, HEAD OF
   OFFICE AT THE AMSTERDAM MAGISTRATE’S COURT; PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM
        OFFICE OF MR M F MATHE, AN ADDITIONAL MAGISTRATE AT PINETOWN

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Before I begin let me just apologise to Imam Gasant
and Mr Mansura at the table. I know that you should be home breaking Fast
with your family. I also want to thank Mr Mansura for the piece of
chocolate. I have never broken Fast with chocolate before; it is actually a
good experience. To come to the hon Mlangeni, we have just decided that we
are going to speak until you are tired. So we will be here until tomorrow .
. . lovely. I will try to paraphrase and be as brief as possible.

These are reports pertaining to magistrates and matters that have been
referred to the portfolio committee. The first one relates to the matter of
Mr H W Moldenhauer. The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development considered the report on the determination by the Magistrates
Commission to withhold Mr Moldenhauer’s remuneration tabled by the Minister
for Justice and Constitutional Development, in terms of section 13 (4A)(b)
of the Magistrates Act of 1993, and reports as follows:


   The portfolio committee noted that on 10 March 2003 the Magistrates
   Commission provisionally suspended Mr Moldenhauer from office in terms of
   section 13 (3)(a) of the Magistrates Act. Section 13(3)(a) in particular
   has since, with effect from 1 November 2003, been amended to the effect
   that the Magistrates Commission is no longer in a position to
   provisionally suspend a magistrate from office. Since 1 November 2003 the
   power to provisionally suspend a magistrate from office is vested in the
   Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development.


   The powers exercised on the advice of the Magistrates Commission, section
   13 (3)(a) of  the  Act  as  it  was  at  the  time  of  Mr  Moldenhauer’s
   provisional suspension is therefore no longer in operation. The portfolio
   committee further noted that the Magistrates Commission on 3  March  2003
   determined to withhold Mr Moldenhauer’s remuneration in terms of  13  (4)
   (a) of the Act. However, in terms of section 13 (4A)(a) of the  Act,  the
   Commission is only in a position to make such a determination in  respect
   of a magistrate who is under provisional suspension in terms  of  section
   13(3)(a), ie provisional suspension affected by the Minister.


Since Mr Moldenhauer was provisionally suspended by the Commission in terms
of a former process, the Commission in the Committee’s view could not have
determined to withhold Mr Moldenhauer’s remuneration in terms of section
13(4)(a) of the Act. Alternatively, if it is argued that the reference in
section 13(4)(a) to section (3)(a) should be interpreted to include a
magistrate suspended in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the Act prior to its
amendment, as the Commission apparently did when taking its decision, Mr
Moldenhauer should have also been entitled to the benefit of the provisions
of sections 13(3)(e) of the Act, which was introduced into the Act by the
amendment affected by Parliament in November 2003, and which provides as
follows:

   The provisional suspension of a magistrate in terms of paragraph (a)
   lapses after 60 days from the date of suspension, unless the Commission
   within that period commences its enquiry into the allegation in question
   by causing a written notice containing the allegation concerned to be
   served on the magistrate. Consequently, Mr Moldenhauer’s provisional
   suspension was effected on 10 March 2003 and should have automatically
   lapsed after 60 days, ie June 2003.
The enquiry in terms of 13(3)(e) only commenced on 7 April 2005, more than
two years later. In such a case the Magistrates Commission could not have
determined to withhold Mr Moldenhauer’s salary during March 2005 since
technically he would not have been under suspension at the time. In terms
of section 13(4A)(c) of the Magistrates Act, Parliament must as soon as
reasonably possible consider the report tabled by the Minister when passing
the resolution, as to whether or not the determination made by the
Magistrates Commission is confirmed, either with or without amendment, or
set aside.

The portfolio committee is of the opinion that the Commission could not
have taken the decision in terms of section 13(4A) of the Act, and
accordingly recommends that the House resolves to set aside the
determination by the Magistrates Commission to withhold Mr Moldenhauer’s
remuneration. That deals with the first report.

The second report is the report of the committee, having considered the
report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate M S E
Khumalo tabled by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development,
in terms of section 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, and we report, as
follows:

The committee noted from the report that the Minister provisionally
suspended Mr Khumalo from office on 22 August 2005. The report of the
Minister, which indicates reasons for the provisional suspension, was
tabled in Parliament on 23 August 2005 in compliance with section 13(3)(b)
of the Magistrates Act of 1993. The portfolio committee invited Mr Khumalo
on 30 August 2005 to submit written representations to the committee
regarding the recommendation made by the Magistrates Commission.

The committee did not receive any response to the invitation by 13
September 2005. The portfolio committee noted that Mr Khumalo was charged
with stealing moneys belonging to a deceased estate in the amount of R240
951,96 during the period 31 July 1999 to 3 April 2001. In terms of section
13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, Parliament must as soon as reasonably
possible pass a resolution as to whether or not the provisional suspension
of the magistrate is confirmed.

The portfolio committee considers the allegation to be of such a serious
nature as to make it inappropriate for Mr Khumalo to perform his functions
as a magistrate while the enquiry referred to in section 13(3)(e) of the
Act is being held, and therefore recommends that the NA resolves to confirm
the provisional suspension of Mr Khumalo in terms of section 13(3)(c) of
the Magistrates Act. The committee further recommends that a progress
report in respect of the enquiry of the Magistrates Commission be tabled in
accordance with the provisions of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act,
and the first report must be tabled in Parliament by 13 January 2006.

Lastly, the report of the committee on the provisional suspension from
office of Mr M F Mathe, an additional magistrate in Pinetown.  Having
considered this report tabled by the Minister, the portfolio committee
noted from the report that the Minister provisionally suspended Mr Mathe
from office on 22 August 2005, and that the Minister’s report was tabled on
23 August 2005 in compliance with the Magistrates Act. The portfolio
committee invited Mr Mathe on 30 August 2005 to submit written
representations to the committee, and did not receive any representations
by 14 September 2005.

The portfolio committee noted that Mr Mathe was charged with stealing
moneys belonging to a deceased estate in the amount of R16 200,00 during
the period December 2002 to January 2003. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of
the Magistrates Act of 1993, Parliament must as soon as reasonably possible
pass a resolution as to whether or not the provisional suspension of the
magistrate is confirmed.

The portfolio committee considers the allegation to be of such a serious
nature as to make it inappropriate for Mr Mathe to perform his functions as
a magistrate while the enquiry referred to in the Act is held, and
therefore recommends that the NA resolve to confirm the provisional
suspension of Mr Mathe in terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act.

The committee further recommends that a  progress report in respect of the
enquiry of the Magistrates Commission be tabled in accordance with the
provisions of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act, and that the report
be tabled in Parliament by no later than 13 January 2006. Thank you,
members, for your attention. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Question put: That the recommendations of the committee be adopted and the
determination of the Magistrates Commission to withhold Mr Moldenhauer’s
remuneration be set aside.

Agreed to.

Recommendations of the committee adopted and determination of the
Magistrates Commission to withhold Mr Moldenhauer’s remuneration
accordingly set aside.

Question put: That the recommendations of the committee be adopted and the
provisional suspension of Magistrate M S E Khumalo be confirmed by the
House.

Agreed to.

Recommendations of the committee adopted and provisional suspension of
Magistrate M S E Khumalo accordingly confirmed by the House.

Question put: That the recommendations of the committee be adopted and the
provisional suspension of Magistrate M F Mathe be confirmed by the House.

Agreed to.

Recommendations of the committee adopted and suspension of Magistrate M F
Mathe accordingly confirmed by the House.

The House adjourned at 19:23.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                          FRIDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2005





TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Education


    a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 15 – Department of Education
       for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
       Financial Statements of Vote 15 for 2004-2005 [RP 162-2005].

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


    (a)     Report on the provisional suspension from office with
         remuneration: Mr I W O Morake, a magistrate at the Lichtenburg
         Magistrates Court.

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


       a) Report and Financial Statements of South African National Parks
          (SANparks) for 2004-
            2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
    Financial Statements for 2004-
            2005.


                          MONDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:
     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 15 September 2005 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


         (i)     Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)
         (ii)    Precious Metals Bill [B 30 – 2005] (National Assembly –
              sec 75)

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of the Assembly


     1. The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr P S Molefe vacating his seat
        in the National Assembly with effect from 8 March 2005, had been
        filled with effect from 2 September 2005, by the nomination of Ms M
        L Matsemela.


     2. The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr P J G Zuma vacating his seat
        in the National Assembly with effect from 15 June 2005, had been
        filled with effect from 2 September 2005, by the nomination of Mr G
        Lekgetho.

     3. The vacancy which occurred owing to Ms P N Mnandi vacating her seat
        in the National Assembly with effect from 1 August 2005, had been
        filled with effect from 2 September 2005, by the nomination of Ms S
        L Dithebe.

     4. The vacancy which occurred owing to Ms H M Mpaka vacating her seat
        in the National Assembly with effect from 1 August 2005, had been
        filled with effect from 2 September 2005, by the nomination of Ms M
        J J Matsomela.


     5. The vacancy which occurred owing to Ms R R Joemat vacating her seat
        in the National Assembly with effect from 1 August 2005, had been
        filled with effect from 2 September 2005, by the nomination of Mr A
        F Madella.


     6. The vacancy which occurred owing to Ms M N Magazi vacating her seat
        in the National Assembly with effect from 1 August 2005, had been
        filled with effect from 2 September 2005, by the nomination of Ms W
        Ngwenya.

     7. The vacancy which occurred owing to Ms N R Ntshulana-Bhengu
        vacating her seat in the National Assembly with effect from 1
        August 2005, had been filled with effect from 2 September 2005, by
        the nomination of Mr M A Cele.

     8. The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr E M Dipico vacating his seat
        in the National Assembly with effect from 1 August 2005, had been
        filled with effect from 2 September 2005, by the nomination of Mr T
        J Bonhomme.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister for Public Service and Administration
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
        Technology Agency (Proprietary) Limited (SITA) for 2004-2005,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 39-2005].


2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


    a) Report and Financial Statements of Ingonyama Trust Board for 2004-
       2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 134-2005].

                         TUESDAY, 20 SEPTEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly


     1.     Termination of membership of the following members of the
        National Assembly has been withdrawn:


        Diko, M; Mdaka, N M.


     2.     A vacancy has occurred owing to Ms B T Ngcobo, in terms of
        section 47(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
        1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), not being eligible to become a member of
        the National Assembly on the date of her designation by the
        Electoral Commission on 18 April 2004.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


    a) Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art Gallery
       for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
       Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 162-2005].


                        WEDNESDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

    1. The following papers are referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
       Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and report:


        a) Report on the provisional suspension from office with
           remuneration: Mr I W O Morake, a magistrate at the Lichtenburg
           Magistrates Court.


        b) Report on the Review of the Organisation and Post Establishment
           of the Office of the Public Protector, August 2003, tabled in
           terms of section 3(11)(a) of the Public Protector Act, 1994 (Act
           No 23 of 1994).


    2.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Works for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the  Independent  Development
           Trust for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the financial statements for 2004-2005 [RP 129-2005].


    3.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts, Culture, Science and Technology for consideration and report.
        The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
           Natural Scientific  Professions  for  2004-2005,  including  the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the  financial  statements  for
           2004-2005.

    4.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a)  Report  and  Financial  Statements   of   International   Trade
           Administration Commission for 2004-2005, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the financial  statements  for  2004-2005
           [RP 80 – 2005].

    5.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Financial  and  Fiscal
           Commission for 2004-2005, including the Report of  the  Auditor-
           General on the financial statements for 2004-2005 [RP 67-2005].

    6.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Education for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of  National  Student  Financial
           Aid Scheme for 2004-2005, including the Report of  the  Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 179-2005].

     7.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report:

        a) Proposed exclusion of Portion 89 (a portion of  Portion  63)  of
           the  farm  Groenkloof  358  J.R.,  in  extent  4484m2  from  the
           Groenkloof National Park situated in the administrative district
           of Pretoria, Gauteng Province, tabled in terms of  section  2(3)
           of the National Parks Act, 1976 (Act No 57 of 1976).

    8.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Transnet  Limited  for  2004-
           2005, including the Report of the Independent  Auditors  on  the
           Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    9.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements are referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the  South  African  National
           Roads Agency Limited for 2004-2005, including the Report of  the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and the  Performance
           Information for 2004-2005.


        b) Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  South  African  Rail
           Commuter Corporation Limited for 2004-2005, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
           [RP 148-2005].

        c) Report of the Regulating Committee of the  Airports  Company  of
           South Africa and the Air Navigation Services Company  for  2004-
           2005.


        d) Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company of South
           Africa Limited for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Transport


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
        Corporation (RTMC) for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP 26-
        2004].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
        (RSR) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 81-2005].


2.    The Minister for Safety and Security


    a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department for Safety
       and Security for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 187-2005].


3.    The Minister in The Presidency


    a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government Communication
       and Information System (GCIS) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
       the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
       172-2005].

                         THURSDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      (1)   Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment
         Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of Communications on 22
         September 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Communications


          i) Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment
             Bill [B 32 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75) [Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             28050 of 20 September 2005.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
         the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
         Joint Rule 160, on 23 September 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

3.    Translations of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Defence


           i) Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Krygstuigkorporasie van Suid-
              Afrika, Beperk [W 14 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)

      This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Armaments
              Corporation of South Africa, Limited Amendment Bill [B 14 –
              2005] (National Assembly– sec 75).


           ii) Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Spesiale Verdedigingsrekening [W
               15 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)


              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
              Defence Special Account Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2005]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).


     (2)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          i) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Grondwetlike Aangeleenthede [W 22 –
             2005] (National Assmebly – sec 75)

      This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Constitutional
             Matters Amendment Bill [B 22 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
             75).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of the Assembly


     1.     The following member has been nominated as a Member of the
        National Assembly with effect from 15 September 2005:

        Ngcobo, B T



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Transport


     (a)               Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic
         Management Corporation (RTMC) for 2002-2003, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003
         [RP 26-2004].


     (b)          Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety
         Regulator (RSR) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 81-2005].


2.    The Minister of Safety and Security


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department for
        Safety and Security for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 187-
        2005].


3.    The Minister in The Presidency


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government
        Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2004-2005,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 172-2005].


4.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Sentech for 2004-2005,
        including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Letter from the Minister of Public Service and Administration
        dated 16 September 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
        terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act,
        1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
        Annual Report of South African Management Development Institute
        (SAMDI) for 2004-2005:

        LATE SUBMISSION OF SAMDI ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2004/05

        I write to furnish reasons in terms of Section 65(2)(a) of the
        Public Finance Managament Act for the delay in the tabling of the
        South African Management Development Institute’s (SAMDI) Annual
        Report in the National Assembly. As per Section 65(1) of the Public
        Finance Management Act, all Executive Authorities are required to
        table their Annual Report by 30th September.


        SAMDI met the requirement to submit their Annual Financial
        Statements to the Office of the Auditor-General by 31st May 2005.
        However, as they report on a Vote in terms of Generally Recognised
        Accounting Practice (GRAP), as well as a Trading Entity in terms of
        Generally Accepted Accounting Practice (GAAP), the audit process
        has been aggravated by ongoing changes in the accounting standards,
        which SAMDI is expected to implement.


        SAMDI has co-operated fully with the Office of the Auditor-General
        (OAG) in responding to queries raised in relation to their
        compliance and financial reporting. However, due to the
        implementation of new GAAP standards which were brought in at the
        beginning of the financial year under audit (2004/05), SAMDI has
        had to make substantial revisions to its financial statements. The
        OAG is currently reviewing these revisions, and has indicated that
        they will only make the final audit report available to us on the
        19th September 2005.
        This makes it possible for SAMDI to finalise and print their Annual
        Report in time to make the deadline of end-September. They will,
        however, be able to submit the Annual Report by Friday the 14th
        October 2005.
        I trust that you will give this matter your urgent attention and
        thank you in advance for your co-operation.


        Kind regards,


        G J Fraser-Moleketi
        Minister for the Public Service and Administration

                          FRIDAY, 23 SEPTEMBER 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Public Works


     (a)    Reply from Minister of Public Works to recommendation in Eighth
          Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts, 2005, as adopted
          by the House on 7 June 2005.


     (b)          Reply from Minister of Public Works to recommendation in
          Sixth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts, 2005, as
          adopted by the House on 7 June 2005.


          Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.


2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     a) Reply from Minister of Trade and Industry to recommendation in
        Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts, 2005, as
        adopted by the House on 7 June 2005.


        Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library for
        the Blind for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005

                          MONDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:

    (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 23 September 2005 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:
        i) Nursing Bill [B26-2005] (National Assembly-sec 75)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

        1. The Minister of Foreign Affairs
     (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3-Department of Foreign
           Affairs for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statement of Vote 3 for 2004-2005.
2.    The Minister of Safety and Security


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Independent Complaints
        Directorate (ICD) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 23 for 2004-
        2005 [RP 771-2005].


3.    The Minister of Public Works


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
        Development Board (CIDB) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 206-
        2005].


4.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs
     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
        Marketing Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 1-
        2005].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural
        Development Bank of South Africa (Land Bank) for 2004-2005,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 164-2005]

     c) Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort Biological
        Products Limited for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

5.    The Minister of Housing


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Thubelisha Homes for 2004-2005,
        including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing Foundation
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the People’s Housing Partnership
        Trust (PHPT) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
        (RHLF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


                         TUESDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Appointment of Whips

     1.     The following members had been appointed as whips in the
         National Assembly with effect from 2 September 2005:

         Mrs X C Makasi (ANC);
         Dr A N Luthuli (ANC).



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Transport


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
         Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2004-2005,
         including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements for 2004-2005.


2.    The Minister of Public Works


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Build
        Environment (CBE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
        177-2005].


3.    The Minister of Science and Technology
        a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
           Foundation (NRF) Agricultural Marketing Council for 2004-2005,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements for 2004-2005.


     (b)          Report and Financial Statements of GODISA for 2004-2005,
           including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     (c)          Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of
           South Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
           Council (HSRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
           140-2005].

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Ntsika Enterprise Promotion
           Agency for the nine months ended 31 December 2004, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
           the nine months ended 31 December 2004.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
           Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2004-2005,
           including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     (c)    Report of the South African Council for the Non-Proliferation of
           Weapons of Mass Destruction for the period 1 July 2003 to 30
           June 2004.

5.    The Minister of Correctional Services


     a) Draft Directives regarding Complainant Participation in
        Correctional Supervision and Parole Boards, tabled in terms of
        section 299A of the Criminal procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of
        1977) as amended.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated 20
    September 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing
    Members of the National Assembly of the employment of the South African
    National Defence Force in the Democratic Republic of Congo:

      EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN THE
    DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, FOR SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE
    INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE
    DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

    This serves to inform the National Assembly that I authorised the
    employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) personnel
    to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), in accordance with the
    Tripartite RSA/DRC/Kingdom of the Netherlands Agreement regarding
    provision of support in the integration of armed forces of the DRC.


    This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
    section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
    1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with sections 52, 53 and 93 of the
    Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).


    A total of (70) members will be employed from mid September 2005 for a
    period of six months.


    The total estimated cost to be borne by South Africa for the deployment
    of personnel, from the current allocation for Peace Support Operations,
    is R 28 626 692.


    I will communicate this report to the National Council of Provinces and
    to the chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence and wish
    to request that you bring the contents hereof to the notice of the
    National Assembly.


    Regards


    signed
    PRESIDENT

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.          Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of
    Quality of Life and Status of Women on Programme 5 on Policy Co-
    ordination, which is part of Budget Vote 1, “The Presidency”, dated 16
    September 2005:
        The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life
        and Status of Women, having considered Programme 5 on Policy Co-
        ordination which is part of Budget Vote 1 “The Presidency”,
        referred to it, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
        thereon.


2.          Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of
    Quality of Life and Status of Women, on Hearings held with the National
    and Provincial Gender Machinery on 21 November 2003, dated 16 September
    2005:


     The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
     Status of Women, having held hearings with the national and provincial
     gender machinery on 21 November 2003, reports as follows:

                              Table of Contents

                              EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                           SECTION ONE:  OVERVIEW

1.    Introduction

2.    National Policy Framework for Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality

3.    Report of the National OSW on the status of GFPs in National
Departments

          SECTION TWO: SUMMARIES OF REPORTS BY OSWs AND DEPARTMENTS

1.    Reports by the national and provincial OSWs

2.    Reports by the Gender Focal Points in national departments
                   SECTION THREE:  ANALYSIS OF SUBMISSIONS

1.    Office on the Status of Women

2.    National Gender Focal Points

3.    Provincial Departmental Gender Focal Points

                       SECTION FOUR:  RECOMMENDATIONS

1.    National Office on the Status of Women
2.    Provincial Office on the Status of Women
3.    National Gender Focal Points
4.    Provincial Departmental Gender Focal Points
5.    Recommendations to the JMCIQLSW

CONCLUSION

REFERENCES

                              Executive Summary

                                Introduction

The Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and
Status of Women (hereinafter the JMC) was, amongst other functions,
established to monitor the State’s obligations to the Beijing Platform for
Action, as well as to any other applicable international instruments, to
which the country is a signatory. To give effect to its mandate, the JMC
invited the national Office on the Status of Women (OSW), provincial OSWs
and national Gender Focal Points (GFPs) to make presentations on the
following:

   OSWs:
      • Structure of the OSWs.
      • The status of GFPs in the provinces.
      • Provincial gender programmes and budgets.
      • Impact of the programmes and monitoring indicators.


   GFPs:
      • An overview of the  GFP  in  the  Department,  including  lines  of
        reporting.
      • The departmental gender programmes and related budgets.

Altogether the national OSW, 7 provincial OSWs[1]  and 28 GFPS participated
in the hearings, by way of either oral presentation and/or written
submission.

Results and analysis

OSWs have been established in all provinces that reported at the hearings,
with the exception of Gauteng. In Gauteng, the Social Development
Directorate performs this function and a Gender/HIV programme is currently
being established in the Directorate. The number of staff in the OSWs
ranges from 1 to 12. Most of the Heads of the OSWs, with the exception of
Mpumalanga, are appointed at deputy director level and not in the position
of director as is recommended by South Africa's National Policy Framework
for Women's Empowerment and Gender Equality (hereinafter Gender Policy).

Very little information is available on the budgets of the OSWs, but in
some instances, OSWs reported budgetary constraints. The report indicates
that provincial gender policies have been developed in Gauteng and draft
policies in KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape. It is unclear whether the
other provinces have developed gender policies. Gender action plans are in
operation in Gauteng, and KwaZulu-Natal is in the process of developing
one.

Only 3 provinces indicated that gender-mainstreaming policies have been
developed. Information on programmes undertaken by OSWs is sketchy. Some of
the programmes that are, however, underway in some OSWs include programmes
focusing on capacity building, policy development and analysis, gender
machinery and coordination and planning.
Nationally, most of the Departments have established GFPs, with many
reporting that GFPs are staffed with 1 person and some reporting that 3 or
more persons staff them. In most cases, GFPs are not located in the Office
of the Director-General and are instead located elsewhere in the
Departments, with the Human Resources section being a popular site of
location. In addition, most GFP coordinators are appointed at deputy
director or even assistant director level. It is noted that some GFPs also
have responsibilities other than gender. Furthermore, a number of
Departments raised the lack of resources as one of the greatest impediments
to the effective implementation of their work.

Less than half of the Departments reported that they are involved in policy
development to promote gender equity. In addition, very few Departments
have developed a gender policy that defines the organisational framework
within which gender equity will be promoted. In addition, very few
Departments indicated their role in embarking on a gender mainstreaming
strategy in Departments.  The implication of this is that Government policy
for furthering gender equity is adversely affected as guiding policies and
concrete gender mainstreaming strategies constitute the foundation upon
which gender-related work should be framed.

With  regard  to  programmes,  many  Departments  focused  on  the  internal
projects and programmes that  they  are  implementing,  such  as  employment
equity issues, recruitment and selection practices  and  internal  policies.
Many Departments make  little  or  no  mention  of  programmatic  work  done
externally. Where external work is  being  done,  this  is  largely  centred
around the commemoration of calendar events such  as  National  Women’s  Day
and the  16  Days  of  Activism  on  No  Violence  Against  Women.  This  is
problematic, as a comprehensive programme of action needs to  encompass  far
more than this.

Information pertaining to the status of provincial GFPs was insufficient
and this limits the analysis with regard to provincial GFPs. Many
Departments in the Eastern Cape and Western Cape have established GFPs,
while the situation in the North West and Mpumalanga is of concern.
Information on this matter is unclear for other provinces. The location of
GFPs varies, with many being located in the Human Resources sections. In
addition, the rank of GFP coordinators also varies, with most being
appointed at assistant director level. The implication of this is that most
co-ordinators are not equipped with the skills and commensurate level of
experience as envisaged by the National Policy Framework for Women’s
Empowerment and Gender Equality.
While information pertaining to budgets was not available for GFPs in most
provinces, 2 provincial OSWs reported that dedicated budgets are available
in some Departments in those provinces. With regard to programmes
undertaken by GFPs, most of the programmes reported on pertained to
external work.

Recommendations

Some very specific recommendations, as well as some generic
recommendations, are made to the different gender machineries. One of the
most important recommendations to the JMC is the need for additional
information from all parties that made submissions to the hearings. This
will allow the JMC to fill the gaps and make a comprehensive assessment of
the national and provincial gender machinery structures.

Another generic recommendation is for structures to be established and
resourced in accordance with the national Gender Policy, so as to allow
them to fulfill the functions assigned to them. There is a further need to
establish the skills level of some of the persons appointed in the OSWs and
GFPs and if necessary, to provide them with the necessary training that
will enable them to fulfill their functions in their respective positions
or operate at a more senior level.

                            Section One: Overview




1.    Introduction


The Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of  Quality  of  Life  and
Status of Women (hereinafter the JMC) was initially  established  as  an  ad
hoc committee but became  a  permanent  committee  in  1998.  The  JMC  was,
amongst other functions, established to monitor the State’s  obligations  to
the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination  Against  Women  (CEDAW)
and the Beijing Platform for Action, as well  as  to  any  other  applicable
international instruments, to which the country  is  a  signatory.  To  give
effect to this role, the JMC is required to monitor the work  of  Government
Departments in  meeting  the  objectives  of  gender  equality  and  equity.
Strategic objective H of the Beijing Platform for Action, which  deals  with
institutional mechanisms for the advancement of  women,  has  resonance  for
the JMC.

Strategic objective H of the Beijing Platform for Action  notes  that  state
parties are obliged to create or strengthen  national  machineries  for  the
advancement  of  women.  The  gender  machineries  are  thus   tasked   with
supporting Government mainstreaming gender in all policies  and  programmes.
Thus,  the  Beijing  Platform  for  Action  identifies  the   following   as
imperative for the effective functioning of national machineries[2]:

 • Location in the highest level of Government.
 • Sufficient resources in terms of budget and professional capacity.
 • Opportunity to influence development of all government policies.
 •  Institutional  mechanisms  or  processes  to  facilitate   decentralised
   planning, implementation and monitoring. This process should involve Non-
   Governmental  Organsiations  (NGOs)  and  Community  Based  Organisations
   (CBOs).

To give effect to its mandate, the JMC invited the national  Office  on  the
Status of Women (OSW), provincial OSWs  and  national  Gender  Focal  Points
(GFPs) to make presentations on the following:

   OSWs:
      • Structure of the OSWs.
      • The status of GFPs in the provinces.
      • Provincial gender programmes and budgets.
      • Impact of the programmes and monitoring indicators.


   GFPs:
      • An overview of the  GFP  in  the  Department,  including  lines  of
        reporting.
      • The Departmental gender programmes and related budgets.

The questions posed by  the  JMC  were  very  specific.  The  aims  were  to
ascertain whether the gender machinery structures were  in  place  and  what
the nature of their programmes  and  budgets  were.  GFPs  varied  in  their
responses  to  the  JMC,  with  some  of  the  GFPs  providing   substantial
information, not only on their  structures,  but  also  on  policies  within
Departments, activities around gender mainstreaming and challenges, etc.

In  compiling  this  report,  it  was  deemed  essential  to  capture   this
additional information, even if it  was  only  available  for  a  few  GFPs.
Therefore, reporting the  findings  was  broader  than  merely  establishing
whether  GFPs  are  operational  in  Departments.  The  report  includes  an
analysis of the information against the functions accorded to the  GFPs  and
OSWs in the National Gender Policy.

Cognisance  is  taken  of  the  limitations  of  following  this  method  of
reporting, but the importance of recording this  information  outweighs  the
limitations. This document  could  therefore  be  used  as  a  baseline  and
further information could be elicited from  Departments  to  ensure  that  a
comprehensive report on all aspects of the Gender Machinery is compiled.

The OSWs and GFPs that participated  by  either  making  oral  presentations
and/or by providing written submissions are:



|OSWs                          |GFPs cont.                        |
|National OSW                  |Independent Complaints Directorate|
|Eastern Cape                  |Justice and Constitutional        |
|                              |Development                       |
|Free State                    |Labour                            |
|KwaZulu-Natal                 |Land Affairs                      |
|Gauteng                       |Minerals and Energy Affairs       |
|Mpumalanga                    |National Prosecuting Authority of |
|                              |South Africa                      |
|North West                    |National Treasury                 |
|Western Cape                  |National Intelligence Agency      |
|                              |(NIA)[3]                          |
|GFPs                          |Public Enterprises[4]             |
|Agriculture                   |Public Service and Administration |
|Arts and Culture              |Public Service Commission         |
|Correctional Services         |Safety and Security – Secretariat |
|Defence                       |Science and Technology            |
|Education                     |Social Development                |
|Environmental Affairs and     |South African Police Services     |
|Tourism                       |                                  |
|Foreign Affairs               |South African Sports Commission   |
|Health                        |Trade and Industry                |
|Home Affairs                  |Water Affairs and Forestry        |
|Housing                       |                                  |

This report presents the findings  of  the  submissions  (both  written  and
oral) made on 21 November 2003 to the JMC. The report is divided  into  four
sections comprising the following:

   1. Section One provides contextual information  on  the  national  gender
      policy framework and the national Gender Machinery.
   2. Section Two summarises the submissions made by the OSWs and  the  GFPs
      in Departments.
   3. Section Three is an analysis of the submissions made.
   4. Section Four details recommendations for consideration.


2.    National Policy Framework for Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality


In December 2000, Cabinet adopted South Africa's National Policy Framework
for Women's Empowerment and Gender Equality (hereinafter the Gender
Policy), prepared by the OSW in the Presidency. The policy framework
outlines South Africa’s vision for gender equality and sets out how it
intends realising its gender goals. It establishes guidelines for South
Africa to remedy the historical legacy of racism and sexism by proposing
and recommending an institutional framework that facilitates equal access
to goods and services for both women and men. The Gender Policy also
proposes a process that no longer regards gender issues and gender equality
as peripheral, but which places gender issues at the very centre of the
transformation process within all structures, institutions, procedures,
practices and programmes of government, its agencies and parastatals, civil
society and the private sector (South Africa’s National Policy Framework
for Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality, 2000).

2.1   Gender Machinery

In order  to  achieve  national  and  international  commitments  to  gender
equality, a Gender Machinery was established. This Gender  Machinery  refers
to a set of co-ordinated structures within and outside Government which  aim
to achieve equality for women in all spheres of life,   that  is  political,
civil, social, economic and cultural. These  national  machinery  structures
are  located  in  the  Executive,  Parliament,  and  in  civil  society.  An
independent statutory body, the Commission for Gender  Equality  (CGE),  has
also been established to  monitor  the  progress  and  achievements  towards
gender equality.


2.1.1 National Machinery


Executive level

 • Office on the Status of Women – The OSW is located in the Office  of  the
   Presidency.  It  plays  a  vital  role  as  the  principal  co-ordinating
   structure for the national machinery on gender equality. One of the  main
   functions of the OSW is to develop national  gender  plans  and  national
   strategies to implement them. It includes, amongst its tasks,  initiating
   policy and action-orientated research pertinent to gender  mainstreaming;
   developing key indicators for measuring national progress towards  gender
   equality; and working with  ministries  and  Departments,  provinces  and
   publicly funded bodies in mainstreaming gender in policies, practices and
   programmes (Parliament of South Africa, 2002).
 • Gender Desks or Focal  Points  –  These  GFPs  are  based  in  Government
   Departments. The main task is to ensure the effective  implementation  of
   the National Gender Policy at an  operational  level.  Focal  points  are
   responsible for the formulation and implementation  of  effective  action
   plans to promote women’s empowerment and gender equality in the  work  of
   Government Departments.

Legislature

 • The Women’s Parliamentary Caucus – This is  a  multi-party  caucus  whose
   functions include creating  forums  in  which  women  in  Parliament  can
   discuss  and  debate  gender  issues  and   providing   capacity-building
   initiatives for women in Parliament.
 • Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement  of  Quality  of  Life  and
   Status of Women. The functions of this Committee are  to,  among  others,
   ensure that legislation before Parliament  is  gender  sensitive  and  to
   encourage the public, and particularly women, to participate in  the  law
   making process.

Independent Statutory Bodies

A number of independent statutory bodies  have  been  established  that  are
involved in gender issues, including, the CGE, the Human Rights  Commission,
the Independent Electoral  Commission,  the  Public  Protector,  the  Public
Service Commission, the Youth  Commission,  the  Land  Commission,  and  the
South African Law Commission. The CGE is  geared  specifically  towards  the
empowerment of women and gender equality. It forms an integral part  of  the
Gender Machinery.

Women’s Organisations in Civil Society

Women’s organisations in civil  society  play  an  important  role,  as  the
national  machinery  of  a  country  cannot  on  its  own   make   effective
contributions and shift  public  policy  agendas  for  women.  The  national
machinery  has  a  responsibility  to  provide  women’s  organisations  with
education and training as well as information and resources.


2.1.2 Provincial Machinery


Different structures have been developed to fulfill the varying needs of
the provinces. The Gender Policy, however, recommends that the general
principles of the national model be followed. This will include the
establishment of an OSW (in the Premiers’ Offices), gender units or focal
points in all provincial Departments, a women’s caucus in provincial
legislatures and support for the establishment of civil society structures.
Furthermore, the provincial OSW is responsible for developing a provincial
gender policy and action plan that is in line with the National Gender
Policy and co-ordinating the activities of other role-players and
stakeholders.




2.1.3 Local Government Machinery


Local Government is in the best position to impact directly  and  positively
on  women’s  empowerment  and  gender  equality.  The  South  African  Local
Government  Association  (SALGA)  has  advocated  the  creation  of   gender
structures, which would guide the work of local government councils.

2.2 Integrated Co-ordination Framework and Process for Gender

Mainstreaming

The Gender Policy outlines an integrated co-ordination framework and  gender
mainstreaming process that is intended to  guide  and  mobilise  ministries,
provinces and local government towards integrated programme delivery. It  is
an integrated approach, as the cross-cutting nature of gender demands  this.
The objectives of the co-ordination framework include:

    • Setting goals and objectives for the national gender programme.
    • Establishing clear lines of communication and accountability.
    • Developing a dynamic Management Information System  that  facilitates
      informed implementation.

The co-ordination process is located in the Presidency  (with  the  national
OSW), which is accountable  for  the  National  Gender  Programme.  The  OSW
operates  through  the  Gender  Focal  Points  located   in   the   national
Departments. It also draws on the strategic input of the National  Technical
Committee. The Provincial OSWs, which are tasked with the development  of  a
provincial gender policy and plan of action, in line with  national  policy,
feeds  into  the  co-ordination  process  as   one   of   the   implementing
agencies[5].

The Minister and  the  Director-General  in  the  Presidency  have  specific
functions as the custodians and principal champions of the  national  gender
programme. They also report directly to the President on gender  issues.  An
example of the function of the Minister in the Presidency includes  ensuring
that gender is mainstreamed through  Cabinet  and  Cabinet  Committees.  The
Director-General,  on  the  other  hand,  has  as  one   of   his   or   her
responsibilities, facilitating gender mainstreaming  among  senior  managers
such as Director-Generals.

A National Co-ordinating Committee  has  also  been  established  which,  is
regarded  as  government’s  hub  for  the  effective  co-ordination  of  the
National Gender Programme. This committee is chaired by the OSW and  members
of this committee cut  across  all  national  ministries,  provinces,  local
government structures and organs of civil society. Some of the functions  of
this committee include providing guidance on gender analysis,  developing  a
national gender action  plan  and  designing,  implementing  and  evaluating
cross-cutting programmes such as poverty  alleviation,  with  Ministers  and
Director-Generals.

In his 2003 State of the Nation  address,  President  Mbeki  indicated  that
further steps are underway  to  ensure  the  implementation  of  the  Gender
Policy. The President indicated that a system would  be  introduced  through
which gender representation targets and content of  programmes  become  part
of the  core  performance  criteria  of  every  government  institution  and
manager. This would provide further  impetus  for  gender  mainstreaming  in
government institutions.


2.3   Gender Mainstreaming


The Gender Policy document refers to gender mainstreaming as a process  that
is goal orientated and “that recognises that most  institutions  consciously
and unconsciously serve the  interests  of  men”  (South  Africa’s  National
Policy Framework for Women’s  Empowerment  and  Gender  Equality,  2000,  p.
xvii). The Gender Policy thus encourages institutions to  embrace  a  gender
perspective  in  transforming  themselves.  It  also   promotes   the   full
participation of women in decision-making so that women’s  needs  move  from
the  periphery  to  the  centre  of  development   planning   and   resource
allocation.

It is important to note that gender equality is the  responsibility  of  all
institutions of Government. In order to achieve gender equality,  Government
must  embark  on  a  rigorous  process  of  gender  mainstreaming.  This  is
essentially the task of structures of the  National  Machinery  as  well  as
individual Government  Departments  at  a  national,  provincial  and  local
level.

The Gender Policy document outlines three main areas  of  intervention  that
Government   Departments   can   make   in   gender   mainstreaming.   These
interventions  relate  to  external  and  internal   gender   transformation
encompassing the following:

   1. Promoting women’s empowerment and gender  equality  in  their  service
      provision (external transformation).
   2. Raising public awareness  about  gender  in  their  interactions  with
      clients  and  stakeholders  in  the  private  and  community   sectors
      (internal and external transformation).
   3. Promoting women’s empowerment and gender equality  in  their  internal
      employment policies and practices (internal transformation).

3.    Report of  the  National  OSW  on  the  status  of  GFPs  in  National
Departments

In November 2003, the OSW undertook its 3rd Audit on the status of  GFPs  in
national Departments. Twenty-two Departments responded to the  questionnaire
distributed by the OSW. The results indicated the following:

 • Of the departments that responded, 31.8% (7) have GFPs  at  the  director
   level, which is the level mandated by the Gender Policy.
 • Six of the Departments reported that their GFPs were at  deputy  director
   level and 4 GFPs were appointed at assistant director level.
 • The understanding of the structure of GFPs varied. In 15 departments, the
   GFP referred to an individual and in 9 departments, the GFP referred to a
   unit.
 • Only 9 Departments have formally appointed GFPs. In these instances,  the
   person’s performance contract refers to their function as that of a  GFP,
   but only 6 Departments assess them on GFP work.
 • The GFPs are responsible for work other than  gender  related  functions.
   Only 6 Departments perform GFP functions exclusively, whilst  GFPs  in  2
   Departments perform 3 functions or  less,  and  in  14  Departments  they
   perform 4 or more functions, over and above their gender functions.


Section Two: Summaries of Reports by OSWs and Departments



Reports by the National and Provincial Offices on the Status of Women (OSW)


As indicated earlier in the report, the OSWs were requested to report on:

      • Structure of the OSWs.
      • The status of GFPs in the provinces.
      • Provincial gender programmes and budgets.
      • Impact of the programmes and monitoring indicators.

The provincial  OSW  reports  varied  in  the  extent  and  depth  to  which
information was supplied. Many of the reports addressed the first two  areas
that had be to  reported  on,  whilst  significantly  less  information  was
received on the provincial gender programmes, and even less on  budgets  and
impact of programmes.


1.    Eastern Cape



1.1   Structure


The OSW is staffed with  3  people,  namely  a  deputy  director,  assistant
director and an administrative officer.

Provincial  Gender  Focal  Points  (GFPs)  have  been  established  in  some
Departments. GFPs  are  staffed  by  co-ordinators  appointed  at  assistant
director level and  Special  Programme  Officers  (SPOs)  are  appointed  at
deputy  director  level.  The  following  GFPs  have  been  established   in
Departments:

Sport, Arts and Culture      1 SPO, deputy director.
                       1 GFP, assistant director.
Agriculture            1 SPO, deputy director.
                       1 GFP, assistant director.
Public Works                 1 SPO, deputy director.
                       1 GFP, assistant director.
Education              1 SPO, deputy director.
                       1 GFP, assistant director.
Health                       1 Acting SPO, deputy director.
Transport              1 SPO, deputy director.
Safety and Liaison           1 SPO, deputy director.
Economic Affairs       1 SPO, deputy director.
Finance                1 GFP, assistant director.

The location of the GFPs differs across Departments. Some of  the  GFPs  are
located in human resources and others in the Heads of Department’s  offices.
The location  of  the  GFPs  places  them  outside  of  key  decision-making
structures and thus limits the impact of the GFP in gender mainstreaming.


1.2   Budget


The OSW representative reported that for the  2003/04  financial  year,  the
Office had a budget of R1.2 million. No indication was  given  whether  this
amount included salaries, infrastructure as well as project expenditure.


1.3   Policy and Gender Action Plan


The report does not indicate whether the  OSW  has  developed  a  provincial
gender policy and gender action plan that  is  in  line  with  the  national
policy. It has undertaken activities for the promotion of the Gender  Policy
Framework. However, the report  does  not  indicate  whether  this  is  with
reference to the national policy or a provincial policy.


1.4   Gender Mainstreaming


Following a Gender Audit,  the  provincial  OSW  in  consultation  with  the
national OSW introduced a coordination framework for the  implementation  of
gender mainstreaming and the empowerment of women. In  accordance  with  the
needs of the province, three gender clusters have  been  prioritised.  These
are the economic empowerment of women, ‘no violence against women’, and  the
special support for rural women’ clusters.


1.5   Programmes


As per the brief given to the OSWs, the report presented by the OSW  focused
on the programmes within the clusters, as prioritised by the  province,  and
the various projects undertaken by the Departments to  give  effect  to  the
objectives of the clusters. It is unclear from the report what the  role  of
the OSW is within these programmes.

 • Women and the Economy

The Departments forming part of this cluster include Environment and
Tourism (lead department); Economic Affairs; Sport, Recreation, Arts and
Culture; Roads and Public Works; Provincial Treasury and Land Affairs. Some
of the programme areas prioritised by the Departments are:


      o Sports, Recreation, Arts and Culture  -  Women  in  Publishing  and
        Women in Arts and Crafts.
      o Economic Affairs, Environment and Tourism - Women’s co-operatives.
      o Roads and Public Works -  Promoting  women’s  full  access  to  and
        control over productive resources.


 • Girl Child

Sports,  Recreation,  Arts  and  Culture  has  been  involved  in   numerous
programmatic areas including  an  eco-challenge,  gymnastrada,  guiding  and
scouts and the South African Games. The Department  of  Education  has  been
involved in awareness raising.

 • Gender Based Violence

The Departments of  Justice,  Safety  and  Liaison,  Health,  South  African
Police  Services,  South  African  National  Defence   Force,   Correctional
Services, Education and Social  Development  constitute  this  cluster.  The
programmatic areas cited by Departments as areas of work include:

         o Social Development - Victim empowerment.
         o Roads and Public Works - HIV and AIDS.
         o  Sports,  Recreation,  Arts  and  Culture  -  Imbiza   Intersect
           Coalition Arts and Culture launch and Life skills training.
         o Education - Awareness raising.
         o Health - Provision of emergency care  services  for  victims  of
           sexual offences or abuse.
         o Correctional Services - Rehabilitation.



 • Rural women


This  cluster  area  is  in  line  with  the  Provincial  Integrated   Rural
Development Plan and is constituted by the Departments of Agriculture,  Land
Affairs.  Social  Development,  Sports,  Arts,  Culture,  Transport,   Water
Affairs  and  Roads  and  Public  Works.  The  report  indicated  that   the
Department of Roads and Public Works has poverty alleviation as one  of  its
programme areas. The report furthermore indicates  that  the  Department  of
Agriculture  is  involved  in  three  projects  in  this  cluster,  but   no
indication is given of the projects.


1.5   Achievements


The report cites provincial  leadership  to  gender  mainstreaming  and  the
empowerment of women as an achievement. This is evident  in  the  Provincial
Growth and Development Plan for 2004 – 2014. Projects and programmes  report
mainstreaming gender as an objective.


1.6   Challenges


The Eastern Cape OSW undertook a gender audit in 2001, which indicated  that
the province was not in  a  position  to  significantly  address  itself  to
fulfilling its gender mandate. GFP coordinators had not  been  appointed  in
the Departments to  drive  the  process  of  gender  mainstreaming  and  the
empowerment of women. Subsequent to the gender audit, GFPs were  established
in some departments. This process of the appointment, location and  resource
allocation to the GFPs were, however, not uniform  in  the  province.  GFPs,
staffed by coordinators, were appointed at  assistant  director  levels  and
special programmes officers at deputy director level.



2.    Free State



2.1   Structure


The OSW is  staffed  with  a  deputy  director,  an  assistant  director,  2
administrative clerks, a messenger and  a  secretary.  An  interdepartmental
gender committee has been formed. This committee consists of the  GFPs  from
provincial and national departments, which have  offices  in  the  province.
Very few gender co-ordinators have been  appointed  at  a  local  government
level. Gender co-ordinators in local government,  however,  attend  meetings
when provincial activities  are  being  planned.  Other  structures  of  the
gender machinery in the province include the Committee  on  the  Improvement
of Status  of  Women,  Youth  and  Disabled.  The  Women’s  Caucus  is  non-
operational.


2.2   Budget


There was an indication by the presenter that gender programmes  received  a
significantly  smaller  allocation  than  that  of  the  youth  directorate.
However, it was  not  clear  whether  this  was  for  the  OSW  or  for  the
respective Departmental GFPs.


2.3   Policy and Gender Action Plan


The National Policy Framework had been  presented  to  the  Members  of  the
Executive Committee, Heads of Departments, Managers and Deputy Managers  and
municipal districts. The Free State Provincial Executive  Committee  adopted
the policy. A Free State  Development  Plan  has  been  developed.  The  OSW
indicated that a monitoring strategy is  in  place  to  gather  Departmental
information on  the  GFPs  on  structures  of  GFPs,  programmes,  projects,
budgets, and disaggregated data of staff.


2.4   Gender Mainstreaming


The report states that Strategic Plans and an  Operational  Plan  have  been
devised from the Gender Policy.


2.5   Programmes



   Education


Some of the programme areas of the Department  of  Education  include  those
addressing sexual harassment, adult basic education and  training,  equality
in job allocation, skills development through the  allocation  of  bursaries
and the building of hostels for farm school children.

 • Economic empowerment of women

The report cites 3 Departments that are engaged in the economic empowerment
of women. These include the Departments of Public Works, Roads and
Transport, Health and Provincial Treasury. Provincial Treasury was cited as
having undertaken road shows, which addressed issues of financial
management. In general, the report was not clear about the programme areas
that these Departments are engaged in.

 • Agriculture

The report indicated that women manage more than 80% of small-scale
projects on tribal land in the former Qwa-Qwa and in townships. Women
constitute 60% of all land reform beneficiaries. The Department of
Agriculture is reported to have a female farmer of the year competition, a
food security pilot project of which the main beneficiaries are women and a
programme that facilitates mentoring and partnership between women farmers
and more experienced neigbouring farmers.

 • Social Development

The Department of Social Development reported on the distribution of
grants, hospice organisations, victim empowerment, and shelters for abused
women amongst its programme areas, which has a gendered impact. Internal
measures include a HIV and AIDS policy.

 • Health

Within the Department of Health, several programmes are said to benefit
women. These include the maternal death notification programme, cervical
cancer services, the Prevention of Mother-to-Child programme, termination
of pregnancies, and the provision of female condoms.

 • Capacity building and skills development

The Departments of Health, Sport, Arts, Culture, Science and Technology as
well as Provincial Treasury indicated their involvement in capacity
building and skills development. The Department of Health had offered
training on post exposure prophylaxis, Provincial Treasury on financial
management and Sports, Arts, Culture, Science and Technology on needlework
and literacy projects.

The GFPs in the provincial Departments and national Departments (with
offices in the provinces) as well as the gender co-ordinators in local
government received training on policy development, gender mainstreaming,
strategic planning, gender awareness and gender analysis.

2.6   Achievements


No achievements were cited other than those listed under the various
programmes.


2.7   Challenges


The following challenges were cited in the report:

 • GFPs don’t have the necessary capacity to achieve gender equality.
 • Due to the capacity of GFPs, gender strategies, programmes and activities
   are not incorporated into the strategic plans of the  Departments,  which
   results in a lack of commitment by Departments.
 • Special Programme Officers are  appointed  at  assistant  director  level
   whereas Departments can make the appointments at a deputy director level.


 • Only a few gender co-ordinators have been appointed at  Local  Government
   level and they are generally responsible for other functions as well.


3.    Gauteng





3.1    Structure


The  Gauteng  Province  does  not  have  an  OSW.  The  Social   Development
Directorate has,  however,  been  coordinating  all  gender  activities  and
programmes. It is in the process of filling the positions in the new  Gender
and HIV/AIDS programme.  The  positions  of  a  deputy  director,  assistant
director and a senior administrative officer are currently being filled.


3.2   Budget

The report does not give  an  indication  of  the  budget  attached  to  the
directorate.

3.3   Policy and Gender Action Plan


A gender policy framework was developed in 2002/03. The  Gauteng  Provincial
Government has a gender action plan and this was  recently  integrated  with
the Gauteng Provincial Government’s priorities. A  draft  Sexual  Harassment
Policy Framework is also in place.


3.4   Gender Mainstreaming


One of the province’s key intervention strategies is  gender  mainstreaming.
Gender indicators have been developed and a monitoring process is in place.


3.5   Programmes


 • Policy development and analysis

The Executive Council has approved a Gauteng  Provincial  Government  Gender
Policy  Framework.  The  Directorate  provides  support  to  Departments  to
facilitate the  development  of  sector  specific  policies  and  programmes
designed to address gender issues. A  draft  Gauteng  Provincial  Government
Sexual  Harassment  Policy  is  in  place  and  Departments  are   currently
finalising their respective policies.

 • Capacity Building

One of the priorities of the Directorate was ensuring that GFPs  and  senior
managers receive training on gender planning and gender budgeting.
 • Gender machineries

All Departments have nominated GFPs. It is  reported  that  the  designation
and location of these vary across the Departments. The positions range  from
that of chief director to assistant  director  and  in  one  case,  that  of
senior administrative officer. A gender forum has been established and  this
structure meets monthly.

 • Monitoring and evaluation

An annual analysis is undertaken of Departmental strategies and  budgets  to
ascertain whether they are in line with national and  provincial  priorities
as well as to ensure that gender is  integrated  into  strategic  plans  and
budgets. A quarterly tracking chart is also  in  operation  to  capture  the
Premier’s and Members of  the  Executive  Council’s  (MECs)  commitments  on
gender  issues  and  to  monitor  progress  against  the  delivery  of   the
commitments made by the Premier and MECs.

 • Gender Mainstreaming

All provincial Departments are reported to have gender budgets. The  outputs
of gender budgets reflect gender sensitive  indicators  for  all  programmes
and projects, which are in line with the  core  functions  of  the  specific
Department.

 • Co-ordination and planning

The Directorate ensures that certain events are commemorated. These  include
Women’s Day and 16 Days of Activism.  They  are  responsible  for  providing
strategic support to the lead department co-ordinating Women’s Day  as  well
as co-ordinating all provincial Departments in celebrating Women’s Day.

3.6   Achievements

No specific achievements other than the ones mentioned above  are  cited  in
the report.


3.7   Challenges


The directorate lists social regeneration and economic empowerment as  their
challenges.


4.    KwaZulu-Natal



4.1   Structure


The OSW is located within the Directorate for Human Rights. The position  of
Head of the OSW, at deputy  director  level,  is  vacant.  The  position  of
assistant  director  and  administrative  officer  is  also  on  the   staff
establishment. It was indicated that the position of the  Head  of  the  OSW
would be converted into a director’s position, as from April 2004.



Within the Departments, most GFPs have been permanently established.


4.2   Budget


It was reported that the OSW has a budget of R1.6 million. It is unclear
whether this amount includes personnel costs.

4.3   Policy and Gender Action Plan


The  OSW  has  a  draft  gender  policy  and  is  currently  working  on  an
implementation strategy as well as a gender monitoring tool. The Office  has
furthermore undertaken a gender audit in the province as part  of  assessing
the 10 years of democracy.


4.4   Gender Mainstreaming


The OSW has developed guidelines for gender mainstreaming.




4.5   Programmes


The following Departments are  said  to  have  programmes  that  are  gender
related:

      • Legislature - Holding of a Young Women’s Parliament and celebration
        of significant events.
      • Department of Health - Workshops on the gender policy in the health
        sector, celebration of significant event days and the establishment
        of a workplace gender forum.
      • Social Welfare and  Population  Development  -  Victim  Empowerment
        programme, domestic violence  programme  and  a  domestic  violence
        resource directory.
      •  Provincial  Treasury  -  Gender   audit,   awareness   programmes,
        celebration of significant events.
      • Traditional and Local  Government  Affairs  -  Awareness  campaign,
        training of co-ordinators, celebration of  events  for  significant
        days.
      • Education  -  Women  empowerment  programme,  women  in  management
        programme and the celebration of events for significant days.
      • Transport - Zibambele Road Maintenance  Contract,  Women  for  Road
        Safety, Employment  for  Female  Traffic  Officers,  Vukuzakhe  and
        labour  construction  programmes  and  celebration  of  events  for
        significant days.


4.6   Achievements


The OSWs report indicated the following achievements:

         • GFPs have been permanently established in some Departments and
           municipalities.
         • Capacity building programmes for GFPs and Provincial Gender
           Machinery have been undertaken.
         • A gender audit was conducted.
         • A draft provincial gender implementation strategy is in place.
         • A draft gender monitoring and evaluation tool has been
           developed.
         • Guidelines for gender mainstreaming are in place.
         • Awareness campaigns are held.


4.7   Challenges


The following challenges were cited:

    • Establishment of permanent GFPs and the resourcing thereof.
    • Establishing an integrated approach to gender issues and political buy-
      in. Furthermore, there is a need for an integrated  approach  to  deal
      with gender issues.

5.    Mpumalanga[6]


5.1   Structure

The OSW  is  located  within  the  Office  of  the  Premier.  The  following
positions are on the staff structure of the OSW:

 • Deputy director
 • 2 assistant directors
 • 3 chief community liaison officers
 • 3 community liaison officers
 • 3 administrative clerks

Currently,  the  positions  of  assistant  director  (research),   2   chief
community  liaison  officers,  2   community   liaison   officers   and   an
administrative clerk are vacant.

GFP coordinators have been appointed in Departments. However, no  structures
are in place and they have inadequate job  descriptions.  GFPs  coordinators
have been appointed fulltime in 6 Departments, namely, Health;  Agriculture,
Conservation and  Environment  Affairs;  Housing  and  Land  Administration;
Safety and  Security;  Social  Services,  Population  and  Development;  and
Sports Recreation, Arts and Culture. Whilst other  Departments  are  in  the
process of appointing staff in the GFPs, the GFPs refers  to  an  individual
person and units have not been established.


5.2   Budget

The budget of the OSW as well as that of the GFPs are not  provided  in  the
report.


5.3   Policy and Gender Action Plan


The report does not indicate whether there is a Provincial Gender Policy  or
whether the province has a gender action plan.


5.4   Gender Mainstreaming


This information is unavailable in the report.


5.5   Programmes


The OSW has undertaken the following programmes since its establishment:

    • Co-ordinated the HIV and AIDS programme Vusa Isizwe, targeting  school
      children.
    • Conducted training for GFPs coordinators on gender issues.
    • Conducted a gender workshop for Members of the Provincial  Legislature
      and Heads of Departments.
    • Ran awareness campaigns on legislation affecting women.
    • Co-ordinated the calendar on women’s events.

Departments were engaged in the following programmes:

    • Housing - Workshops to gender sensitise senior managers.
    • Safety and Security - Campaigns on gender-based violence,  partnership
      against crime and moral  regeneration.  Awareness  raising  programmes
      were conducted on drug and  substance  abuse  for  youth  as  well  as
      paralegal workshops for farmers.
    • Social Development - Welfare services for women.


5.6   Achievements


No specific achievements were reported other than those mentioned above.


5.7    Challenges


Challenges were cited for the OSW and for the GFPs.


                                     OSW


    • Not all positions in the OSW has been filled.
    •  Budgetary  constraints  are  experienced  due  to  cost   curtailment
      measures, which has impacted on the filling of posts.
    • Provincial or national Governments on occasion give the OSW additional
      mandates that are not funded.


                                    GFPs


    • GFPs deal with issues other than  gender,  such  as  HIV,  disability,
      youth and children’s issues. Some GFPs are also responsible for  other
      core functions within their Departments.
    • The location and rank of the GFPs are a challenge. Some GFPs  have  to
      report to numerous persons. They do not have an influence on decision-
      making and thus do not have the  ability  to  influence  decisions  on
      issues such as gender mainstreaming and gender equality.
    • Departments do not have budgets to undertake gender responsibilities.


6.    North West



6.1    Structure


The  OSW  was  established  in  1995  and  is  located  within  the  Special
Programmes Directorate, in the Office of the Premier. The  report  indicates
that a director,  who  is  also  responsible  for  the  disability  desk,  3
assistant directors, a senior administrative officer, an office manager  and
an administrative clerk, is provided for on the  structure.  It  is  unclear
from the report whether all these positions are located within  the  OSW  or
within the Special Programmes  Directorate.  Furthermore,  clarification  is
needed on the level at which the Head of the OSW is appointed.

The status of the Departmental GFPs is:

    • The Department of Health - A person has been appointed to the  GFP  as
      an assistant director.
    • The Department of Agriculture - A person has been  formally  appointed
      in the GFP as assistant director.
    •  Conservation  and  Environment  –  An  assistant  director  has  been
      appointed.
    • Department of Minerals and Energy – Systems are in  place  to  address
      gender in the province.
    • Other departments have ad hoc gender desks where gender does not  form
      part of the individual’s job description.


6.2    Budget


The Special Programmes Directorate has a budget, and the  OSW  is  allocated
for within this budget. The amount allocated to the OSW was not indicated.


6.3    Policy and Gender Action Plan


It is unclear whether the province has a Gender Policy and a  gender  action
plan.


6.4    Gender Mainstreaming


The province adopted a Provincial Gender Strategy in  2003.  The  Provincial
Gender Strategy  set  mechanisms  in  place  by  which  Departments’  gender
programmes will be assessed.


6.5    Programmes


There is no clear indication from the report about the programmes  currently
underway in the OSW and in  the  Departments.  The  report,  however,  makes
brief mention of a United Nations Development Programme (UNDP/OSW)  capacity
building programme and Departmental gender analysis.  The  nature  of  these
undertakings is unclear.


6.6    Achievements


The report indicated the following achievements:

    • Between 1997 and 1998, a business plan was developed which  was  aimed
      at integrating the implementation of gender programmes in Government.
    • A gender audit was undertaken between 1998 and 1999.
    • In 2001, a provincial gender summit was held.
    • A capacity building training programme was developed for GFPs.
    • A Gender Strategy has been developed and adopted by the province.


6.7   Challenges


The challenges reported on include:

    • Most of the Departments in the province  do  not  have  a  permanently
      appointed GFP. The Departments of Health, Agriculture and Conservation
      and  Environment  are  the  only  Departments  with  GFPs.  The  other
      Departments have ad hoc GFPs and gender does not form  part  of  their
      job descriptions. This makes it difficult for the  OSW  to  engage  in
      training and other initiatives.
    • The OSW is faced with the challenge of getting the  provincial  gender
      machinery operational.
    • Departments do not have specific budgets for mainstreaming gender.
    • The  relationship  between  national  and  provincial  Departments  is
      problematic.

7.    Western Cape[7]

7.1   Structure

 The OSW head is appointed at deputy director level. The OSW is staffed with
                              only one person.

Table: Status of GFPs in Western Cape provincial Departments
|Department   |Structure   |Rank of GFP |Gender        |Budget     |
|             |and location|            |programmes    |           |
|Housing      |Included in |Assistant   |Draft gender  |Dedicated  |
|             |2004/05     |director    |equality and  |budget     |
|             |strategic   |            |women         |2004/05    |
|             |plan.       |            |empowerment   |           |
|             |Location in |            |implementation|           |
|             |Human Rights|            |strategy.     |           |
|             |and special |            |              |           |
|             |projects.   |            |              |           |
|             |Ad hoc      |            |              |           |
|             |function    |            |              |           |
|Health       |Add-on      |Position    |Draft gender  |No budget  |
|             |function.   |vacant. The |equality and  |           |
|             |Human       |position was|women         |           |
|             |Resources.  |at the level|empowerment   |           |
|             |            |of assistant|implementation|           |
|             |            |director.   |strategy.     |           |
|             |            |            |Celebration of|           |
|             |            |            |commemorative |           |
|             |            |            |days.         |           |
|Agriculture  |Located in  |Deputy      |Draft gender  |Dedicated  |
|             |Human       |director:   |equality and  |budget     |
|             |Resources   |gender,     |women         |2004/05.   |
|             |and Support |youth, HIV, |empowerment   |           |
|             |Services.   |disability  |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy.     |           |
|             |            |            |Celebration of|           |
|             |            |            |commemorative |           |
|             |            |            |days.         |           |
|Social       |            |Assistant   |Celebration of|Dedicated  |
|Services     |            |director.   |commemorative |budget     |
|             |            |            |days.         |           |
|             |            |            |Safe houses.  |           |
|             |            |            |Sponsorships. |           |
|Education    |Human       |Assistant   |Celebration of|Dedicated  |
|             |Resources   |director:   |commemorative |budget     |
|             |Development |gender, HIV,|days.         |           |
|             |            |youth,      |Draft gender  |           |
|             |            |disability. |equality and  |           |
|             |            |            |women         |           |
|             |            |            |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |            |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy.     |           |
|             |            |            |Life skills.  |           |
|Community    |Add-on      |Senior      |Commemorative |           |
|Safety       |function.   |officers:   |days, Draft   |           |
|             |Human       |gender,     |gender        |           |
|             |Resources   |youth,      |equality and  |           |
|             |Development |disability. |women         |           |
|             |            |            |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |            |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy;     |           |
|             |            |            |trauma rooms; |           |
|             |            |            |young women at|           |
|             |            |            |risk.         |           |
|Economic     |Human       |Deputy      |Celebration of|Dedicated  |
|Development  |Resources   |director:   |commemorative |budget     |
|and Tourism  |Development |gender,     |days. Draft   |           |
|             |Formal      |youth, HIV, |gender        |           |
|             |structure.  |disability, |equality and  |           |
|             |            |labour      |women         |           |
|             |            |relations.  |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |            |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy.     |           |
|Environmental|Add-on,     |Contract    |Draft gender  |No budget. |
|Affairs and  |Human       |appointment:|equality and  |           |
|Development  |Resources   |gender,     |women         |           |
|planning     |Development |youth,      |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |disability  |implementation|           |
|             |            |and HIV.    |strategy.     |           |
|Local        |Formal,     |Assistant   |Celebration of|Dedicated  |
|Government   |Human       |director.   |commemorative |budget     |
|             |resources.  |            |days. Draft   |2004/05.   |
|             |            |            |gender        |           |
|             |            |            |equality and  |           |
|             |            |            |women         |           |
|             |            |            |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |            |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy.     |           |
|Provincial   |Add-on,     |Officer     |Draft gender  |No budget. |
|Treasury     |Human       |(Acting).   |equality and  |           |
|             |Resources   |            |women         |           |
|             |Management  |            |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |            |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy.     |           |
|Provincial   |            |            |Nonexistent.  |No budget. |
|Administratio|            |            |              |           |
|n            |            |            |              |           |
|Transport and|Formal, will|Special     |Draft gender  |Dedicated  |
|Public Works |be located  |Programmes  |equality and  |budget     |
|             |in HOD (1   |Officer:    |women         |2004/05.   |
|             |April 2004).|gender,     |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |youth,      |implementation|           |
|             |            |disability. |strategy.     |           |
|             |            |            |Commemorative |           |
|             |            |            |days.         |           |
|Culture      |Add-on      |Sport       |Celebration of|Dedicated  |
|Affairs and  |            |Promotions  |commemorative |budget.    |
|Sport        |            |Officers.   |days.         |           |
|             |            |            |Draft gender  |           |
|             |            |            |equality and  |           |
|             |            |            |women         |           |
|             |            |            |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |            |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy.     |           |

7.2   Budget

Whilst the report gives an  indication  of  budgets  allocated  to  specific
programmes, it does not provide the overall budget  allocation  to  the  OSW
for the 2003/04 financial year.

7.3   Policy and Gender Action Plan

A draft provincial Gender  Equality  and  Women  Empowerment  Implementation
strategy is in place.

7.4   Gender Mainstreaming

The OSWs report does not indicate whether the Office is  developing  or  has
developed a gender mainstreaming strategy for the province.

7.5   Programmes

Table: Programmes of the OSW in the Western Cape
|Programme    |Budget    |Activity       |Status    |Challenges    |
|Policy       |R15 000   |Draft          |Draft.    |No capacity to|
|Development  |(2002/03) |provincial     |          |give effect to|
|and Research |          |gender equality|          |the plan.     |
|             |          |and women      |          |Obtaining     |
|             |          |empowerment    |          |institutional |
|             |          |implementation |          |support and   |
|             |          |strategy.      |          |buy-in.       |
|Capacity     |R50 000   |Mainstreaming  |Developed |Need to       |
|Building and |(2003/04) |training for   |training  |appoint person|
|Training     |          |trainers in the|package.  |to provide and|
|             |          |public sector. |          |sustain       |
|             |          |OSW specific   |          |training.     |
|             |          |capacity       |          |              |
|             |          |building.      |          |              |
|Public       |R285 000  |Celebration of |          |Capacity to   |
|Education,   |(2003/04) |commemoration  |          |give effect to|
|Awareness    |          |days.          |          |programmes for|
|Raising and  |          |Development of |          |commemorative |
|Communication|          |promotional    |          |days.         |
|             |          |materials.     |          |              |
|             |          |Partnerships   |          |              |
|             |          |with civil     |          |              |
|             |          |society.       |          |              |
|Co-ordination|Integrated|The formal     |          |Commitment    |
|of gender    |R350 000  |structuring of |          |from all      |
|machinery    |(2004/05) |a provincial   |          |gender        |
|             |          |gender         |          |stakeholders  |
|             |          |management     |          |in provinces. |
|             |          |system.        |          |Resources.    |
|Monitoring,  |          |Developing of  |Appointed |Budgetary     |
|Evaluation   |          |an audit       |the Human |constraints   |
|and Reporting|          |instrument.    |Sciences  |              |
|             |          |               |Research  |              |
|             |          |               |Council   |              |
|             |          |               |(HSRC) to |              |
|             |          |               |develop an|              |
|             |          |               |audit     |              |
|             |          |               |instrument|              |
|             |          |               |.         |              |

7.6   Achievements

Other than the  achievements  mentioned  above,  the  OSW  reported  on  the
following achievements:

    •  Convening  a  conference  entitled  “Breaking  Barriers:   Women   in
      Technology”.
    • Hosting a social sector consultative workshop.
    • Undertaking a provincial consultative road show.
    • Hosting conferences on gender violence.

7.7   Challenges

The report indicates the following challenges:
 There is a need to strengthen existing relations with the NGO sector.
    • Structuring and co-ordination of the provincial gender machinery.
    • Resources for the replication of gender desks on district level.
    • Understanding the role and operational methodology of the OSW.
    • OSW needs to be properly resourced with regard to the approval of  the
      organogram and the filling of posts.
    • Departments need to institutionalise gender portfolios by:
         o Formalising structures.
         o Adequately resourcing structures.
         o Strategically locating gender structures.
         o Appointing the GFPs at the recommended rank.
         o Understanding the responsibilities of GFPs.

Gender Focal Points

1.    Department of Agriculture

1.1   Structure

In July 2003, the Departmental Executive Committee ratified a decision to
establish a Gender Forum in the Department. This Forum is in the process of
being established. It is envisaged that the Forum will be composed of 70%
women and 30% men, who would be nominated from departmental programmes. The
Forum will report to the Director-General and the Employment Equity Forum.
The GFP staffed with a deputy director has been created in the Director-
General’s office. The relationship between the Gender Forum and the GFP was
not indicated. This needs to be explored as well as the functions of the
two structures.

1.2   Budget

The report indicated that the budget allocation to the Forum would be
discussed after the launch.

1.3   Policy and Gender Action Plan

The Department’s report does not indicate whether there is any gender
policy or gender action plan implemented or developed for the Department.

1.4   Gender Mainstreaming

There is no indication of a gender mainstreaming strategy in place in the
Department.

1.5   Programmes

 • Female farmer of the year competition

This competition was initiated in 1999 to celebrate women farmers’
contribution to the agricultural sector. Women are recognised in the top
exporter-, top national markets-, top informal markets- and top household
producer categories.

1.6   Staff component

|Female                 |Male                |
|36%                    |64%                 |
|Women in senior positions                   |
|40%                    |                    |
|Senior management positions held by women   |
|Director-General       |0                   |
|Deputy                 |2                   |
|Director-Generals      |                    |
|Chief of staff of      |0                   |
|ministry               |                    |
|Assistant              |0                   |
|Director-General       |                    |

The Human Resources Management recruitment strategy is in the process of
being revised to ensure gender balances in recruitment processes.

1.7   Achievements

The Department’s report did not indicate any specific achievements.

1.8   Challenges

No challenges were reported.


2.    Department of Arts and Culture (DAC)





2 Structure


The GFP is staffed with a Special Programmes Officer who has been  appointed
at a deputy director level and reports to the  Director  of  Human  Resource
Management. This person is responsible for gender issues, HIV and AIDS,  the
Employee Assistance Programme, disability issues and children’s rights.

1. Budget

The GFP does not have a budget  of  its  own.   It  draws  from  the  budget
allocated to Human Resources.  The  amount  available  to  the  GFP  is  not
indicated.

2.3   Policy and Gender Action Plan

The  GFP  is  currently  engaged  in  a  review  of  departmental   policies
pertaining to HIV and AIDS, employment equity,  recruitment  and  the  draft
‘Human Resource and Development and Disability’ policy. No mention  is  made
of a gender action plan.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

The Department’s report does not make mention of  strategies  to  mainstream
gender into all departmental plans, procedures,  programmes,  outputs,  etc.
This information needs to be elicited from the Department.
5. Programmes

Internally,  the  Department  has  embarked  on  information  and   training
sessions for staff on the Domestic Violence Act (Act  No  116  of1998),  the
Customary Marriages Act (Act No 120 of 1998) and on sexual harassment.

Externally,  the  Department  has  only  been  involved  in  initiatives  to
commemorate International Women’s Day, Women’s Day,  Human  Rights  Day  and
the 16 days of No Violence Against Women programme.

6. Staff Component

Not reported.

7. Achievements

No specific achievements other than those mentioned above are documented  in
the report.

2.8   Challenges

The Department has  not  listed  the  challenges  faced  by  the  GFP.  This
information needs to be elicited.

3.    Department of Correctional Services (DCS)

1. Structure
The Gender Desk within  the  Department  of  Correctional  Services  is  the
equivalent of a directorate and is managed by  a  National  Manager  who  is
appointed at a director level.  In addition  to  the  director,  the  gender
desk is staffed with six people.  Two  of  these  are  appointed  at  deputy
director levels and are responsible for policy, planning, mainstreaming  and
advocacy and for women’s empowerment  and  capacity  building  respectively.
Two  assistant  directors  provide  programmatic  support  to   the   deputy
directors.   The  remaining  three  staff  members  provide   administrative
support to the directorate.

2. Budget

No mention is made in the Department’s report on  the  budget  available  to
the Gender Desk.  This would need to be sourced from the DCS.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The DCS report does not cover any  aspects  relating  to  the  work  of  the
Gender Desk in reviewing Departmental policies from a gender perspective  or
in developing gender related policies. This needs to be determined.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

Strategies pertaining to the mainstreaming of gender are not touched  on  in
the report.

5. Programmes

The following internal programmes are listed in the report  as  a  means  of
promoting gender equity in the department:  workshops,  training,  security,
bursaries, employment opportunities, personnel development and leave.

In relation to the services that the DCS provides, the following  programmes
are  targeted  at  offenders:  educational  programmes,   skills   training,
counseling, health care, HIV and AIDS, moral and spiritual care, sports  and
recreation, victim offender mediation and support systems for release.   The
ways in which these programmes promote gender equity is  not  clarified  and
the objectives, methodology and impact assessment mechanisms have  not  been
outlined in the report.

3.6   Staff Component

The following information is provided with respect to  the  demographics  of
senior managers in the Department:

Senior Management Demographics for 2003
|Group                 |Numbers               |Percentage            |
|White male            |3                     |3.7                   |
|Black male            |62                    |76.5                  |
|Female                |16                    |19.7                  |

3.7   Achievements

The Department’s achievements with respect to furthering gender  equity  are
not indicated in the report.
8. Challenges

The  challenges  identified  relate  to  restructuring,  the  socio-economic
status of women, women as practitioners  and  the  sphere  of  work  in  the
justice system.  The exact nature of these  challenges  is  not  articulated
and this needs to be clarified.

   4. Department of Defence (DoD)


1. Structure

The GFP in  the  Department  of  Defence  is  a  sub-section  in  the  Equal
Opportunities  Chief  Directorate.   The  GFP  reports  to  the  Council  on
Defence, the Secretary of  Defence  and  the  Chief  of  the  South  African
National Defence Force (SANDF).  It is staffed by  five  personnel  members.
These posts are the military equivalent of a deputy director, two  assistant
directors, an administrative officer and a chief clerk.

A Gender Forum has been established and each service and division chief  has
appointed a representative  to  serve  on  this  forum.   The  Gender  Forum
assists the GFP in attaining its objectives, which include ensuring that:

    • The gender policy is implemented.
    • The  budgets  of  the  various  services  and  divisions  are  gender
      sensitive.
    • Gender-related training is conducted.
    • Gender is mainstreamed in all services and divisions.

2. Budget

The GFP was allocated R 89 211.00 for the 2003/04 financial  year.  The  GFP
is further striving to ensure that all services  and  divisions  budget  for
gender- related activities in their respective budgets.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The objectives listed by the GFP include the following:

    • To ensure that the ‘National Policy on Women’s Empowerment and  Gender
      Equity’  is  implemented  in  all  services  and  divisions   of   the
      Department.
    • To market and promote gender policies in the Department
    • To monitor Departmental programmes and policies to  ensure  that  they
      are consistent with the national gender policy.

The GFP has formulated several policies. These include a  sexual  harassment
policy and a gender-based  violence  policy.  A  policy  pertaining  to  the
promotion of gender equity  and  a  pregnancy  policy  are  still  in  draft
formats.

No mention is made of a Gender Action Plan in the Department’s report.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

The GFP indicates that the mainstreaming  of  gender  in  all  services  and
divisions is one of its objectives.  The Gender Forum is used to  assist  in
monitoring the implementation of this.
5. Programmes

4.5.1 Internal Programmes




   Gender Training Programme


The purpose of this programme is  to  build  internal  capacity  within  the
department and to equip  staff  with  skills  and  contextual  knowledge  on
gender issues.  Examples cited are a ‘Women in Law’ course and  training  on
sexual harassment.


   Hotline


An internal hotline  has  been  established  for  the  reporting  of  sexual
harassment and gender-based violence in the Department.  This  hotline  will
be used to serve as an indicator of the levels of gender-based violence  and
sexual harassment.


   Gender Sensitisation Programmes


This initiative is comprised of internal roadshows and  presentations  aimed
at
facilitating an understanding of the departmental policies  that  relate  to
gender. The programme is targeted at both management and staff.

4.5.2 External Programmes


   Gender Awareness Campaign


The awareness campaign is predominantly centred around calendar events  such
as National Women’s Day and the 16 Days of Activism on No  Violence  against
Women and Children.


   Peace Table Seminar


The peace table initiative strives to create a  forum  where  women  in  the
military can engage with women in civil society to promote peace.  The  2003
seminar focused on how women can contribute towards  the  implementation  of
the African Union (AU) and New Partnership for Africa’s Development  (NEPAD)
peace agenda.

6. Staff Component

Not reported.

7. Achievements

The work of the GFP has been recognised by  some  countries  in  Africa  and
internationally. Namibia, Botswana and Nigeria have requested that  the  GFP
assist their Defence Forces in setting up their own Gender Focal Points.  In
addition, North Korea, Portugal  and  Pakistan  have  requested  information
from the GFP on its work in the Department.

8. Challenges

The report does not list the identified challenges.

5.    Department of Education (DoE)

1. Structure

The  GFP  in  the  Department  of  Education  has  been  established  as   a
directorate, comprising a director, a chief education specialist,  a  senior
administrative officer (this post was vacant at the time of  reporting)  and
a secretary. The GFP reports to the chief director of special programmes  in
education.  The director of the GFP participates in  departmental  strategic
planning meetings and attends management meetings.

2. Budget

The budget allocated to the GFP for the  2003/04  financial  year  was  R1,5
million.  Of this, R 200 000 was allocated to programmatic  work.   Much  of
the  work  done  by  the  GFP  is  funded  by  donations  and  by   building
partnerships  with  other  directorates.   The  GFP’s  report   notes   that
budgetary restrictions limit programmatic initiatives to a large extent.

5.3   Policy and Gender Action Plan

One of the strategic objectives of the GFP is to ensure that  gender  equity
is reflected in  all  policies  and  practices  of  the  Department.  Policy
guidelines on sexual harassment and learners who become pregnant  have  been
developed by the GFP.

5.4   Mainstreaming of gender

The GFP has developed a framework to assist sectional  heads  to  mainstream
gender into their work.  This  framework  still  needs  to  be  approved  by
senior management before it can be utilised.

5. Programmes


   Gender sensitisation workshops


Workshops aimed at improving the conceptual understanding of  gender-related
issues were conducted  with  school  governing  bodies,  educators,  learner
representative councils, educator unions and education officials.


   Girl Education Movement


The Girl Education Movement was launched to focus on and build the  capacity
of girls.  A website was  created  to  provide  girls  with  a  platform  to
discuss issues affecting the quality of their lives.  A workshop on  writing
skills was also conducted for  girls  to  enhance  their  ability  to  write
articles for publication.


   Advocacy Strategy


Campaigns on gender-based violence and the link between gender and  HIV  and
AIDS have been conducted.  These campaigns have entailed the compilation  of
educational materials such as posters and manuals.

6. Staff Component

Not reported.

5.7   Achievements

No achievements are listed.

5.8   Challenges

Budgetary constraints were listed as an impediment to the work of  the  GFP.



6.    Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT)

6.1   Structure

The Division for Gender,  Disability,  Youth  and  Children  serves  as  the
Gender Focal Point for the Department.  This  division  is  located  in  the
Directorate  for  Transformation  and  Special   Projects.    The   Division
comprises  an  assistant  director  and  an  administrative  officer.    The
assistant director  serves  as  the  GFP  officer.  The  assistant  director
reports to the deputy director of transformation.

2. Budget

Currently, the GFP does not have a budget of its own. Its work is funded  by
the budget of the Directorate:  Transformation and  Special  Projects.   The
amount available to the GFP from this budget has not  been  stipulated.   It
is envisaged that a proposal will be submitted to secure a dedicated  budget
for the GFP.  It is hoped that this will be available in the next  financial
year.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The  Department  reports  that  it  is  cognisant  of  the  national  policy
framework on gender and it has put in place structures  to  give  effect  to
this.  This is not elaborated on in the report. The  role  of  the  Division
for Gender, Disability, Youth and Children is to co-ordinate and  facilitate
the development and implementation of policies and strategies which  promote
‘gender  equality,   women’s   empowerment,   disability   inclusivity   and
integration,  youth  development  and  the  promotion  and   protection   of
children’s rights’.  The report does not specify how this is  done  and  the
policies that have been worked on.  The only specific reference to a  policy
that has been developed is a sexual harassment policy.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

The directorate is currently in the process of establishing  structures  and
mechanisms for ensuring that gender is mainstreamed  into  the  Department’s
core  functions.   A  departmental  Gender  Committee  has  therefore   been
established  to  give  effect  to  this.   The  Gender  Committee  comprises
officials who  have  been  nominated  as  gender  representatives  from  the
various Chief Directorates in the Department.   Gender  issues  are  also  a
standing agenda item in meetings of the Transformation  Steering  Committee,
which are chaired by the Director-General.

6.5   Programmes

6.5.1 Internal

 • Internship programme

As part of its internship programme, the Department has allocated R 147  000
to 8 students from disadvantaged communities to  study  for  a  certificated
course at the Garankuwa Hotel Management  School.  Fifty  percent  of  these
students are female.


   Training of tour operators


The Department has set aside R 240 000 for the training  of  tour  operators
in the next financial year.  Fifty percent of those trained will be women.


   Employment equity targets


The Departmental draft Employment Equity  Plan  calls  for  an  overall  50%
target of women employees.  Currently, 35% of the staff  in  the  Department
is women.  Women hold 40% of senior management positions.

6.5.2 External

 • Commemoration of Calendar Events

The Department has been actively involved in commemorating national  gender-
related events such as the celebration of Women’s Day.


   Arts, crafts and clothing project


Funds have been  allocated  to  a  training  and  developmental  project  in
KwaZulu-Natal.  This project has entailed the  production  of  African  art,
crafts and clothing.  Some of the work produced as a result of this  project
was showcased at the World Summit on Sustainable Development  in  2002.  The
project currently receives orders from an international market as well.

The ways in which this project has benefited women and the number  of  women
involved are not articulated in the report.


   Tourism project


The Department has initiated a tourism  project  in  the  Limpopo  Province,
where women are  trained  in  running  bed  and  breakfast  outlets.   These
outlets are then marketed internationally.  The number of women involved  in
this project is not reflected in the report.




   Abalone fishing exemptions


In Centane in the Eastern Cape, 115 abalone  fishing  exemptions  have  been
handed out, of which 63 were to women.


   Fly-fishing project


In Caledon in the Free  State,  the  Department  has  funded  a  fly-fishing
project, which is run by 40 women.  This poverty  relief  project  has  also
become a tourist attraction site and as a consequence,  the  women  involved
have been trained and given bicycles so that they  can  provide  tour  guide
services as well.

6.6   Staff Component

Not reported.

6.7   Achievements

No achievements are reported.

8. Challenges

One  of  the  major  challenges  reported  on  is  the  need  to  capacitate
representatives that serve on the Gender  Committee.  A  second  significant
challenge is the need to strengthen the co-ordination function  of  the  GFP
within the Department. This includes establishing a co-ordination link  with
the Department’s  statutory  bodies  and  the  provincial  line  functionary
departments.

7.    Foreign Affairs

7.1   Structure
The Department does not have any person staffing the position  in  the  GFP,
which is at director level.  The  Human  Resources  section  has  taken  the
initiative to consult with the OSW as  well  as  the  Department  of  Public
Service and Administration to develop a  gender  strategy.  Following  this,
the Department is in the process of establishing a GFP in  the  Directorate:
Transformation, which will house the Gender Unit and  an  Employment  Equity
sub-directorate.  The  Gender  Unit   will   be   responsible   for   making
recommendations on programmes,  and  together  with  the  Employment  Equity
Forum monitor the advancement and implementation of programmes.

7.2 Budget

The Department currently does not have an operational GFP.

7.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

None. The Department is  currently  using  the  employment  equity  plan  to
address representivity and training in the Department.

7.4 Gender Mainstreaming

The Department’s report  does  not  indicate  whether  they  have  a  gender
mainstreaming strategy.

7.5 Programmes

 • Recruitment and selection

A decision had been  taken  to  use  the  Department’s  current  recruitment
process to recruit  women,  especially  for  middle  and  senior  management
positions.

 • Human resource development

Training is being used to develop and advance women in the Department.  ABET
is also used to develop staff, especially women at lower levels.

 • Foreign Service Institute

In order to increase the number of women  in  missions  abroad,  women  have
been part of some of the following training initiatives:

     1) Diplomatic training: 10 out of 22 participants  being  trained  are
        women.
     2) Mission administration course: 16 out of 32 officials are women.
     3) Foreign Affairs Assistance Course: 20 out of the 24  officials  are
        women.

7.6 Staff component

|Female staff members                               |49%          |
|Female staff in senior management positions        |5%           |
|Females staff in middle management positions       |33%          |
|Female staff in positions below middle management  |62%          |
|Missions abroad headed by women as Ambassadors,    |16 out of 106|
|High Commissioners or Consul Generals              |             |


7.7 Achievements

As the Department does not have a GFP in place, there were  no  achievements
reported.

7.8 Challenges

The Department does not  have  a  GFP  and  therefore  this  issue  was  not
addressed in the report.


8. Department of Health (DoH)

8.1  Structure

The organogram of the Department indicates that the GFP  is  headed  by  the
deputy director-general  and  it  comprises  a  director,  deputy  director,
assistant director (post vacant at the time of reporting), a  secretary  and
a senior administrative officer (post vacant at the time of reporting).

2. Budget

The total budget allocated to the GFP for the current financial year is
 R 1 892 000. In addition to this, some of the programmes of  the  GFP  have
received external funding, namely the Danish funded project on HIV and  AIDS
and gender- based violence.

Department of Health: Budget
|Line item                  |Amount Allocated                         |
|Personnel                  |R 1024 000.00                            |
|Administration             |R  100 000.00                            |
|Professional & Special     |R   688 000.00                           |
|Services                   |                                         |
|Equipment                  |R      80 000.00                         |

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The GFP has finalised and launched ‘Gender Policy Guidelines for the  Public
Health Sector’ in November 2002.  It  has  also  engaged  in  a  process  of
advocacy and awareness  raising  on  this  policy  in  6  provinces,  namely
Limpopo,  Northern  Cape,  Free  State,  KwaZulu-Natal,   North   West   and
Mpumalanga.  The policy has been presented to  senior  management  in  these
provinces.  In addition to this, a further  10  departmental  policies  have
been analysed from a gender perspective.

4.  Gender Mainstreaming

Nationally, 4 clusters  and  1  directorate  have  been  trained  in  gender
analysis and  mainstreaming.  In  the  Limpopo  province,  approximately  36
middle managers have been trained.   In  all  9  provinces,  15  senior  and
middle managers have been trained on gender and health related issues.

The report does not indicate how gender is mainstreamed  into  the  work  of
the Department.

5. Programmes

 • Sexual Assault Care Practitioners Training Project (SACP)

It is estimated that more than 600 nurses have been trained  in  2001/2  (40
nurses in KwaZulu-Natal, 30 nurses in the Northern Cape, 544 nurses  in  the
Western Cape and 19 nurses in Gauteng).  Further information on  the  nature
of this project is lacking.

 • Training for state doctors

Training has been provided to state doctors  (100  doctors  in  the  Western
Cape and 27 doctors in the Eastern Cape).  The nature of this  training  and
its impact from a gender perspective are unclear.

 • Projects on HIV and AIDS and gender-based violence (donor funded project)

Under the auspices of this project,  research  has  been  conducted  on  the
following:

    • Partner violence and HIV.
    • Child sexual abuse.
    • Disclosure of serostatus.
    • Sexual coercion and sexual debut.
    • Monitoring the implementation of rape  law  reforms  in  South  Africa
      (with special focus on  the  investigation  and  prosecution  of  rape
      cases).
    • Justice  served  in  South  Africa  (exploring  alternative  ways  and
      mechanisms to improve on justice with regard to rape).
    • The economic aspects of sexual assault services.
    • Prevention of violence and harassment of girls in schools.

 • Projects related to strategy development and services (donor funded)
The following strategy development and service related  initiatives  are  in
progress:

    • Anti-rape responses:  this entails the mobilisation of partnerships.
    • Development of a profile of convicted  child  offenders  (aged  0-11)
      years).
    • Development of strategies to effectively prevent and respond  to  the
      rape of children aged 0-11 years and the offering of support to  both
      the victims and offenders.


 • Research on rape

This research  focuses  on  rapes  committed  against  victims  in  the  age
category 0-35 years and will be used to generate knowledge that can be  used
to inform an anti-rape strategy.

 • Stop women’s abuse helpline

This is a call-in helpline that aims to provide  victims  of  violence  with
information. The helpline also serves as  a  referral  system  and  provides
support.

8.6 Staff Component

Not reported.

8.7 Achievements

The following achievements are listed:

    • Initiation of a process for  developing  a  model  of  sexual  assault
      service provision based on the SACPs project.
    • Development of national management guidelines for dealing with  sexual
      assault.
    • Development of a sexual assault policy.
    • Development of a ‘Sexual Assault Care  Practice  Curriculum/  Training
      Manual’.
    • Facilitation of sexual harassment workshops within the Department.
    • Facilitation of workshops on gender-based violence and health.
    • Establishment  of  a  gender  forum  comprised  of  the  national  and
      provincial GFPs which meets quarterly to review and plan programmes.

8.8 Challenges

The following challenges have been identified:

    • Weaknesses in strategic direction with regard to the mainstreaming  of
      gender.
    • The full-time appointment of GFPs in the provinces.
    • The need to clarify the roles,  powers  and  functions  of  provincial
      GFPs.
    • Inadequate human and financial resources.
    • Lack of co-operation from some senior managers.
    • The need for capacity building in the provinces.
    • The lack of a staff retention strategy at both national and provincial
      level.

9. Department of Home Affairs (DoHA)

9.1  Structure
The GFP in the Department of Home Affairs comprises a  person  appointed  at
the level of an assistant director. This person is also responsible for  the
portfolios of disability, children’s rights, youth affairs and  ‘other  add-
ons’.  The assistant director reports to the  deputy  director  of  business
process management. The Department does not have GFPs at  provincial  level.


2. Budget

There is no dedicated budget for gender programmes.  The  GFP  utilises  the
budget of the Business Processes Management Section.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The GFP  does  not  participate  in  the  development  of  policies  and  in
selection and procurement processes in the Department.

4.  Gender Mainstreaming

The Gender Focal  Person  has  developed  programmes,  which  are  aimed  at
mainstreaming gender into the work of  the  Department.  It  appears  as  if
though these programmes are merely proposals at this point.  This  needs  to
be clarified.

5. Programmes

The  only  programmes  listed  in  the  report  are  those  that  have  been
recommended to mainstream gender  into  the  work  of  the  Department.   It
appears as if though these programmes have  not  yet  been  implemented  and
that they are merely proposals at this point.  This needs to  be  clarified.



   Recognition of Customary Marriages Act


The GFP  recommended  that  programmes  be  implemented  to  strengthen  the
implementation and popularisation of the  registration  and  recognition  of
the Customary Marriages Act.   Public  awareness  programmes  on  fraudulent
marriages are also proposed.


   Immigration Act


A programme that facilitates the collation  of  submissions  on  legislation
relating to cross border and international trafficking and public  awareness
in this regard is proposed.


   Refugee Act


There is a need for programmes that highlight the plight of  women  refugees
and  that  commemorate  World  Refugee  Day.  These  programmes  should   be
conducted in partnership with civil society so as to educate the  public  on
xenophobia.  An investigation of the  feasibility  of  establishing  special
refugee centres for women and children needs to be conducted.


   Departmental Women Empowerment Initiative


Internally, the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs  has  launched  the  Women’s
Empowerment Initiative on 15 August 2003.  The initiative  aims  to  enhance
the skills and qualifications  of  all  women  employees,  to  assist  women
employees to develop self-esteem and to  monitor  gender  considerations  in
the selection and procurement process.

6. Staff Component

Not reported.

7. Achievements

No achievements are listed in the report.  The report makes  no  mention  of
the gender-related work done by the GFP other than the proposal  highlighted
above. The outputs of the GFP would need to be tracked and documented.

8. Challenges

The challenges that the GFP faces in meeting its objectives  have  not  been
identified.

10. Housing

10.1 Structure

The Department has an internal and external gender focus. A deputy  director
in the Human  Resources  Management  Directorate  deals  with  the  internal
gender issues. A deputy director in the Directorate Human Settlement  Policy
and Integration deals with gender issues as  it  pertains  to  the  external
housing policy  issues.  However,  gender  mainstreaming  is  not  the  only
function of these officials as they  are  also  responsible  for  disability
issues, HIV and AIDS,  children,  youth,  the  elderly,  employment  equity,
service delivery and  developing  human  settlement  policies.  Both  deputy
directors report to their directors in the respective directorates.

10.2 Budget

The Department does not have specific gender budgets for the GFPS.

The deputy director:  Transformation  has  an  all-inclusive  budget  of  R2
million, within which gender related issues are addressed.

10.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

The Department’s report does not indicate whether there  is  an  operational
gender policy and action plan.

10.4 Gender Mainstreaming

The Department’s report  indicates  that  gender  programmes  are  aimed  at
mainstreaming gender within the internal  programmes  and  the  Department’s
housing policies and programmes. It  does,  however,  not  indicate  whether
there is an operational gender mainstreaming strategy in place.

10.5 Programmes
The Department has no stand-alone programmes  but  it  reports  that  gender
mainstreaming is done in both its internal and  external  programmes.  These
gender mainstreaming activities  form  part  of  other  activities  such  as
employment equity,  service  delivery  or  the  housing  subsidy  programme.
Monitoring and evaluation is noted as  being  an  important  aspect  of  the
work.

    • In 2003/04  research  on  integrating  gender  in  housing  and  human
      settlements were undertaken – R160 000.
    • Workshop on women in housing – R60 000. The aim of  the  workshop  was
      for the Minister to engage with stakeholders on issues and  challenges
      that women in housing are facing  as  consumers  as  well  as  service
      providers. This information will form the basis of a gender  programme
      that the Department will develop.
    • The housing subsidy programme targets female-headed households and  as
      at September 2003, slightly more than 50% of  the  approved  subsidies
      was allocated to female-headed households.
    • As at September  2003,  83  projects  countrywide  included  women  as
      developers or contractors. The total subsidy  value  is  approximately
      R850 million.
    • The Department has approved a  project  where  at  least  10%  of  the
      provincial housing budget allocation should be  utilised  by  projects
      that are undertaken by female developers or contractors.

10.6 Staff component

This information is not supplied in the report.

10.7 Achievements

The Department’s report does not indicate any  specific  achievements  other
than those indicated for the programmes.

10.8 Challenges

Challenges are not addressed in the report.


11.  Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD)

The mandate of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) in terms of  the
Domestic Violence Act is to monitor the implementation of  the  Act  by  the
South African  Police  Services  and  the  Municipal  Police  Services.  The
Domestic Violence Act makes provision for the ICD  to  submit  a  report  to
Parliament every six months regarding the number and particulars of  matters
reported to it.

The report submitted by the ICD does not, however,  give  substance  to  its
strategies  for  monitoring  the  implementation  of   the   Act.    Further
information in this regard needs to be elicited.

11.1  Structure

The GFP in the ICD is located  in  the  sub-directorate  of  Human  Resource
Management and reports to the deputy manager of Human  Resource  Management.
The GFP  comprises  a  Special  Programmes  Officer  and  special  programme
representatives, located in each of the 9 provinces. The GFP is  responsible
for internal gender awareness, stakeholder collaboration and  training.  The
nature of this training is not  specified.  The  GFP  is  a  member  of  the
national  office  management,  senior  management  and  special   programmes
committees. The role of the GFP is to report on  gender  and  other  special
programmes at these meetings. The nature of ‘other  special  programmes’  is
unclear.

11.2  Budget

A budget of R 66 000 has  been  allocated  to  both  internal  and  external
special programmes.

 3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The ICD has an approved ‘Gender  Policy’  since  March  2001.   Policies  on
gender,  selection,  recruitment  and  equity  have  been  developed.  These
policies were forwarded to all staff for their input before being  approved.
The following project objectives constitute part of a strategy to  implement
the National Gender Policy Framework:

     • To monitor the implementation of the Domestic Violence Act.
     • To actively participate in the 16 Days of  Activism  on  No  Violence
       Against Women and Children.
     • To employ more women in senior positions.
     • To revise the current internal policy on gender.


 4. Gender Mainstreaming

The report does not indicate how gender is mainstreamed  into  the  work  of
the ICD.

11.5  Programmes
11.5.1 Internal

 • Staff Development

The  ICD  encourages  all  staff  to  attend   conferences,   training   and
information  sessions  on  gender  issues  and  national  gender   machinery
meetings.  During August, all offices participated in  dialogues  on  issues
that affect women. The aim of these dialogues was to get both men and  women
to engage on gender-related issues.  A report  on  the  dialogues  has  been
compiled and has been forwarded to the OSW in September 2003.

 • Systems Development

Systems have been developed for monitoring how gender equity in the  ICD  is
being promoted. The ICD has two internal standing  committees,  the  Special
Programmes Committee and the Equity Committee that meets quarterly and  part
of their mandate is  to  monitor  progress  made  in  this  regard.  Matters
pertaining to gender equity are also reported on  to  management  at  senior
management meetings and national office management meetings.

The ICD also monitors the implementation of the Domestic Violence Act.   The
Communications component is responsible for community outreach  initiatives.
 A quarterly newsletter on special programmes is also produced  and  one  of
its goals is to give coverage to gender issues.

 • Health Care and Rehabilitation

The report makes note of the fact that  a  number  of  employees  have  been
referred to health care facilities.  The objectives of this  initiative  and
its relevance for impacting positively on gender  relations  are  not  clear
and needs to be clarified.

 • Education

The ICD ensures that equal opportunities are provided to all  employees  for
the furthering of education.

11.5.2 External

 • Public Education and Awareness Raising

The ICD strives to play a proactive role in sensitising communities  on  the
Domestic Violence Act.  Vulnerable communities in rural  and  farming  areas
and informal settlements are the main target groups.  This is  done  through
campaigns run during the 16 Days of Activism of No Violence  Against  Women,
the Imbizo Focus Weeks and the Public Service Week.  The ICD also makes  use
of a newsletter, information  boards,  information  sessions,  training  and
other calendar events to disseminate information on  gender-related  issues.


 6. Staff Component

The following information is provided with respect to staffing:


Staff Complement as at 31 October 2003

|Total Female Staff    |Total Male Staff      |Total Staff           |
|58                    |63                    |121                   |
|Total female staff    |Total male staff      |Total staff employed  |
|employed at salary    |employed at salary    |at salary level 9 and |
|level 9 and above     |level 9 and above     |above                 |
|12                    |24                    |36                    |

 7. Achievements

The report does not make specific mention of the achievements of the GFP.

 8. Challenges

No challenges are identified in the report.

12. Justice and Constitutional Development

12.1 Structure

The GFP is a directorate located in the office of the Director-General.  The
organogram of the Director-General’s office  is  in  the  process  of  being
finalised and it is envisaged that the  Director  of  the  GFP  will  report
directly to the Director-General. The positions in the Directorate are  that
of director, deputy director, legal administrative  officer,  administrative
officer and an administrative clerk. Not all the positions  are  filled  due
to a bargaining chamber resolution.

The Department furthermore has a National Gender Forum,  which  consists  of
the GFP coordinators from  the  Provincial  Gender  Forums,  representatives
from the Head Office Gender Forum and the Gender Directorate.

Functions of the GFP

    • Ensure the ongoing development of the gender policy.
    • Mainstream gender into policy development.
    • Monitor and facilitate the implementation of the gender policy.
    • Drive the gender budget process within the Department.
    • Facilitate the establishment of regional gender sub-structures.
    •  Facilitate  the  relationship  between  the  Department   and   other
      Government Departments and constitutional bodies within  the  national
      gender machinery.
    • Provide secretarial services to the National Gender Forum.
    • Integration of gender equality analysis into, amongst others:
      o Policy programme development
      o Research
      o Interpretations of judgements
      o Legal advice
      o Dispute resolutions
      o Legal advice

Functions of the National Gender Forum

    • To act as an advisory body and monitoring  mechanism  to  ensure  that
      gender considerations are integrated into mainstream issues.
    • To advise the Department on the integration of  gender  concerns  into
      mainstream policy and planning.
    • To apply gender equality analysis tools in  assessing  and  monitoring
      the Department’s  policies,  legislation,  procedures,  practices  and
      programmes.
    • To monitor progress  in  the  implementation  of  the  gender  policy,
      identify blockages and facilitate the  process  of  redressing  gender
      imbalances in Departmental policies and practices.


12.2 Budget

From the Department:
Administration   R2 024 000
Projects         R1 095 000
Total            R3 119 000

Donor funding:
European Union         R3 000 000

12.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

The Department does have a Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan.

12.4 Gender Mainstreaming

The  Department  has  a  gender  mainstreaming  strategy.  Details  of  this
strategy are captured below.

12.5 Programmes

|Programme    |Sub-programme    |Project       |Progress                |
|Sexual       |Law reform       |Sexual        |The South African Law   |
|Offences     |                 |Offences      |Commission submitted a  |
|             |                 |Substantive   |report on sexual        |
|             |                 |Law and Sexual|offences (including a   |
|             |                 |Offences      |draft bill) to the      |
|             |                 |Processes and |Minister in January     |
|             |                 |Procedure.    |2003. The Criminal Law  |
|             |                 |              |(Sexual Offences)       |
|             |                 |              |Amendment Bill is       |
|             |                 |              |currently before        |
|             |                 |              |Parliament.             |
|             |                 |              |Other discussion papers |
|             |                 |              |being developed are on  |
|             |                 |              |adult prostitution and  |
|             |                 |              |stalking.               |
|             |Sexual Offences  |              |These courts have been  |
|             |Courts           |              |launched throughout the |
|             |                 |              |country. An audit has   |
|             |                 |              |been conducted to       |
|             |                 |              |provide clarity as to   |
|             |                 |              |the status of all sexual|
|             |                 |              |offences courts.        |
|Domestic     |Magisterial      |              |The Gender Directorate  |
|Violence     |guidelines on the|              |and a committee of 15   |
|             |Domestic Violence|              |Magistrates assisted the|
|             |Act              |              |Consortium on Violence  |
|             |                 |              |Against Women to develop|
|             |                 |              |guidelines in the       |
|             |                 |              |implementation of the   |
|             |                 |              |Domestic Violence Act.  |
|             |Multi-disciplinar|              |An integrated strategy  |
|             |y training manual|              |on training was         |
|             |on the Domestic  |              |developed to address the|
|             |Violence Act     |              |problem of inefficiency |
|             |                 |              |in the implementation of|
|             |                 |              |the Domestic Violence   |
|             |                 |              |Act in the entire       |
|             |                 |              |Criminal Justice System.|
|             |Training on the  |              |Decentralised training  |
|             |Domestic Violence|              |courses have been       |
|             |Act              |              |designed to counter the |
|             |                 |              |problems of staff being |
|             |                 |              |unable to attend        |
|             |                 |              |training.               |
|             |Simplification of|              |The Consortium on the   |
|             |the Domestic     |              |implementation of the   |
|             |Violence         |              |Domestic Violence Act   |
|             |application forms|              |simplified the domestic |
|             |                 |              |violence protection     |
|             |                 |              |order applications      |
|             |                 |              |forms.                  |
|Maintenance  |The              |Appointments  |Assistants to           |
|             |implementation of|of assistance |maintenance officers    |
|             |the maintenance  |to maintenance|have been appointed in  |
|             |system           |officers.     |56 maintenance courts.  |
|             |                 |              |The policy and          |
|             |                 |              |regulations for the     |
|             |                 |              |permanent appointment of|
|             |                 |              |maintenance             |
|             |                 |              |investigators are being |
|             |                 |              |finalised.              |
|             |                 |Training of   |The Department, together|
|             |                 |maintenance   |with the Justice        |
|             |                 |investigators.|College, HJN Training   |
|             |                 |              |and Technikon Pretoria  |
|             |                 |              |have provided training  |
|             |                 |              |for maintenance         |
|             |                 |              |investigators.          |
|             |                 |Duties of     |The duties of the       |
|             |                 |maintenance   |maintenance             |
|             |                 |investigators.|investigators have been |
|             |                 |              |established, The        |
|             |                 |              |Departments is also in  |
|             |                 |              |the process of          |
|             |                 |              |prioritising the        |
|             |                 |              |establishment of an     |
|             |                 |              |Information Support     |
|             |                 |              |Centre for maintenance  |
|             |                 |              |and related             |
|             |                 |              |investigations.         |
|             |                 |Baseline      |A study was commissioned|
|             |                 |costing       |into the costing of the |
|             |                 |Initiative in |appointment of          |
|             |                 |Maintenance   |maintenance             |
|             |                 |Courts.       |investigators. Five     |
|             |                 |              |reports evolved from    |
|             |                 |              |this and are being      |
|             |                 |              |considered.             |
|             |Simplification of|              |A committee has been    |
|             |maintenance      |              |established to look at  |
|             |application forms|              |the simplification of   |
|             |                 |              |maintenance forms.      |
|             |Technical        |Committee to  |The function of this    |
|             |amendments to the|investigate   |committee is to         |
|             |Maintenance Act  |the execution |investigate the         |
|             |                 |of orders     |practical problems      |
|             |                 |under         |experienced by the      |
|             |                 |Maintenance   |maintenance court as it |
|             |                 |Act.          |pertains to the Chapter |
|             |                 |              |5 civil remedies as set |
|             |                 |              |out in the Maintenance  |
|             |                 |              |Act.                    |
|Family Court |                 |              |This committee was      |
|sub-committee|                 |              |established to implement|
|on drafting  |                 |              |some of the tasks geared|
|of technical |                 |              |towards establishing    |
|amendments   |                 |              |fully-fledged and       |
|             |                 |              |effective functioning   |
|             |                 |              |family courts.          |
|Family Court |                 |              |The Gender Directorate  |
|process      |                 |              |leads this process,     |
|mapping      |                 |              |which is aimed at       |
|project      |                 |              |re-engineering the      |
|             |                 |              |systems in these courts |
|             |                 |              |in order to automate    |
|             |                 |              |efficiencies.           |
|The South    |Tabling the      |              |It was envisaged that   |
|African      |Charter before   |              |the Charter would be    |
|Charter of   |Cabinet on 26    |              |tabled before Cabinet on|
|Victims      |November 2003    |              |26 November 2003 and be |
|Rights and   |                 |              |launched on 8 March     |
|the Minimum  |                 |              |2004.                   |
|Standards for|                 |              |                        |
|Service      |                 |              |                        |
|Providers    |                 |              |                        |
|Translation  |                 |              |The Domestic Violence,  |
|of the Acts  |                 |              |Maintenance and         |
|into 9       |                 |              |Recognition of Customary|
|African      |                 |              |Marriages Acts have been|
|languages and|                 |              |translated into 9       |
|Brail        |                 |              |African languages. These|
|             |                 |              |Acts are also in the    |
|             |                 |              |process of being        |
|             |                 |              |finalised in brail text.|
|Service      |Magistrates      |              |A workshop was held to  |
|delivery     |workshop inJuly  |              |discuss service delivery|
|improvement  |2002             |              |improvement in courts   |
|by judicial  |                 |              |regarding the           |
|decision     |                 |              |prioritisation of       |
|making       |                 |              |maintenance, domestic   |
|project      |                 |              |violence, sexual        |
|             |                 |              |offences cases and court|
|             |                 |              |management.             |
|             |Developing other |              |                        |
|             |guidelines       |              |The Lower Court         |
|             |                 |              |Management Committee has|
|             |                 |              |been tasked to develop  |
|             |                 |              |magisterial guidelines  |
|             |                 |              |in the implementation of|
|             |                 |              |the Maintenance Act and |
|             |                 |              |Child Justice Act.      |
|Women        |Recognition of   |              |The Gender Directorate  |
|empowerment  |Customary        |              |was involved in a       |
|on justice   |Marriages Act    |              |3-month radio talk show |
|issues       |radio talk show  |              |on this Act. A plan of  |
|through      |                 |              |action will be produced |
|effective    |                 |              |based on the problems   |
|communication|                 |              |identified during the   |
|             |                 |              |programmes.             |
|Amendments to|                 |              |The Directorate was     |
|regulations  |                 |              |involved in a process of|
|of the       |                 |              |insuring that           |
|Recognition  |                 |              |regulations are amended |
|of Customary |                 |              |to make the process of  |
|Marriages Act|                 |              |registering a customary |
|             |                 |              |marriage easier for     |
|             |                 |              |women.                  |
|Mainstreaming|Mainstreaming    |              |A study was conducted by|
|Gender       |Gender report    |              |the Gender Directorate  |
|             |                 |              |with the aims of        |
|             |                 |              |enhancing the           |
|             |                 |              |Directorate’s           |
|             |                 |              |effectiveness in working|
|             |                 |              |with the leadership of  |
|             |                 |              |the Department to       |
|             |                 |              |accelerate gender       |
|             |Mainstreaming    |              |transformation.         |
|             |Gender           |              |                        |
|             |Implementation   |              |The Directorate has     |
|             |Guidelines       |              |developed guidelines to |
|             |                 |              |assist the              |
|             |                 |              |Ministry/Department and |
|             |                 |              |affiliated structures to|
|             |                 |              |implement gender        |
|             |                 |              |equality analysis in its|
|             |                 |              |entire business;        |
|             |                 |              |training will commence  |
|             |Mainstreaming    |              |in February and March   |
|             |gender reporting |              |2004.                   |
|             |protocol         |              |                        |
|             |                 |              |The Directorate has     |
|             |                 |              |developed reporting     |
|             |                 |              |protocols to assist the |
|             |                 |              |Minister and the        |
|             |                 |              |Director-General to     |
|             |                 |              |monitor the             |
|             |                 |              |implementation to gender|
|             |                 |              |equality analysis by all|
|             |                 |              |managers in the Ministry|
|             |                 |              |/ Department.           |
|Gender Budget|Customer needs   |              |The Gender Directorate  |
|Project      |assessment tool  |              |conducted a needs       |
|             |and report       |              |assessment with its     |
|             |                 |              |customers in order to   |
|             |                 |              |develop gender budgeting|
|             |                 |              |guidelines to assist the|
|             |                 |              |Ministry / Department to|
|             |                 |              |mainstream gender in all|
|             |                 |              |aspects of its budget.  |
|             |                 |              |                        |
|             |Gender budget    |              |A gender budget         |
|             |assessment tools |              |assessment tool has been|
|             |and report       |              |developed to assess the |
|             |                 |              |Department’s budget     |
|             |                 |              |allocation and          |
|             |                 |              |expenditure trends. This|
|             |                 |              |was envisaged to be     |
|             |                 |              |conducted between 24 –  |
|             |                 |              |28 November 2003.       |
|             |Gender budget    |              |                        |
|             |implementation   |              |The report from the     |
|             |guidelines       |              |assessment of the budget|
|             |                 |              |allocation will lead to |
|             |                 |              |the development of the  |
|             |                 |              |gender budget           |
|             |                 |              |implementation          |
|             |                 |              |guidelines.             |
|Promotion of |                 |              |The Act was enacted in  |
|Equality and |                 |              |February 2000.          |
|Prevention of|                 |              |                        |
|Unfair       |                 |              |                        |
|Discriminatio|                 |              |                        |
|n Act of 2000|                 |              |                        |
|             |                 |              |                        |
|             |Equality Court   |              |Thirty-three courts have|
|             |                 |              |been identified for the |
|             |                 |              |first phase             |
|             |                 |              |implementation.         |
|Tertiary     |                 |              |Some tertiary           |
|institutions |                 |              |institutions have been  |
|research     |                 |              |assisting the           |
|programme    |                 |              |Directorate with        |
|             |                 |              |research, monitoring and|
|             |UCT: Consortium  |              |evaluation.             |
|             |on Violence      |              |                        |
|             |Against Women    |              |Conducted research on   |
|             |research         |              |the implementation of   |
|             |                 |              |Domestic Violence Act in|
|             |Technikon South  |              |the Western Cape.       |
|             |Africa           |              |                        |
|             |                 |              |Conducted research on   |
|             |                 |              |the experiences of black|
|             |                 |              |women in the Maintenance|
|             |University of    |              |Court.                  |
|             |Potchefstroom    |              |                        |
|             |                 |              |Assisting with research |
|             |                 |              |on constitutional       |
|             |University of    |              |development.            |
|             |Witwatersrand:   |              |                        |
|             |Centre for       |              |                        |
|             |Applied Legal    |              |Assisting the Justice   |
|             |Studies          |              |College with the        |
|             |                 |              |development of the      |
|             |                 |              |Recognition of Customary|
|             |Service delivery |              |Marriages Act bench     |
|             |improvement      |              |book.                   |
|             |through          |              |                        |
|             |partnership with |              |The Directorate held a  |
|             |tertiary         |              |seminar with tertiary   |
|             |institutions     |              |institutions to         |
|             |conference,      |              |establish a formal      |
|             |September 2003   |              |working relationship.   |
|             |                 |              |A conference is         |
|             |                 |              |scheduled for February  |
|             |                 |              |2004.                   |
|             |                 |              |                        |
|Transformatio|Research on      |              |It focuses on the nature|
|n of the     |equalising       |              |of current obstacles to |
|Judiciary    |opportunities    |              |women’s equal           |
|             |within the       |              |participation within the|
|             |judiciary between|              |judiciary.              |
|             |men and women    |              |                        |
|             |Meeting with SA  |              |A meeting was held to   |
|             |women judges,    |              |initiate the programme  |
|             |October 2001     |              |and ascertain the       |
|             |                 |              |problems that women     |
|             |                 |              |judges are experiencing.|
|             |                 |              |In order to address some|
|             |                 |              |of the problems, laptops|
|             |                 |              |were purchased to assist|
|             |                 |              |women judges. The       |
|             |                 |              |laptops could not be    |
|             |                 |              |distributed as the      |
|             |                 |              |Minister, Deputy        |
|             |                 |              |Minister, and Chief     |
|             |                 |              |Justice said it was     |
|             |                 |              |discriminating against  |
|             |                 |              |men.                    |
|             |South African    |              |A committee emanated    |
|             |women judges     |              |from this conference to |
|             |conference,      |              |look at gender issues   |
|             |October 2003     |              |within the judiciary,   |
|             |                 |              |and the establishment of|
|             |                 |              |the Association.        |
|             |Women in the     |              |Four women judges and a |
|             |judiciary        |              |chief magistrate have   |
|             |transformation   |              |been nominated to form a|
|             |committee        |              |committee that will     |
|             |                 |              |focus on gender issues  |
|             |                 |              |and to establish a SA   |
|             |                 |              |Association of women    |
|             |                 |              |judges.                 |
|Employment   |                 |              |The Department is not   |
|Equity       |                 |              |making sufficient       |
|             |                 |              |progress to ensure that |
|             |                 |              |women are appointed to  |
|             |                 |              |senior and              |
|             |                 |              |decision-making         |
|             |                 |              |positions.              |
|Women who    |Application for  |              |The Department has      |
|killed their |Presidential     |              |appointed a researcher  |
|abusive      |pardon           |              |to investigate the      |
|partners     |                 |              |implications of granting|
|             |                 |              |pardons.                |
|             |                 |              |                        |
|             |                 |              |A workshop will be held |
|             |                 |              |with constitutional     |
|             |                 |              |experts in April 2004 to|
|             |                 |              |discuss the             |
|             |                 |              |constitutional          |
|             |                 |              |implications of         |
|             |                 |              |presidential pardons.   |
|Ratification |                 |              |The Directorate is part |
|of the United|                 |              |of an inter-departmental|
|Nations      |                 |              |task team looking at    |
|Convention   |                 |              |this convention and its |
|Against      |                 |              |protocols.              |
|Transnational|                 |              |                        |
|Organised    |                 |              |                        |
|Crime        |                 |              |                        |
|Development  |                 |              |The Directorate is      |
|of a booklet |                 |              |compiling a booklet,    |
|on precedent |                 |              |which discusses all     |
|setting court|                 |              |landmark decisions by   |
|judgements   |                 |              |the Constitutional Court|
|             |                 |              |and other courts that   |
|             |                 |              |hold significance for   |
|             |                 |              |women’s human rights.   |
|Draft        |                 |              |The Directorate has     |
|National     |                 |              |participated in the     |
|Action Plan  |                 |              |drafting of a preface   |
|Against      |                 |              |for this national action|
|Racism       |                 |              |plan.                   |



12.6 Staff component

| Post Class           |African Male          |African Female        |
|13                    |16                    |12                    |
|14                    |7                     |4                     |
|15                    |2                     |1                     |

18.7 Achievements

The achievements of the GFP are not highlighted in the report.

18.8 Challenges
The challenges faced by the GFP are not mentioned.

19. Public Service Commission[9]

19.1 Structure

The GFP in the Department refers to an individual. A senior Human  Resources
Practitioner is responsible for all special  programmes,  including  gender.
This person report to the assistant director: Group Human Resources.

19.2 Budget

The Department has allocated  a  budget  of  R52  000  towards  all  special
programmes for the 2003/04 financial year.

20. Safety and Security – Secretariat[10]

20.1 Structure

The Secretariat does not have a GFP in place.

20.2 Staff component

The  Secretariat  has  a  staff  compliment  of  30.  At  the  time  of  the
presentation, there were 16 vacant positions  in  the  Secretariat.  Of  the
staff in management level, there  is  1  deputy  director  and  4  assistant
directors.

21.  Department of Science and Technology (DST)

21.1 Structure

The Science, Gender and Disability Unit was established  in  November  2002,
and is responsible for the gender mainstreaming of line  function  programme
delivery in the Science, Engineering  and  Technology  (SET)  sector.   This
unit only has an  external  focus  and  is  managed  by  a  manager  who  is
appointed at a director level.  The unit is also  staffed  with  two  deputy
directors and a secretary.  The deputy-directors have been in  office  since
June 2003 and August 2003, respectively.  The GFP  reports  to  the  general
manager of Human Capital and Science Missions.

A Special Programmes Officer, appointed  at  a  deputy  director  level  and
located in  the  Human  Resource  Management  Section,  is  responsible  for
ensuring gender equity in terms of employment practices, training and  staff
development. This person is also responsible  for  organising  commemorative
events such as Women’s Day  and  the  16  Days  of  Activism  Campaign.  The
Internal GFP reports to the general manager of Human Resource Management.

21.2  Budget

The following information was provided with respect to the budget:


|Project                       |Amount                             |
|South African Reference Group |R1 Million                         |
|on Women in Science and       |                                   |
|Technology (SARG)             |                                   |
|South African Women in Science|R1 Million                         |
|Awards                        |                                   |
|Research Project              |R260 000                           |
|Administrative cost of unit   |As necessary                       |

It was not stipulated whether the unit has its own budget or not.

21.3  Policy and Gender Action Plan

The internal gender programme has been involved in developing a sexual
harassment policy.

The SET sector has identified a  need  for  a  Gender  Equity  Mainstreaming
Policy.  It is  envisaged  that  this  policy  will  capture  the  following
themes:

      • Human capital development, with specific focus on  the  development
        of women.
      • Research agenda that reflects the needs/interests of women  leading
        to an improvement in their quality of life and allowing them to  be
        involved in wealth creating entrepreneurship.


It is anticipated that this policy should be available for public debate by
mid-2004.
21.4 Gender Mainstreaming

As part of an attempt to recognise the need to mainstream  gender,  the  DST
has firmly entrenched this concept in the National Research and  Development
Strategy that was approved by Cabinet in 2002.  The  objective  here  is  to
mainstream gender into all research agendas to ensure that women are  viewed
as potential end-users and/or beneficiaries with a resultant improvement  in
the quality of their lives and in their communities.

The  Science,  Gender  and  Disability  Unit  focuses  on  achieving  gender
mainstreaming in two ways:

          • Human capital development in a holistic manner by addressing the
            educational  pipeline  issue  for  the  girl   child   and   the
            recruitment, retention and  development  of  women  in  Science,
            Engineering and Technology.
          • Ensuring that research agendas of publicly  funded  institutions
            reflect the needs and interests of women.

In September 2003, the Science, Gender and Disability Unit  set  up  a  two-
phased process aimed at  achieving  organisational  transformation  and  the
inclusion of gender sensitivity in all line function programmes  to  promote
the mainstreaming of gender in the DST. The first phase involved  a  set  of
focused  interviews  of  seven  senior  managers  by  an   external   gender
consultant to obtain an understanding of the  organisational  culture,  work
environment  and  core  activities  of  the   individual   programmes.   The
interviews  were  followed  by  a  one-day  gender  sensitivity  and  gender
mainstreaming workshop to which  all  senior  managers  were  invited.   The
final report on the outcomes  and  recommendations  of  the  interviews  and
workshop is still in the process of being drafted.

21.5 Programmes

 • Human Capital Development Plan




An engendered human resource development plan is crucial to the  achievement
of an improved quality of life and wealth  creation  for  women.  This  plan
strives to address the following issues:


      • Identify  impediments  to  progress  in  Science,  Engineering  and
        Technology.
      • Identify needs/deficits of the science, engineering and  technology
        sector in attracting and retaining women.
      • Identify and develop appropriate rewards and recognition systems
      • Monitor survival and progress at institutions.
      • Analyse the impact of (or lack of) mentoring and coaching roles  of
        senior women researchers and businesswomen in the technology sector
        as role models and high achievers.


   Establishment of engendered research agendas


The principle objective of establishing engendered research  agendas  is  to
improve the quality of life of women and to enable women to be  involved  in
wealth creation.  The three major areas in which  the  quality  of  life  of
women can be improved are through:


         • Women’s health
         • Women’s role in society
         • Women’s safety and security

   South African Reference Group on Women in Science and Technology


The Research and Development Strategy  of  the  Department  of  Science  and
Technology articulates a clear position on the empowerment of  women  and  a
need for their meaningful participation and contribution in the  development
of research and development in South  Africa.  Wide  consultation  with  key
stakeholders at various  forums  determined  that  the  vehicle  to  achieve
gender  mainstreaming  is  through  the  appointment  of  a  South   African
Reference Group on Women in Science and Technology (SARG).

The following key objectives have been set for the SARG:

      • Assist the National Advisory Council on Innovation (NACI) to
        promote a research agenda, including influencing funding that will
        improve the quality of life of women.
      • Assist NACI to promote innovation that will allow women to make a
        greater contribution to wealth generation in South Africa.
      • Provide advice on developing mechanisms that will increase the
        participation and contribution of women in science and technology.
      • Highlight role models that promote women’s entry and advancement in
        science and technology.
      • Monitoring role in tracking institutional impact.

 • Equity Audit of Science Councils

In 2002, the Science, Gender and Disability Unit  undertook  an  audit  that
sought to  uncover  how  the  various  Science  Councils  responded  to  the
challenge of addressing equity issues  in  their  respective  organisations.
This baseline audit of the Science Councils was to  provide  basic  data  on
the availability of resources  and  the  progress  attained  in  some  areas
towards transformation. The study has  been  set  within  the  framework  of
corporate governance.

 • South African Women in Science Awards

The  South  African  Department  of  Science  and  Technology  has   created
recognition awards to celebrate “Women  in  Science”.   This  was  a  direct
response  to  the  vision  encapsulated  in  the   National   Research   and
Development Strategy of ultimate improvement in the quality of life  of  all
South Africans.

 • Research Project on Gender Equity in Science and Technology

The Science, Gender and Disability Unit commissioned research to inform  DST
and the SARG  on  the  status  in  Science  Councils  and  Higher  Education
Institutions of the following:
      •  The  number  of  women  scientists   and   engineers   and   their
        qualifications.
      • Special policies and programmes for development of women in SET.
      • Preferential funding mechanisms for grants for women in SET.
      • Research agendas/projects being developed with a gender perspective
        that sees women as beneficiaries/end users.


   SARG Website and On-Line Discussion Forum


The SARG website was officially launched on Youth Day in 2003 and  its  main
purpose is to inform the public of gender-related developments  in  SET  and
the activities of the SARG. The site also serves as a portal for  discussion
forums. A closed forum allows for discussions between SARG members. An  open
forum allows individuals from  the  scientific  community  and  the  general
public to enter into discussion and debates with each other, SARG,  DST  and
NACI on issues relating to gender mainstreaming  in  SET  within  the  broad
themes of human capital development and research  agendas.  The  themes  and
lessons arising out of these forums will be  used  to  inform  other  gender
equity initiatives such as conferences and research endeavours.


   Poverty Relief Programme

The Technology for Poverty Alleviation Programme is one of  the  initiatives
within the  Poverty  Relief,  Infrastructure  Investment  and  Job  Creation
Programme, which was approved by the  Ministers'  Committee  on  the  Budget
(MINCOMBUD).  The  programme  focuses   on   the   transfer   of   available
technologies to communities to  enhance  the  use  of  local  resources  and
indigenous  knowledge  to  stimulate  economic  activity.   Many  of   these
projects have been  implemented  in  poverty  nodes  as  identified  by  the
Integrated  Sustainable  Rural  Development  Programme  (ISRDP).  Technology
partners  follow  a  holistic  approach  to  poverty  relief,  focusing   on
technology as one component to contribute towards the  economic  empowerment
of previously marginalised groups and communities, with special emphasis  on
women.
21.6 Staff Complement
Not reported.
21.7 Achievements
No specific achievements are reported.
21.8 Challenges
No challenges are reported.

22.  Department of Social Development (DoSD)
22.1 Structure

The GFP in the Department of Social Development is a sub-directorate and  is
staffed with a deputy director and one contract worker. The GFP  is  located
in the Director-General’s office and has been placed under  the  Directorate
of Executive Support.   It  reports  to  the  chief  director  of  corporate
services.

22.2 Budget

R 580 000 was allocated to the GFP for the 2003/04 financial year.

22.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

No mention was made of work done in this regard.

22.4 Gender Mainstreaming

Overall, no mention was made of this aspect of the work  of  DoSD.  However,
mention was made of the fact that no clear indicators  have  been  developed
to ensure effective gender mainstreaming into the Department’s programmes.

22.5 Programmes

 • Training

Training is provided on legislation such as the Domestic Violence  Act  (Act
No 116 of 1998) and the Maintenance Act (Act No 99 of  1998).   Training  is
further provided on international and regional treaties such as the  Beijing
Platform for Action (BPA), the Convention on the Elimination  of  All  Forms
of Discrimination against  Women  (CEDAW),  the  South  African  Development
Community  Declaration,  National  Gender  and  Policy  Framework  and  more
broadly on issues such as sexual harassment, self  defence  and  sensitising
men to gender issues. The target group of this training was not given.

 • Gender Advocacy and Awareness Programmes

This  programme  entails  the  commemoration  of   National   Women’s   Day,
International Women’s  Day,  16  Days  of  Activism  and  the  International
Women’s Day for Peace.

22.6 Staff Complement

Not reported.

22.7 Achievements

No achievements are listed.

22.8 Challenges

No challenges are listed.

23. The South African Police Services (SAPS)

23.1   Structure

The deputy national commissioner manages the Gender  Focal  Point  in  SAPS.
Internally, the Divisional Commissioner: Career Management is the  custodian
of internal gender-related issues.  Externally, the divisional  commissioner
crime prevention is responsible for the gender-related work of SAPS.


23.2 Budget

The SAPS budget makes provision for the activities and programmes  conducted
to address gender issues. The amount allocated is not stipulated.

24.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

A Sexual Harassment  Policy  has  been  developed  and  popularised  amongst
staff.

24.4  Gender Mainstreaming

This is not indicated.

24.5   Programmes

24.5.1 Internal programmes
 • Women’s Empowerment Sessions

‘Women’s Empowerment Sessions’ were conducted in all nine  provinces.  These
sessions were motivational sessions for women in SAPS.  It is  thought  that
they resulted in more  women  applying  for  middle  and  senior  management
posts.  Gender structures were also established as  part  of  this  process.
The role of these structures was  not  clarified.  These  gender  structures
have undergone training.  The  purpose  and  content  of  this  training  is
unclear.


   Exhibitions


Exhibitions were held at  the  specialised  units  during  the  Women’s  Day
celebrations at the Pretoria West College.   The  purpose  of  this  was  to
expose women to the specialised units with the aim of  stimulating  interest
in them, given that they are male dominated.

 • Bridging programme/ recruitment strategies

A bridging programme has been established  at  the  Special  Task  Force  to
‘accommodate the disadvantaged’.  The nature of, objectives and the ways  in
which this programme benefits women are not clear.

Recruitment strategies  in  2004  in  the  Special  Task  Force  will  focus
specially on women.


   Launch of the Women’s Network


The Women’s Network was launched to facilitate communication  and  the  flow
of information amongst women in leadership  positions  and  the  sharing  of
best practices.   It  is  unclear  whether  this  network  only  focuses  on
internal gender issues.


   Calendar Events


The celebration of National Women’s Day with related activities  took  place
in the provinces and divisions.  It was envisaged  that  men  will  run  the
campaign during the 16 Days of Activism.

 • Sexual Harassment Survey

A survey on the prevalence of sexual harassment in SAPS has been  conducted.
The final report will be used to determine whether the  current  policy  has
been effective and whether there is a need for further interventions.

 • Affirmative Action Programme

An ‘Entering Leadership Programme’ has been initiated.  Seventy  percent  of
the participants in 2003 were women.     The  purpose  and  method  of  this
programme was not clarified.  Numeric targets in terms of gender  have  also
been set as per the SAPS Employment Equity Plan. The overall  representation
of women in SAPS in 2003 is 26%.




 • Training

At middle management level, a total of 27 441 women were trained.   A  total
of 110 women received bursaries.

25.6 Staff Component

Numeric targets in terms of gender have been set as per the SAPS  Employment
Equity Plan. The following table provides  information  on  the  numbers  of
women in SAPS over the past four years:

|Year                  |Men                   |Women                 |
|2000                  |79%                   |21%                   |
|2001                  |77%                   |23%                   |
|2002                  |75%                   |25%                   |
|2003                  |74%                   |26%                   |

25.7 Achievements

Achievements of the GFP are not specified.

25.8 Challenges

No challenges are listed.

26.  South African Sports Commission

26.1  Structure
In terms of the ‘Women, Sport and Recreation Policy Guidelines’,  the  South
African Sports Commission (SASC), together with the provinces,  have  agreed
that the Committee  on  the  Transformation  of  the  South  African  Sports
Commission’s  (SASC)  Board,  will  take  responsibility  for  the   overall
strategic direction and policy framework on all matters pertaining to  women
and sport.  A Commissioner will chair  this  committee.   Co-ordinators  for
women and sport  will  provide  assistance  to  this  committee.   The  main
responsibilities of the co-ordinators will be  to  initiate,  implement  and
oversee all operational issues.

The provincial forums will take responsibility for:

    • Advising the co-ordinator on equity issues.
    • Implementing the policy.
    • Initiating and implement women and sport projects.
    • Assisting in dispute resolution.
    • Hosting information dissemination sessions.
    • Sharing ideas and addressing key issues.
    • Assisting with equity research.
    • Ensuring that key role players establish equity desks.
    • Addressing cultural dynamics.


26.2  Budget

R100 000 was received in the 2003/04 financial year.  It is unclear  whether
this budget is intended solely for gender-related initiatives  in  sport  or
whether it caters for a broader range of activities.

26.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

Policy guidelines have been developed on women, sport  and  recreation.   In
terms of these guidelines, the SASC has to submit a women and  sport  policy
document and business plans and budgets for related projects to  the  SASC’s
Board Committee on Transformation. A document that sets  out  the  framework
and strategic direction for  all  issues  pertaining  to  women,  sport  and
recreation must also be submitted to this committee.

26.4 Gender Mainstreaming

Although the policy guidelines on women, sport and recreation indicate  that
gender mainstreaming should be one of  the  key  performance  areas  of  the
SASC, no further information is provided on the strategies for so doing.

  5. Programmes

The following projects are listed in the SASC report:

    • Gender training  workshops  on  life  skills,  capacity  building  and
      mentorship.  The target of this initiative is not mentioned.
    • Establishment of forums  in  the  provinces  (no  further  information
      provided in this regard).
    • Research on women, sport and recreation.   The  exact  nature  of  the
      research is not stipulated, yet reference is made  to  the  fact  that
      data is being collected on the trends of  participation  of  women  in
      sport.
    • Support for  girl  child  programmes  such  as  leadership/peer  group
      courses.
    • Commemoration of calendar events such as Women’s  Day  and  Disability
      Month.

26.6 Staff Complement

Not reported.

26.7  Achievements

Not reported.

26.8  Challenges

The following challenges are listed:  (Note that the  exact  nature  of  the
challenges were not clarified).

    • Budgetary constraints.
    • Lack of sponsorships.
    • Lack of support from male counterparts.
    • Lack of support from families and partners.
    • Minimum media support.
    • Cultural dynamics.
    • Pregnancy in sport and taboos relating to this.
    • Women’s sport being trivialised, criticised and not taken seriously.
    • Codes such as netball being dubbed ‘Cinderella sports’.
    • Some codes seen as being masculine.

27.  Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)

27.1  Structure

Before the current unit came into existence, a Gender Desk had been  set  up
in 1998, which was transformed into a Gender Unit in 2000.

The Gender Focal Point in the Department of Trade and Industry is  currently
called the Gender and Women’s Empowerment Unit, set up in  2003.   The  unit
is staffed with a director who reports to the  Deputy  Director-General.   A
chief director post has been created, but is still to be confirmed.

27.2 Budget

The  internal  administration  of  the  Gender   and   Women’s   Empowerment
Programme is allocated R1,5  million  annually.   The  South  African  Women
Entrepreneurs Network (SAWEN) is budgeted at R 2 million and R 6 million  is
allocated to Technology for Women in Business (TWIB).

27.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

One of the initiatives of the  unit  has  been  to  revise  the  Gender  and
Women’s Empowerment Policy and Strategy framework.  No  further  information
in this regard is provided.

A Gender and Women’s Empowerment Committee has been set up  to  monitor  the
impact of policies.

 4. Gender Mainstreaming
No mention is made of the mainstreaming of  gender  into  the  work  of  the
Department.

 5. Programmes

    • Launch of the ‘Women’s Forum Annual Conference and Awards’.
    • Facilitated a process for growing and supporting  women’s  enterprises
      through  SAWEN.  A  committed  budget  has  been  secured  for   SAWEN
      groundwork. SAWEN  provincial  chapters  have  been  launched  in  the
      Eastern  Cape,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Gauteng,  Bloemfontein,  North   West,
      Northern Cape and Limpopo.
    • Hosted the national technology for ‘Women In Business Conference’  for
      2003.
    • Commissioned a study to assess the national status  of  South  African
      women entrepreneurs.

 6. Staff Complement

Not reported.

 7. Achievements

The following achievements are listed:

    • Developed a business plan with milestones  and  incorporated  this  as
      part of the divisional strategic plan.
    • Secured a gender budget  as  well  as  separate  budgets  for  various
      initiatives.
    • Launched the DTI internal  clinic  providing  medical  and  counseling
      services specifically for women.
    • Engaged with the private sector to support a women’s  entrepreneurship
      programme (JSE, APDF, BMF and ABSA are participating partners).
    • Supported the Spousal offices (the nature of  is  achievement  is  not
      made clear).

27.8  Challenges

The following challenges have been identified:

    • The need for additional financial resources.
    • The need to increase staff capacity.
    • The need to implement the ‘Gender and Women’s Empowerment  Policy  and
      Strategy Framework’ throughout the DTI.
    • The need to  increase  women’s  support  and  design  in  relation  to
      financial and non financial schemes.


28. Department of Water Affairs and Forestry

28.1 Structure

Gender issues are managed by the Equity  Programmes,  which  resides  within
Human  Resource  Management.  This  sub-directorate  also   manages   issues
relating to disability, youth  and  children,  and  employment  equity.  The
Gender Focal Point reports to the Director Human Resources Management.

28.2 Budget

The budget is located within the  Human  Resource  Management  Directorate’s
budget.  The amount allocated to gender-related work is not specified.

28.3  Policy and Gender Action Plan

The Department’s Gender Policy was developed to promote gender equity and
equality in the fields of water and forestry and to honour national and
international legislation calling for gender equity and equality.


This policy document outlines the status of gender-related issues in the
Department.  It also outlines the important gender principles that
recognise and address the conditions that mitigated against women taking
their full part in society, ending discriminatory practices and according
special recognition and treatment to women as a means towards addressing
the imbalances of the past.


Apart from the Gender Policy, the Department has also adopted an Anti-
Sexual Harassment Policy as the department believes that it is its duty to
provide a work environment that is free of sexual harassment. The policy
applies where sexual harassment has occurred in the work environment.

The Department has developed a draft gender action plan. This document is
an implementation plan that details what will be done, how it will be
accomplished and who is responsible. Although the intention of this
document is very clear, it has been seriously affected by capacity problems
in terms of taking it forward, specifically with regard to awareness
raising, implementation and monitoring.

28.4 Gender Mainstreaming

The Gender  Policy  outlines  both  the  internal  and  external  goals  and
objectives for gender mainstreaming. One of  the  goals  is  to  ensure  the
equal participation and involvement of women and men in  decision-making  on
all projects undertaken by the Department.  The  policy  then  reflects  the
structure responsible for implementation and also outlines the national  and
international instruments supporting gender equality and/or mainstreaming.

28.5 Programmes

• Representation in project structures

Water projects were managed through local project steering committees.  The
Department requires that their membership consist of 30% women, which has
been complied with. With the handover of responsibilities to local
government, the 30% target is still being applied. In all institutions for
which the Department has oversight and where the Minister is responsible
for appointments of the Board, adequate gender representation is promoted.

Celebration of calendar events

For the past year, the Department has successfully celebrated and
participated in the National Women’s Day, the 16 Days of Activism on No
Violence Against Women and Children Campaign and International Women’s Day.
The last gender-related event that was celebrated was the ‘Women in Water
Awards’ celebration.

Water Resources Management Branch Progress

The  Department  has  undergone  a  process  of  transformation,  which  has
resulted in the establishment of  a  gender  component  in  the  Stakeholder
Empowerment Unit in the Water Resources Management (WRM) branch.

During the Earth Summit in August 2002, the Department of Water Affairs  and
Forestry made a commitment to work in partnership with the Gender and  Water
Alliance (GWA). This would entail the development of  training  modules  for
ensuring gender mainstreaming in integrated water resources management.

In the development of the Levhuvhu  River  Government  Scheme,  local  women
were trained in concrete technology, catering,  bookkeeping,  minute  taking
and facilitation. Those trained in concrete technology  have  been  employed
in the scheme, and local women now  cater  for  project  meetings.  In  such
initiatives,  sustainability  is  a   challenge,   and   only   co-operative
governance could be a means for ensuring poverty alleviation in these  areas
after the completion of projects.
The Department has been supporting the ‘Water for Food Movement’,  which  is
an association of rural women who use water-harnessing mechanisms, in  order
to have enough water for their communal vegetable gardens.

A gender analysis of the water sector is currently  underway.  Some  of  the
water management institutions are being  analysed.  A  gender  mainstreaming
strategy will be developed, implemented and monitored.

 • Water Services Programme Progress

 o Awareness raising  and  training  programmes  were  rendered  to  project
   implementing agents and management staff in the Department, and  district
   municipalities in KwaZulu Natal, Limpopo, Eastern Cape, and  North  West.
   The aim  was  to  assist  managers  and  implementing  agents  understand
   relationship between gender and sustainability and ensure that these  get
   addressed within project cycles.
 o Establishment of units to address gender within the  Department  and  the
   water services sector. This has been achieved in  Eastern  Cape,  Limpopo
   and North West.
 o The development of a draft gender mainstreaming strategy in  the  Eastern
   Cape.
 o Started a process of development of gender key performance indicators for
   integration into the monitoring and evaluation system.
 o Started a process of developing a sector gender mainstreaming strategy.
 o Assumed a leading role in the " Take  a  Girl  Child  to  Work"  project,
   sponsored by Cell C.

28.6 Staff Complement

The following information was provided:

|Period                |Male                  |Female                |
|1999-2000             |16 385 (71%)          |6 554 (29%)           |
|2000-2001             |15 548 (71%)          |6 403 (29%)           |
|2001-2002             |14 539 (71%)          |5 841 (29%)           |
|2002-2003             |12 912 (70%)          |5 553 (30%)           |

28.7 Achievements

No specific achievements other than those identified in the programmes
listed above, have been identified.

28.8 Challenges

No challenges have been identified other than the fact that the
implementation of the Gender Action Plan has been seriously affected by
capacity problems.

Section Three: Analysis of Submissions

Office on the Status of Women

1. Structure

1.1 Capacity of OSW in terms of staff complement

The  table  below  indicates  the  staff  complement  of  the  OSWs  in  the
provinces:

|OSW                       |No. of     |Position(s)                     |
|                          |positions  |                                |
|Eastern Cape              |3          |Deputy director, assistant      |
|                          |           |director, administrative        |
|                          |           |officer.                        |
|Free State                |6          |Deputy director, assistant      |
|                          |           |director, administrative officer|
|                          |           |(2), messenger and secretary.   |
|KwaZulu-Natal             |3          |Deputy director, assistant      |
|                          |           |director and administrative     |
|                          |           |officer.                        |
|Gauteng[11]               |3          |Deputy director, assistant      |
|                          |           |director and administrative     |
|                          |           |officer.                        |
|Mpumalanga                |12         |Deputy director, assistant      |
|                          |           |director (2), chief community   |
|                          |           |liaison officers (3), community |
|                          |           |liaison officer (3), and        |
|                          |           |administrative clerk (3).       |
|North West                |7          |Director, assistant director    |
|                          |           |(3), administrative officer,    |
|                          |           |office manager and              |
|                          |           |administrative clerk.           |
|Western Cape              |1          |Deputy director.                |

From the above table, it is evident that OSWs vary in the number  of  people
staffing the offices. This ranges from 1 position in the Western Cape to  12
posts being available on the organogram of the Mpumalanga OSW. A  number  of
vacancies were reported in the OSWs.  These  include  the  position  of  the
deputy  director  in  KwaZulu-Natal  and  half  of  the  positions  in   the
Mpumalanga office.  The vacancies in both the KwaZulu-Natal  and  Mpumalanga
office is of serious concern, as it  impacts  on  the  Offices’  ability  to
deliver.

The shortage of staff in the Western Cape OSW is another grave concern.  The
capacity of human resources no doubt impacts negatively  on  the  fulfilling
of the functions of the OSW. It is difficult to see how this  OSW  can  meet
its mandate with only one staff member employed.
Another concern is with the seemingly skewed staff distribution in the  Free
State.  The  Free  State  OSW  appears  to  be   heavily   staffed   in   an
administrative capacity and less so with  staff  carrying  out  programmatic
functions. The reasons for and  effectiveness  of  this  should  be  further
investigated.

The report submitted by  the  North  West  is  unclear  as  to  whether  the
positions all have  gender  responsibilities.  It  was  indicated  that  the
director is also responsible  for  disability  issues.  Thus,  the  question
arises as to whether the administrative staff support functions  other  than
gender issues.

1.2 Location

The Gender Policy recommends that OSWs be established within  provinces  and
be located in the Offices of the  Premiers.  The  Mpumalanga,  KwaZulu-Natal
and North West OSWs  indicated  that  they  are  based  in  the  recommended
office. Although Gauteng indicated the Directorate that the  new  Gender/HIV
structure will report to, it is unclear  whether  the  Directorate  will  be
located in the Premier’s office. Three OSWs (Eastern Cape,  Free  State  and
Western Cape) did not indicate the location of their offices.

1.3 Level of Appointment

Most of the OSWs (6) indicated that the position of head of the OSW  (or  in
the case of Gauteng, head of the programme) was at  deputy  director  level.
As indicated earlier, 2 of these were vacant  (KwaZulu-Natal  and  Gauteng).
Only the North West reported that the OSW is headed by a  director.  As  was
also  indicated  previously,  other  than  gender   responsibilities,   this
position also has the responsibility for disability issues.

In 3 of the OSWs, the deputy director or director is assisted by at least  1
assistant  director  (Eastern  Cape,  Free  State  and  KwaZulu-Natal).  The
Mpumalanga OSW reports having 2 assistant directors  while  the  North  West
has 3 assistant directors, of which 1 position is vacant.

Whilst the Gender Policy does not make specific reference to  the  level  at
which provinces should appoint OSW coordinators, it stands  to  reason  that
positions should be at the level where the person  can  influence  decision-
making and have the necessary level of authority  to  monitor  gender  goals
and take action should this be the case.

1.4 Functions of the OSW

The Gender Policy identifies clear areas of foci for  the  provincial  OSWs.
These are:

 • To develop a gender policy and plan of action (in line with the  national
   policy).
 • To coordinate the activities of other role-players and stakeholders.

Given the functions of the OSW, it would thus also be  responsible  for  co-
ordinating the activities of GFPs in Departments and  to  some  extent,  the
establishment of the GFPs in provincial Government Departments.

Other than report on the GFPs, the OSWs were not  asked  to  report  on  the
functions of the OSW. However, all but Gauteng reported  on  the  programmes
undertaken by the provincial Departments. The  fact  that  Gauteng  had  not
reported could possibly be ascribed to the Province not having an Office  on
the Status of Women. From the data collected, most provinces were thus  able
to report on the status of GFPs within Departments  and  to  indicate  where
Departments had not been able  to  establish  GFPs.  Provincial  GFPs  will,
however, be discussed in a different section of the report.

2. Budget

Only 3 OSWs (Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal  and  the  Western  Cape)  provided
some information on their budgets. These are indicated in the table below:

|Province              |Amount                                   |
|Eastern Cape          |R1.2 million (2003/04).                  |
|Free State            |Not available.                           |
|KwaZulu-Natal         |R1.6 million (the financial year is not  |
|                      |known).                                  |
|Gauteng               |Not available.                           |
|Mpumalanga            |Not available.                           |
|North West            |Special Programme Directorate has a      |
|                      |budget from which the OSW is allocated   |
|                      |funds.                                   |
|Western Cape          |Policy Development and Research - R15 000|
|                      |(2002/03).                               |
|                      |Capacity building - R50 000 (2003/04).   |
|                      |Public Education - R285 000 (2003/04).   |
|                      |Coordination of gender machinery - R350  |
|                      |000 (2004/05).                           |

Mpumalanga and the Western Cape mentioned budgetary constraints in  the  OSW
as  one  of  the  reasons  why  positions  were  not  filled.   Furthermore,
Mpumalanga indicated that they are often given  additional  mandates,  which
are not funded. The Free State indicated that the  budgetary  allocation  to
their offices was far less than the allocation of the Youth  Directorate  in
the province. This touches on the issue  of  prioritisation,  and  begs  the
question  of  whether  gender  equality  is  being   given   the   necessary
prioritisation.

Whilst the OSWs in the Eastern Cape  and  KwaZulu-Natal  may  appear  to  be
getting a substantial amount of financial  resources,  it  is  necessary  to
ascertain what percentage of that amount goes towards the  operations  costs
of programmes and the percentage that is  allocated  towards  administrative
functions such as salaries and infrastructure. At  this  point,  it  is  not
clear as to whether the amount is sufficient or not, but  it  is  often  the
case that administrative expenditure outweighs the programmatic costs.  This
has serious impact on the output of the programmes.    Furthermore,  in  his
2003 State of the Nation address, the President indicated  that  more  funds
would be allocated towards gender. It would need to be  established  whether
this was indeed the case.

The  Gender  Policy  does  not  refer  specifically  to  the  allocation  of
resources for provincial OSWs.  However,  it  is  imperative  that  adequate
resources are made available to the provinces for them  to  give  effect  to
their mandates. This requires an adequate allocation of financial  resources
to  allow  for  the  effective  coordination,  monitoring,  networking   and
technical support required by the Office,  as  well  as  adequate  financial
allocations for programmes.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

3.1 Developing policy

The Gender Policy clearly states that one of the  provincial  OSW  functions
is  to  develop  a  provincial  gender  policy  and  plan  of  action.  This
provincial policy should be in line with the national policy.  As  mentioned
elsewhere in the report, one of the limitations of  the  hearings  was  that
very specific questions (and thus limiting responses) were  posed  to  OSWs.
Many of the OSWs thus chose to answer the questions without any  elaboration
on any other issues. Within this report, it  is  thus  difficult  to  report
conclusively on the issue of the development of gender policies  within  the
OSWs. Reference was made in some provincial reports to Gender  Policies  but
very little detail was given  on  this.  Hence,  additional  information  is
required from OSWs.

The reports show that Gauteng has a provincial Gender Policy in  place.  Two
other provinces, namely Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal indicated that  draft
policies are available. The Free State and the Eastern Cape  make  reference
to undertaking activities to  promote  the  gender  policy.  As  no  further
information was provided on these gender policies,  it  is  unclear  whether
the activities that they are undertaking is in relation  to  a  national  or
provincial gender policy. This information needs  to  be  sourced  from  the
provinces. The OSWs of Mpumalanga and the North West  did  not  indicate  if
the province has a Gender Policy or if one is being developed.

3.2 Gender Action Plan

Gauteng was the only province that referred to a  provincial  gender  action
plan. The Free State's report mentioned a developmental plan and  the  North
West OSW stated that they had developed a business plan, which was aimed  at
integrating gender programmes in Government. As no further  information  was
provided, it is unclear whether these plans can be  equated  with  a  gender
action plan. This would need further investigation. KwaZulu-Natal is in  the
process  of  developing  a  gender  action  plan.  For  most  of  the  other
provinces,  this  information  was  not  available  and   requires   further
investigation.
3.3 Gender Audits

The OSWs in the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and  the  North  West  mentioned
that their provinces had undertaken gender audits and in  the  case  of  the
Free State, developed monitoring tools. The  gender  audit  in  the  Eastern
Cape led to the development  of  a  gender  mainstreaming  strategy  and  an
empowerment of women coordination framework.

The  Gender  Policy  recommends  that  provincial  machineries   should   be
structured and reflect  those  in  the  national  machinery.  One  of  these
functions that should be  mirrored  is  the  development  of  indicators  to
measure progression towards gender equality. The  gender  audits  undertaken
by the aforementioned 3 OSWs thus squarely fall  within  the  ambit  of  the
provincial OSWs’ work. It should be ascertained what the OSWs  progress  has
been  towards  the  development  of   indicators   to   measure   provincial
progression towards gender quality.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

Gender equality in all institutions of government can only be attained if  a
rigorous process of gender mainstreaming occurs  (National  Gender  Policy).
Therefore, it is the task of the gender machinery, also those in  Government
Departments, and at all levels, to ensure this. The Eastern  Cape,  KwaZulu-
Natal and Gauteng indicated that they have a  gender  mainstreaming  policy.
The Free State indicated that they have a strategic plan and an  operational
plan derived from the Gender Policy. The North West has  a  gender  strategy
and in the absence of any further information, it is  not  possible  to  say
whether this could be equated with a gender mainstreaming strategy.

With the exception of Gauteng, very little information is  provided  on  the
gender mainstreaming strategies of provinces. It is  therefore  unclear  how
gender is mainstreamed in provincial  programmes  and  projects.  Additional
information needs to be provided by all OSWs on their  gender  mainstreaming
strategies.

5. Programmes

The OSWs were not asked to provide information on the programmatic  work  of
their offices. Despite  this,  the  OSWs  in  Gauteng,  Mpumalanga  and  the
Western Cape gave some indication of  the  programmes  underway.  Sufficient
information was provided by Gauteng and the Western Cape  to  ascertain  the
programmatic areas, as well as the aims of the respective programmes.

The brief given to the OSWs requested that they provide information  on  the
programmes  of  the  provincial  GFPs.  However,  they  failed  to   provide
information indicating the link between the GFPs' programmatic work and  the
involvement of the OSWs.

Because programmatic information is only available for Gauteng, the  Western
Cape and Mpumalanga, it is not possible to make significant comments on  the
programmes of the OSWs. This is clearly  an  area  that  should  be  further
explored.

|OSW          |Programme            |Description of programme      |
|Gauteng      |Policy development   |Support is provided to        |
|             |and policy analysis  |Departments to develop sector |
|             |                     |specific policies and         |
|             |                     |programmes that address gender|
|             |                     |issues.                       |
|             |Capacity building    |The Directorate has done      |
|             |                     |training on gender budgeting  |
|             |                     |and gender planning with GFPs |
|             |                     |and senior management.        |
|             |Gender machineries   |A Gender Forum has been       |
|             |                     |established which meets       |
|             |                     |monthly.                      |
|             |Monitoring and       |Annual analysis of            |
|             |evaluation           |Departmental strategies and   |
|             |                     |budgets are done to ascertain |
|             |                     |if they are in line with      |
|             |                     |national and provincial       |
|             |                     |priorities as well as to check|
|             |                     |for the integration of gender |
|             |                     |into plans and budgets.       |
|             |Gender mainstreaming |The programme ensures that    |
|             |                     |gender is mainstreamed into   |
|             |                     |Departments.                  |
|             |Co-ordination and    |The Directorate coordinates   |
|             |planning             |and plans the celebrations of |
|             |                     |certain commemorative events. |
|Mpumalanga   |HIV and Aids         |Co-coordinated the HIV and    |
|             |                     |AIDS programme Vusa Isizwe,   |
|             |                     |which targets school children.|
|             |Gender training      |Conducted training for GFPs   |
|             |                     |coordinators on gender issues.|
|             |Gender workshop      |Conducted a gender workshop   |
|             |                     |for Members of Parliament and |
|             |                     |Heads of Departments.         |
|             |Awareness campaigns  |Ran awareness campaigns on    |
|             |                     |legislation affecting women.  |
|             |Calendar events      |Co-coordinated the calendar on|
|             |                     |women’s events.               |
|Western Cape |Policy development   |Drafted a provincial gender   |
|             |and research         |equality and women empowerment|
|             |                     |implementation strategy.      |
|             |Capacity building and|Involved in mainstreaming     |
|             |training             |training for trainers in the  |
|             |                     |public sector.                |
|             |                     |OSW specific capacity         |
|             |                     |building.                     |
|             |Public education,    |Involved in the celebration of|
|             |awareness raising and|commemoration days.           |
|             |communication        |Development of promotional    |
|             |                     |materials.                    |
|             |                     |Partnerships with civil       |
|             |                     |society.                      |
|             |Co-ordination of     |The formal structuring of a   |
|             |gender machinery     |provincial gender management  |
|             |                     |system.                       |
|             |Monitoring,          |Developing of an audit        |
|             |evaluation and       |instrument                    |
|             |reporting            |                              |

The programmes of the Western Cape and Gauteng clearly gives effect  to  the
functions outlined for the provincial OSWs.

6. Challenges

Most of the OSWs reported on challenges impeding their work. The Free  State
and Eastern Cape did not raise challenges pertaining to their  offices.  One
cannot, however, make the assumption that no challenges exist.

|Challenge                                    |Raised by           |
|Fostering an integrated approach to gender   |KwaZulu-Natal       |
|issues                                       |                    |
|Political support required for gender issues |KwaZulu-Natal       |
|Social regeneration and economic empowerment |Gauteng             |
|Filling of vacancies                         |Mpumalanga and      |
|                                             |Western Cape        |
|Budgetary constraints                        |Mpumalanga and      |
|                                             |Western Cape        |
|Unfunded mandates from provincial and/or     |Mpumalanga          |
|national Government Departments              |                    |
|Getting the gender machinery operational and |North West and      |
|strengthening the gender machinery           |Western Cape        |
|Understanding the role and the operational   |Western Cape        |
|methodology of the OSW                       |                    |
|Strengthening relations with NGOs            |Western Cape        |

National Gender Focal Points

1.  Structure

1.1 Capacity of GFP in terms of staff complement
Most Departments (namely 11)  report  that  the  GFP  is  staffed  with  one
person.   Six Departments reported that their GFP  was  staffed  with  3  or
more persons, i.e. with at least 2 people  assigned  to  professional  posts
and  one  administrative  post.  Two  Departments   (Foreign   Affairs   and
Agriculture) need to fill the post of the person responsible for doing  GFP-
related work and one Department (Labour) reported that its GFP needs  to  be
re-established.  This is because the one that had initially been set up  has
become dysfunctional.

1.2 Location

The Gender Policy recommends that the GFP should reside  within  the  office
of the Director-General so  as  to  afford  the  GFPs  easy  access  to  all
programmes  and  programme   officials,   thereby   creating   an   enabling
environment  for  gender  mainstreaming.  Only  4  Departments  (i.e.   Land
Affairs, Agriculture and Justice and Constitutional Development  and  Social
Development) reported that their GFPs are located within the office  of  the
Director-General.  Twelve of the other Departments reported that their  GFPs
were located elsewhere in the organisation, with Human  Resource  Management
being a popular site of location.

1.3 Level of appointment

The Gender Policy recommends that the GFP co-ordinator is appointed  at  the
level of director  and  that  persons  appointed  to  this  level  have  the
commensurate  skill  level  required  for  gender  mainstreaming.   Of   the
Departments that indicated the level of appointment, only 7  have  appointed
a director to drive  the  GFP  (Correctional  Services,  Education,  Health,
Foreign Affairs, Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Science and  Technology
and Trade and Industry).  Seven  Departments  (Arts  and  Culture,  Defence,
Labour,  Agriculture,  Housing,  Minerals  and  Energy   and   Science   and
Technology[12]) reported  that  they  had  appointed  someone  at  a  deputy
director level and 3 Departments (Environmental Affairs  and  Tourism,  Home
Affairs and  the  National  Treasury)  made  appointments  at  an  assistant
director level.  The Public Service Commission has appointed a senior  human
resource practitioner to take responsibility for gender issues.

1.4 Area of focus

In many instances, it was not  expressly  stipulated  whether  the  GFP  was
responsible for key performance areas other than gender. Only  in  the  case
of  4  Departments  (i.e.  Correctional  Services,  Education,  Justice  and
Constitutional Affairs, and Trade and Industry),  could  it  be  ascertained
that the GFPs focused on gender alone.  Eight departments  expressly  stated
that the GFP is responsible for areas of competency in  addition  to  gender
(namely, Arts and Culture, Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Home  Affairs,
Labour, Housing, Science and Technology, the Public Service  Commission  and
Water Affairs and Forestry).  The  additional  areas  of  responsibility  in
these cases are HIV and Aids, Employee  Assistance  Programmes,  disability,
children, youth and employment equity.  On average, most of the  Departments
concerned are mandated  with  between  three  to  five  of  these  areas  of
responsibility. This is a serious impediment to focusing on  gender  in  any
substantive and meaningful way as the combination of  taking  responsibility
for so many areas of competency together  with  the  lack  of  capacity  and
resources, limits the impact of the  GFP  in  terms  of  its  gender-related
work.

2.  Budget

The Gender Policy indicates that the costs  entailed  in  the  planning  and
implementation of programmes for women’s empowerment and gender equality  at
Departmental level, need  to  be  incorporated  into  existing  Departmental
budgets.  This needs to be achieved, inter alia,  by  the  re-prioritisation
of  spending  and  efficiency  savings.    Expenditure   on   gender-related
initiatives and programmes need to be planned in advance and where  this  is
not the case, plans need to be reviewed and adjusted to  meet  the  specific
needs  of  women.   The  gender  policy  further  advises  that  the  gender
structures need to have  adequate  financial  resources  so  that  they  are
capacitated to do their work.

Seven departments indicated that their  GFPs  have  a  dedicated  budget  of
their  own  (i.e.  Defence,  Education,  Health,  Land  Affairs,  Trade  and
Industry and Justice and Constitutional Affairs).  The National  Prosecuting
Authority and the South African Sports Commission  also  make  reference  to
available budgets, but it is not entirely clear  as  to  whether  these  are
used exclusively for gender-related work.   Eight  departments   (i.e.  Arts
and Culture, Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Home  Affairs,  SAPS,  Water
Affairs  and  Forestry,  Agriculture,  the  Public  Service  Commission  and
Housing) indicated that their GFPs draw their resources from a  budget  that
they do not control and manage. Six Departments failed to  indicate  or  are
unclear as to whether their GFPs have their own budgets or not.


The table below reflects the amounts allocated for  gender-related  work  by
Departments that provided this information.

Amounts allocated for the financial year 2003/4
|Department                        |Amount                            |
|Defence                           |R 89 211                          |
|Education                         |R 1.5 million (of this R 200 000  |
|                                  |is for programmatic work)         |
|Health                            |R 1 892 000 (of this R 688 000 is |
|                                  |for non-administrative costs)     |
|Land Affairs                      |R 1.577 million                   |
|ICD                               |R 66 000 (allocated to ‘special   |
|                                  |programmes’). It is not clear how |
|                                  |much is specifically for          |
|                                  |gender-related work.              |
|NPASA                             |R 2 5 million (allocated to the   |
|                                  |Sexual Offences and Community     |
|                                  |Affairs Unit, of which R 24       |
|                                  |million is for human resource     |
|                                  |related expenditure)              |
|Science and Technology            |R 1 million – SARG                |
|                                  |R 1 million – SA Women in Science |
|                                  |Awards                            |
|                                  |R 260 000 – research project      |
|                                  |(only different project budgets   |
|                                  |are provided)                     |
|SASC                              |R 100 000 (not clear if this is   |
|                                  |solely for gender-related work or |
|                                  |not)                              |
|Social Development                |R 580 000                         |
|Trade and Industry                |R1.5 million for internal         |
|                                  |gender-related work and R 2       |
|                                  |million to SAWEN and              |
|                                  |R 6 million to TWIB               |
|Justice and Constitutional Affairs|R 3 119 000 (R 1 095 000 for      |
|                                  |programmatic related work),       |
|                                  |also R 3 000 000 (donor funding)  |

From the above, it is clear that on the whole, most GFPs either do not  have
direct control over managing their own financial resources  or  have  access
to very limited amounts of financial resources.   A  number  of  Departments
raised the lack of resources as one  of  the  greatest  impediments  to  the
effective  implementation  of  their  work.  This  needs  to  be   seriously
addressed.

3.  Policy and Gender Action Plan

In terms of the Gender Policy, some of the key functions of the GFPs are:

    • To ensure that each Department implements the national gender policy.
    • To ensure that gender issues are routinely considered in  Departmental
      strategic planning exercises.
    • To ensure that Departments  reflect  gender  considerations  in  their
      business plans and routinely report on them.
    • To review Departmental policy and planning in line with  the  national
      gender policy.
    • To monitor and evaluate Departmental projects and programmes to assess
      whether they are consistent with the national gender policy.

Most Departments acknowledge that  their  GFPs  should  be  responsible  for
implementing the national gender policy,  for  developing  gender  sensitive
policies and for reviewing Departmental policies from a gender  perspective.
 Some Departments further reflect that these functions are  key  objectives.
However, most make no mention as to how they are striving to  implement  the
national gender policy and whether they are involved  in  either  developing
or reviewing Departmental policies from a gender perspective.

3.1 Developing policy

Eleven departments make no mention of playing a role in the  development  of
gender-sensitive policies. Twelve departments report that they are  involved
in policy development that promotes gender equity in the  Department.  These
departments and the policies that they have developed are reflected  in  the
table below:

|Department                        |Policy                            |
|Defence                           |Sexual harassment policy,         |
|                                  |gender-based violence policy,     |
|                                  |promotion of gender equity policy |
|                                  |(draft form), pregnancy policy    |
|                                  |(draft form).                     |
|Education                         |Policy guidelines on sexual       |
|                                  |harassment, policy guidelines on  |
|                                  |learner harassment                |
|Environmental Affairs             |Sexual harassment policy          |
|Health                            |Policy guidelines for health      |
|                                  |sector                            |
|Independent Complaints Directorate|Gender policy, policy guidelines  |
|                                  |on gender, selection, recruitment |
|                                  |and equity                        |
|National Prosecuting Authority of |Draft sexual harassment policy    |
|South Africa                      |                                  |
|SAPS                              |Sexual harassment policy          |
|Science and Technology            |Sexual harassment policy, will    |
|                                  |develop a gender equity           |
|                                  |mainstreaming policy by mid 2004  |
|South African Sports Commission   |Policy guidelines on women, sport |
|                                  |and recreation                    |
|Trade and Industry                |Revision of ‘Gender and Women’s   |
|                                  |Empowerment Policy Framework’     |
|Water Affairs                     |Gender policy, sexual harassment  |
|Justice and Constitutional Affairs|Gender Policy Statement,          |
|                                  |mainstreaming gender              |
|                                  |implementation guidelines and the |
|                                  |developing of mainstreaming of    |
|                                  |gender reporting protocols.       |



From the above, it can be seen that most Departments have opted  to  develop
a  sexual  harassment  policy.  Very  few  Departments  have  developed   an
overarching gender  equity/gender  mainstreaming  policy  that  defines  the
organisational framework within which gender equity will be  promoted.  This
is problematic, as notwithstanding the fact that the national gender  policy
serves as the framework within which Departments should  engage  in  gender-
related work, it is important that each Department develop a  gender  policy
of its own, which spells out its commitment to eradicating gender inequity.
One Department, namely the Department of Home Affairs, reports that its  GFP
does not participate in the development of  polices  and  in  selection  and
procurement processes in the Department.  This should  be  explored  further
with the Department.

3.2 Reviewing policy

Most Departments make no mention of the role that  they  play  in  reviewing
and analysing Departmental policies to ensure that they take  cognisance  of
gender issues. Only 7 departments (Defence,  Arts  and  Culture,  Education,
Health, Labour, Public Serve and Administration, Trade and Industry)  report
that they are/should play a role in the reviewing of  Departmental  policies
from a gender perspective.  Of these, only 3 (Arts and Culture,  Health  and
Labour) appear to be  actively  engaged  in  reviewing  policies.  The  rest
merely report that policy review is one of the objectives of  the  GFP,  but
do not report on any work being done in this regard.

3.3 Gender Action Plan

The Gender Policy encourages the development of a  programme  of  action  or
gender action plan based on the  policy.   The  GFPs  are  the  implementing
units of the national plan.  GFPs at national level are therefore  meant  to
facilitate the programme and be the centre of co-ordination at  Departmental
level.   With the exception of 1 Department,  no  mention  is  made  of  the
development of gender action plans.  Only Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  and
Justice and Constitutional Development have developed a draft gender  action
plan,  but  reports  that  there  have   been   ‘serious’   impediments   in
implementing this as a consequence of capacity problems.

4.  Gender Mainstreaming

The Gender Policy holds that  Government  Departments  should  embark  on  a
rigorous  gender  mainstreaming  strategy.   Eight   departments   (Defence,
Education, Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Health, Home  Affairs,  Public
Service and  Administration,  Science  and  Technology,  Water  Affairs  and
Forestry, Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the  South  African  Sports
Commission) make specific mention of their role in this regard and  some  of
these report  on  related  initiatives.   Of  these,  the  attempts  of  the
Department of Home Affairs in this regard appear to be at a  proposal  stage
at this point  and  have  therefore  not  yet  been  implemented.    Only  2
Departments (Science and Technology and Justice and Constitutional  Affairs)
indicate how they strive to mainstream gender into Departmental  programmes,
policies, procedures, outputs and the like. Only 2 Departments (Defence  and
Environmental Affairs and Tourism) make mention of specific structures  that
have been put in place to assist  with  the  mainstreaming  of  gender  into
Departmental work.

On the whole, the information provided on the mainstreaming of  gender  into
Departmental programmes, procedures, etc. is very sketchy.  The  reason  for
this need to be determined and further analysis in this regard is  critical.


5.  Programmes

Given that the methods for reporting on programmatic  work  by  the  various
Departments are so diverse, it  has  been  very  difficult  to  collate  the
information in this regard. However, a few observations  can  be  made  with
regard to the programmes being implemented:

5.1 Internal vs External Programmatic Work

Many Departments focused on the internal projects and programmes  that  they
are implementing, i.e. work related  to  transformation  in  the  Department
itself,  such  as  employment  equity  issues,  recruitment  and   selection
practices and internal policies. Many Departments make little or no  mention
of programmatic work done externally, i.e.  the  gendered  initiatives  that
they are implementing to improve the Department’s service delivery.   It  is
important that both the internal transformation  and  the  external  service
delivery issues are both addressed in terms of their gendered implications.

5.2 Limited scope of external programmes

Where external work is done, it is to a large extent this is centred  around
the commemoration of calendar events such as National Women’s  Day  and  the
16 Days of Activism on No Violence Against Women.  This is problematic as  a
comprehensive programme of action needs to encompass far more than this.

5.3 Links between programmes and gender

In many instances, Departments report on programmatic  work  that  is  being
done, but the ways in which this work strives to promote  gender  equity  is
not clear.  It is important that the ways in which gender  equity  is  being
promoted is clear in all programmatic initiatives

5.4 Gender planning

In most cases, very little mention is  made  of  how  programmatic  work  is
planned.  This suggests that there is a need to look into the ways in  which
gender planning methodologies are utilised  to  inform  planning  processes.
The  Gender  Policy  recommends  the  project  life  cycle  as  a  tool  and
organising instrument for gender planning.  Each phase has  gender  specific
activities, which makes it easier for Departments to audit the  activity  of
each of the tasks they execute, whether the  task  relates  to  internal  or
external transformation.

5.5 Programme design

In many instances, the links between the objectives,  methods  and  intended
outputs of programmatic work is not clear.  The design of  programmes  aimed
at facilitating gender equity therefore needs to be carefully considered.

5.6 Impact assessments

Almost no mention is made of attempts to assess the impact  of  programmatic
work.  This is critical in  developing  interventions  that  are  effective.
The design and usage of effective evaluation mechanisms therefore  needs  to
be emphasised. The Gender Policy recommends that monitoring  and  evaluation
are key to measuring the success and  impact  of  programmes  that  seek  to
implement gender equality principles.

5.7 Development of key performance indicators

Similarly, no mention  is  made  of  the  development  of  programmatic  key
performance indicators for the  measuring  of  progress  made.   The  Gender
Policy recommends the usage  of  indicators  to  measure  transformation  in
programmes.  These indicators encompass, inter alia, the following:

    • The number and quality of  sector-related  gender  analysis  training
      programmes in place.
    •  The  extent  to  which  sector-based  gender  analysis  and   gender
      disaggregated data is effectively used in programmatic design.
    •  The  extent  of  technical  support  and  guidelines  provided   for
      responsive review of sector programmes.

5.8 Lack of resources for programmatic work
On the whole,  it  appears  that  the  resources  allocated  to  work  of  a
programmatic nature are dismally insufficient.  This needs to  be  addressed
urgently.


6.  Challenges

Most Departments did not report on  the  challenges  faced  by  their  GFPs.
Because this information is critical in defining the problems faced by  GFPs
and in seeking appropriate interventions to these, it is critical that  this
information be elicited.  The table below constitutes challenges  that  were
raised that are of a serious nature:


|Nature of challenge               |Raised by                         |
|Restructuring in Department       |Correctional Services, Labour,    |
|                                  |Land Affairs                      |
|Budgetary constraints             |Education, Health, SASC, Trade and|
|                                  |industry                          |
|Lack of human resources           |Health, Trade and Industry        |
|Staff capacity (in relation to    |Environmental Affairs and Tourism |
|skills)                           |                                  |
|Lack of strategic direction wrt   |Health                            |
|gender mainstreaming              |                                  |
|No full-time GFPs in provinces    |Health                            |
|Need to clarify role, powers and  |Health                            |
|functions of provincial GFPs      |                                  |
|Lack of co-operation from senior  |Health                            |
|management                        |                                  |
|Lack of support from male         |SASC                              |
|counterparts                      |                                  |
|Need to implement policy          |Trade and Industry                |
|Implementation of gender action   |Water Affairs and Forestry        |
|plan affected by capacity problems|                                  |

Provincial Departmental Gender Focal Points

Information provided  by  the  provincial  OSWs  on  the  structure,  budget
allocation, policies, programmes, gender mainstreaming strategies,  etc.  of
GFPs was inadequate. The limited amount of  information  gathered  does  not
allow one to form a comprehensive, reliable and valid picture of GFPs.  OSWs
had been asked to provide information on the status of  GFPs  in  provinces,
yet it is unclear why the information was not forthcoming. As stipulated  by
the Gender Policy, one of the functions of the provincial OSWs would  be  to
coordinate the gender machineries in the provinces. Provincial  OSWs  should
thus be best placed to provide a comprehensive overview  of  the  provincial
GFPs,  including  their  structure,   location,   level   of   appointments,
programmes,   gender   mainstreaming    strategies,    budget    allocation,
achievements and challenges. This said  limited  inferences  could  be  made
about the provincial GFPs.

1. Structure of GFPs

1.1 Capacity of GFPs in terms of staff complement

The Eastern Cape OSW indicated that 9 Departments, out  of  the  approximate
11,  have  established  GFPs.  In  Mpumalanga  6  out  of  an  estimated  11
Departments in Mpumalanga have established GFPs. This means that  just  over
half of the Departments have established GFPs, which  is  unsatisfactory  as
it impacts on the ability of the individual Departments  and  ultimately  on
the  province’s  ability  to  address  gender  issues  and  to  ensure  that
Departmental programmes benefit not only men but  women  as  well.  Head  of
Departments should be asked to account for  nearly  half  of  the  GFPs  not
being established in their Departments.

The situation in the North West appears to be problematic. Only 3 out of  10
Departments have established GFPs. This means that 70% of the GFPs have  not
been  established  in  accordance  with  the  Gender  Policy.  Without   the
appropriate gender structures in place, the empowerment  of  women  and  the
eradication of discrimination against women, will not become  a  reality  in
this province.

The situation in the Western Cape appears slightly  more  positive  than  in
other provinces.  Twelve  Departments  have  GFPs  in  the  province.  These
structures, however, vary between being formalised  GFPs  and  those,  which
are accorded the GFP function on an ad hoc basis. It appears  as  if  formal
structures  have  been  established  in  at  least  8  Departments,  with  1
Department not having this function at all and the position being vacant  in
another.   However,  the  provincial  OSW  has  indicated  that  there   are
significant challenges pertaining to the formalising of structures.

1.2 Location

The location of the GFPs in the Eastern Cape varies from  being  located  in
the Head of Departments’ offices, as is recommended in  the  Gender  Policy,
to being placed in the Human Resources  Department.  In  the  Western  Cape,
most of the GFPs  are  located  in  the  Human  Resources  sections  of  the
Departments. Again, this is not in accordance with  the  recommendations  of
the Gender Policy and has been mentioned as a challenge by the Western  Cape
OSW.

The implications of being located in the Human Resources  is  that  firstly,
the GFP persons would not have an  integral  understanding  and  bird’s  eye
view of the programmes and projects undertaken in the Department.  Thus,  it
would be difficult to mainstream gender into projects. Secondly, it  affects
their ability to influence decision-making at a  macro  level,  which  would
ensure that decisions filters and are implemented  at  micro-levels  in  the
Department.

1.3 Level of appointment

GFP coordinators in the Eastern Cape and the North  West  are  appointed  at
assistant  director  level.   This   is   not   in   accordance   with   the
recommendations of the Gender Policy, which  states  that  GFP  coordinators
should be appointed at director level.

The Mpumalanga OSW asserted  that  in  the  established  GFPs,  the  persons
employed have inadequate job descriptions and there  are  no  structures  in
place. The level of appointment was, however, not indicated.

The rank of GFP coordinators in  the  Western  Cape  varies  between  senior
officer to assistant director to deputy director. None  of  the  Departments
currently employ the coordinator at the recommended rank of  director.  This
has been recognised as a challenge for the provincial Departments.

It has been stated repeatedly that appointing GFP  persons  at  ranks  other
than  director  impacts  on  their  ability  to  influence  decision-making.
Furthermore, it implies that people with all the  skills  required  for  the
position are not necessarily appointed.

2. Budgets
With the exception of the Western  Cape  and  Gauteng,  the  Provincial  OSW
reports do not provide any  information  on  whether  provincial  GFPs  have
dedicated budgets.  Within  the  Western  Cape  GFPs,  most  (8  out  of  11
Departments) reportedly have dedicated budgets for  their  gender  desks  in
2004/05. It is observed that most of the Departments  that  have  formalised
GFPs have dedicated budgets. This is the exception  in  the  Departments  of
Housing and Culture Affairs and Sports, where  the  gender  function  is  an
additional  function,  yet  they  have  dedicated  budgets.  The  OSW  cites
inadequate resourcing of the GFPs as one of the problems.

The Mpumalanga OSW has indicated that there are no  budgets  in  Departments
to undertake gender responsibilities. This is certainly  indicative  of  the
priority given to gender issues and  tasks  undertaken  in  the  Department,
which  addresses  gender  equality   and   equity   issues.   This   impacts
significantly on the Department’s  delivery  of  services  but  also  on  it
ability to address transformation within the Department.

In Gauteng, the Directorate indicated that all provincial  Departments  have
gender  budgets.  The  outputs  of  these  gender  budgets  reflect   gender
sensitive indicators for all programmes and  projects,  which  are  in  line
with the  core  functions  of  the  Department.  Whilst  all  the  necessary
information on this initiative is not available, it is clear that the  steps
taken by Gauteng allows them to monitor how the money  is  being  spent  and
the impact that it has on men and women in the province.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The Gender Policy recommends that provincial GFPs should be  established  to
mirror those at the national level. Some of the functions  accorded  to  the
provincial GFPs are to:

    • Ensure that Departments implement  the  (national)  provincial  gender
      policy.
    • Review Departmental policy and planning in line  with  the  (national)
      provincial gender policy.
    • Ensure that gender issues are  routinely  considered  in  Departmental
      strategic planning exercises.

Given that provincial gender policies are not the norm,  this  would  impact
on the functions assigned to the GFPs. This might also lead  to  uncertainty
and confusion around the role and functions of the GFPs. The  question  thus
arises whether the national Gender Policy is guiding the work  of  the  GFPs
in the provinces where provincial Gender Policies are absent.

Furthermore, provincial  OSWs  gave  no  indication  of  whether  GFPS  have
reviewed their Departmental policies to ensure  that  it  is  in  line  with
provincial or national Gender Policies  and  that  it  takes  cognisance  of
gender issues and the gendered impact of these policies.

With regard to the development of policies that impact  on  men  and  women,
the Free State Department of Social Development is said to have an  internal
HIV and AIDS policy and the Department of Education has developed  a  Sexual
Harassment  Policy.  The  Directorate  in  Gauteng   also   indicated   that
provincial Departments are in the process  of  finalising  their  respective
policies on sexual harassment.

Gender Mainstreaming

At provincial OSW level, gender mainstreaming strategies  are  in  operation
in the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, Gauteng, and  possibly  the  Free  State
and North West. Theoretically, the GFPs in these provinces should thus  have
a framework in which to mainstream gender into the policies, programmes  and
activities of  the  Departments.  They  are  thus  in  a  more  advantageous
position than those provinces that do not have strategies.
The Western Cape OSW is the exception and reports that most of the  GFPs  in
the Departments have draft gender equality and women empowerment  strategies
in place. Critique cannot be offered in this report on  these  processes  in
the Western Cape, as detailed information is not  available.  On  the  other
hand, the Free State OSW has clearly indicated  that  GFPs  don’t  have  the
necessary capacity to achieve gender equality. As a direct result  of  this,
gender strategies, programmes and activities with  a  gender  dimension  are
not incorporated in the strategic  plans  of  the  Departments.  This  is  a
matter of concern as it impacts on the delivery of services, the ability  of
programmes to set and achieve gender targets, etc. Furthermore,  this  could
imply that the position and the skills currently  available  for  fulfilling
that position, is not commensurate.

4. Programmes

The information supplied by the provincial OSWs on the  work  undertaken  by
the Departments varied. In instances where information was supplied, it  was
not detailed to the extent of delineating the aims  and  objectives  of  the
programme as well as the  methods  and  intended  outputs.  Furthermore,  no
information was supplied on the planning of the project and how  gender  was
incorporated into all the phases thereof. Thus, the analysis in this  regard
is limited.

4.1 Internal versus External programmatic work

Most of the programmes mentioned focused on the external work undertaken  in
the Departments i.e. in the service delivery aspects  of  Departments.  This
is in contrast with the National GFPs  reporting  in  this  document,  which
focused more on  the  internal  programmes.  Whilst  reference  is  made  to
internal programmes in the provincial GFPs,  the  weight  of  the  reporting
certainly is placed on the external service delivery aspects. Whilst  it  is
important to focus on  service  delivery  initiatives,  internal  programmes
with a focus on gender issues, have to be undertaken. This is  important  to
ensure that transformation is not only geared towards the outside, but  also
internally for women and men within the Department. Programmes and  policies
of this nature is thus essential. These pertains, amongst others, to  sexual
harassment policies, HIV  and  AIDS  policies,  issues  of  recruitment  and
retention  of  staff  and  the  employing  of  women  in  senior  management
positions.

4.2 Scope of the external programmes

One of  the  activities  that  were  consistently  raised  by  some  of  the
Departments was that of commemorating national events. This  is  problematic
when this becomes the sole activity undertaken by the Department.  If  these
activities fall within a comprehensive and substantive programme with  clear
aims, objectives and outputs, and culminate in  the  celebratory  event,  it
would be less problematic.

Some Departments are undertaking a number of other  substantive  programmes.
These  include  awareness  raising,  the  establishing  of   trauma   rooms,
initiatives with  rural  women,  addressing  gender  based  violence,  youth
initiatives, etc.

4.3 Links between gender and programmes

At face value, some of the programmes  reported  on  seem  to  have  as  its
intended outcome, the empowerment of women.  However,  due  to  the  limited
information at hand, it is not possible to say  to  what  extent  programmes
address gender equality and equity issues.

5. Challenges

A host of challenges that  are  experienced  by  the  provincial  GFPs  were
raised by the provincial OSWs. These are listed in the table below.

|Nature of challenge             |Raised by                       |
|The appointment, location and   |Eastern Cape                    |
|allocation of resources to GFPs |                                |
|are not uniform.                |                                |
|The location of GFPs is         |Mpumalanga and the Western Cape.|
|problematic.                    |                                |
|GFPs have not been established  |KwaZulu-Natal, North West and   |
|in all Departments.             |the Western Cape.               |
|GFPs are not appointed at the   |Eastern Cape, Mpumalanga and the|
|recommended rank.               |Western Cape.                   |
|GFPs don’t have the necessary   |Free State                      |
|capacity to achieve gender      |                                |
|equality.                       |                                |
|The lack of GFP capacity leads  |Free State                      |
|to gender not being mainstreamed|                                |
|into strategic plans of         |                                |
|Departments.                    |                                |
|The resources allocated to GFP  |KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, North|
|are insufficient.               |West and the Western Cape.      |
|GFPs are tasked with issues     |Mpumalanga                      |
|other than gender.              |                                |
|GFPs report to several persons. |Mpumalanga                      |
|There is problem between        |North West                      |
|national and provincial         |                                |
|Departments.                    |                                |
|There is a lack of understanding|Western Cape                    |
|of GFPs responsibilities.       |                                |



A number of the challenges raised above serves as common problems  to  other
GFPs, even though they were not reported on at this  hearing.  This  comment
is made against the backdrop of study tours undertaken  by  the  JMC  during
2000  –  2003.  Common  challenges  included  the  appointment,   structure,
location and rank of GFPs as well as the resources allocated to them.  This,
together with a skill shortage in the GFPs, leads to  the  GFPs  being  less
effective in performing  their  functions  and  thus  addressing  issues  of
gender equality.

Section 4: Recommendations

National Office on the Status of Women

    • The Gender Policy lists, as one of the tasks of the OSW,  leading  the
      process  of  developing  a  National  Gender  Action  Plan.    It   is
      recommended that the OSW give effect to the Gender Policy and  develop
      this National Gender Action Plan, which would guide the  provinces  in
      their development and  implementation  of  provincial  gender-specific
      action plans.
    • The OSW  is  assigned  the  task  of  developing  key  indicators  for
      measuring the  national  progression  towards  gender  equality.  This
      implies that the national OSW has a monitoring role to  fulfil.  Thus,
      the question of whether the OSW has the capacity to  do  this  arises.
      This necessitates that the Office be equipped with the necessary human
      resources to give effect to this function. The second  issue  that  it
      raises, is what enforcement powers the Office has. This  is  in  light
      structures not complying with, among others, the implementation of the
      Gender Policy. The OSW should thus monitor but also  be  afforded  the
      necessary powers to enforce certain recommendations. In addition,  the
      OSW should be in a position to ensure that the Gender Policy  is  used
      at a provincial and national  level,  in  the  absence  of  provincial
      Gender Policies.
    • It is recommended that there be a more effective co-ordinated approach
      to the programmes of the national OSW, provincial OSW as well  as  the
      national  and  provincial  GFPs.  In  this  respect,   provinces   and
      Departments should be required to table their reports based  on  their
      programmes, etc. This will lead to  more  substantive  programmes  and
      hopefully eradicate only events-based activities.
    • In order to facilitate the work of the JMC, it is recommended that the
      OSW brief the JMC on a quarterly basis.  In  this  respect,  they  are
      requested to provide the JMC  with  all  the  necessary  and  relevant
      documentation. It  is  further  suggested  that  the  JMC  be  briefed
      timeously  on  urgent  matters  as  well  as  on  reports   (including
      international reports) that requires the JMC to provide input.
    • The national OSW should undertake a skills audit within  the  OSWs  as
      well as national and provincial GFPs. This will enable  the  necessary
      structures to make decisions regarding, amongst others,  the  rank  of
      GFP coordinators, the skills required within GFPs or OSWs, etc.
    • It is recommended that the national OSW be  provided  with  additional
      staff, with the necessary skill level required for the  positions,  to
      enable the Office to fulfill all its functions.
    • The budgetary requirements of the OSW should be commensurate with  the
      tasks, programmes and output envisaged by the Office. Furthermore, the
      budget should be increased to make provision for the national  OSW  to
      assist the provincial OSWs.
    • Local Government should be assisted to establish gender  machinery  at
      this level. In this respect,  the  OSW  should  be  working  with  the
      National Department of Provincial  and  Local  Government,  provincial
      OSWs as  well  as  the  South  African  Local  Government  Association
      (SALGA).
    • Legislatures  should  be  encouraged  to  establish  Joint  Monitoring
      Committees on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of  Women,
      which would monitor provincial progression towards gender equality.
    • It is recommended that the National Gender Machinery hold a  strategic
      planning session to evaluate the  progress  of  the  Gender  Machinery
      within the 10  years  of  democracy  period,  as  well  as  to  assess
      implementation and the development of action plans.


Provincial Office on the Status of Women

 1. Recommendations pertaining to the structure of the OSWs

1.1 Capacity

Given the functions of the OSW, sufficient human capacity  is  essential  if
the Office  is  to  be  effective  in  fulfilling  its  tasks.  It  is  thus
recommended that the staff capacity be increased, as a  matter  of  urgency,
to at  least  3  staff  members,  with  1  person  providing  administrative
support. This is vital for provinces such as the Western Cape.  Furthermore,
it is essential that the numerous and significant positions that are  vacant
be filled (KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga).

1.2 Location

As stated in the Gender Policy,  the  OSWs  should  be  located  within  the
Premiers’ Offices. Considering the responsibilities assigned to the OSW  and
the level of decision-making, it is essential that the  OSWs  be  placed  in
the Premiers’ offices. In addition, other than  the  necessary  status  that
the OSWs are afforded by being placed in  the  Premiers’  Offices,  it  also
affords them a bird’s eye view of programmes, projects and  activities  that
are conducted  throughout  the  province,  and  the  OSW  can  thus  play  a
significant role in these.

1.3 Level of appointment

Whilst the Gender Policy is silent  on  the  level  of  appointment  of  OSW
coordinators, it does recommend that the GFP coordinator be appointed  at  a
director level. It  is  thus  recommended  that  the  head  of  the  OSW  be
appointed at the level of director. Cognisance should, however, be taken  of
the skill requirements for such a position and the  person  should  only  be
appointed at this level if he or she has the skills  commensurate  with  the
position. In this regard, it might be necessary to undertake a skills  audit
of all the staff in the provincial OSWs and to match the position  with  the
necessary skills required. Furthermore, it might be necessary  to  undertake
extensive  capacity  training  for  staff  members  in  order  for  them  to
effectively execute their current job requirements or to  prepare  them  for
tasks at a higher level.

1.4 Functions of the OSWs

Whilst this area was not reported on comprehensively by the  OSWs,  the  JMC
needs to ascertain whether the OSWs are able to  deliver  on  the  functions
assigned to them, and  the  factors  that  are  aiding  or  hampering  their
progress. Provinces should furthermore be able to enforce decisions  arising
from their monitoring of the progression towards the achievement  of  gender
equality for women.

1.5 Establishment of a Gauteng OSW

Gauteng provided a comprehensive report on the gender  policies,  programmes
and activities  for  the  Province.  It  is  evident  that  the  Directorate
fulfilling the function  of  the  OSW  is  very  effective  in  most  areas.
However, there is a need for the Province to establish an  OSW  which  could
carry out these functions. The reasons for this not being the case  need  to
be taken up with the political leadership in the province.

  2. Budget

The JMC has to ascertain what the respective budgets for  the  OSWs  in  the
provinces are.  Included  in  this,  should  be  whether  the  OSWs  have  a
dedicated  budget  and  a  breakdown  for  the  budget  disaggregating   the
percentages and amounts for  the  different  programmes  and  administrative
functions (salaries, infrastructure, etc). OSWs should furthermore  give  an
indication of the amount allocated to the  OSW  together  with  the  amounts
allocated to other  programmes  in  the  Office  of  the  Premier.  This  is
necessary as the JMC wishes  to  get  an  understanding  of  how  gender  is
prioritised. The resources  allocated  to  structures  dealing  with  gender
issues will be a good indication of this.

As indicated earlier, it is difficult to say that an amount of R1.2  million
is  sufficient  or  insufficient  to  cover  the  expenditures  of  an  OSW.
Therefore, it is recommended that a budget be allocated to  the  OSWs  based
on the strategic and business plans of  the  Office  and  that  this  budget
allows the Office to effect its plans.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plans

3.1 Developing policy

It is essential that OSWs provide additional  information  on  whether  they
have developed provincial gender policies and provide information  on  these
gender policies. Gender policies are essential to providing a  framework  of
how gender equality is to  be  achieved  within  provinces.  All  operations
undertaken by the province will thus be guided by such a  policy  and  serve
as a mechanism by which government officials and  other  stakeholders  could
be held accountable.

Gender policies need to be developed by those provinces, which do  not  have
such policies. This forms part of the tasks of the provincial OSWs.   It  is
further recommended that the national OSW, as  well  as  provinces  such  as
Gauteng that have Gender  policies  in  place,  provide  assistance  to  the
provincial OSWs in the development of such policies.

3.2 Gender Action Plan

As only  2  OSWs  speak  specifically  about  gender  action  plans,  it  is
imperative that this is followed-up on. As in the case of the developing  of
gender policies, the  JMC  and  the  national  OSW  should  investigate  the
reasons behind provincial OSWs’ lack of such plans. If the problem  pertains
to capacity within the provincial OSWs to develop  such  action  plans,  the
necessary technical support should be provided.

3.3 Gender Audits and Monitoring Mechanisms

Provincial OSWs are responsible for developing  key  performance  indicators
by which the progression towards gender equality can be  measured.  While  3
OSWs made reference to  conducting  gender  audits,  it  is  essential  that
performance indicators and mechanisms be  developed  by  the  Office,  which
could be used by provincial GFPs in the Departments.
Whilst it is important to have monitoring mechanisms in place,  OSWs  should
start looking towards conducting evaluations of their  specific  programmes.
This would assist OSWs with making changes to programmes that are  currently
underway and thus improve the effectiveness of programmes.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

Very few OSWs indicated that they have gender  mainstreaming  strategies  in
place. The JMC needs to  investigate  whether  these  strategies  have  been
developed and where they don’t exist,  investigate  whether  this  is  as  a
result of a  lack  of  capacity  or  human  resources.  Furthermore,  it  is
recommended that:

    • Provincial OSW staff receives training in the  development  of  gender
      mainstreaming strategies.
    • The  national  OSW  assists  or  coordinates  this  capacity  building
      training.
    • Provincial gender strategies are developed for those provinces,  which
      do not have such strategies in place.
    • The outputs and key performance indicators be documented.
    • Provincial OSWs should provide the national OSW with an annual  report
      on the status of women in their provinces.


   5. Programmes

The Gender Policy outlines the functions of the provincial OSWs  from  which
programmes could be developed. Provincial OSWs thus need to provide the  JMC
with the following information:

    • An overview of their  programmes,  with  the  corresponding  aims  and
      objectives of programmes, outputs, monitoring  indicators,  challenges
      and budgets.
    •  Information  on  whether  these  programmes  have  been  informed  by
      provincial needs assessments.
    • The manner in which programmes  impact  or  the  potential  impact  of
      programmes on men and women.

6. Areas to follow up with individual OSWs

Apart from the recommendations cited above, the JMC can use the  information
provided in the table below to follow-up with the respective OSWs:
|OSW                             |Area                            |
|Eastern Cape                    |No mention was made of the      |
|                                |location of the OSW.            |
|                                |Establish whether the OSW has a |
|                                |dedicated gender budget and a   |
|                                |breakdown of the budget for the |
|                                |2003/04 and 2004/05 should be   |
|                                |provided.                       |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender policy is in place, and  |
|                                |the nature thereof.             |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender action plan is in place, |
|                                |and the nature thereof.         |
|                                |The report did not give an      |
|                                |indication of the link between  |
|                                |the provincial OSW and the      |
|                                |programmes of the GFP.          |
|                                |Insufficient information on the |
|                                |work of the OSW.                |
|Free State                      |What is the rationale behind    |
|                                |administrative staff            |
|                                |outnumbering staff implementing |
|                                |programmes?                     |
|                                |No mention was made of the      |
|                                |location of the OSW.            |
|                                |Establish whether the OSW has a |
|                                |dedicated gender budget and a   |
|                                |breakdown of the budget for the |
|                                |2003/04 and 2004/05 should be   |
|                                |provided.                       |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender policy is in place, and  |
|                                |the nature thereof.             |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender action plan is in place, |
|                                |and the nature thereof.         |
|                                |Investigate whether the province|
|                                |has developed strategies to     |
|                                |mainstream gender.              |
|                                |The report did not give an      |
|                                |indication of the link between  |
|                                |the provincial OSW and the      |
|                                |programmes of the GFP.          |
|                                |Insufficient information on the |
|                                |work of the OSW.                |
|KwaZulu-Natal                   |Establish whether the OSW has a |
|                                |dedicated gender budget and a   |
|                                |breakdown of the budget for the |
|                                |2003/04 and 2004/05 should be   |
|                                |provided.                       |
|                                |No mention was made of          |
|                                |strategies to mainstream gender.|
|                                |The report did not give an      |
|                                |indication of the link between  |
|                                |the provincial OSW and the      |
|                                |programmes of the GFP.          |
|                                |Insufficient information of the |
|                                |work of the OSW.                |
|Gauteng                         |Is the Directorate located in   |
|                                |the Premier’s Office and will   |
|                                |the new Gender programme be     |
|                                |located within the Premier’s    |
|                                |office?                         |
|                                |Establish whether the           |
|                                |Directorate has a dedicated     |
|                                |gender budget and a breakdown of|
|                                |the budget for the 2003/04 and  |
|                                |2004/05 should be provided?     |
|                                |No mention was made of          |
|                                |strategies to mainstream gender.|
|Mpumalanga                      |In which ways does the location |
|                                |of the OSW assist or hamper the |
|                                |office?                         |
|                                |Establish whether the OSW has a |
|                                |dedicated gender budget and a   |
|                                |breakdown of the budget for the |
|                                |2003/04 and 2004/05 should be   |
|                                |provided?                       |
|                                |No mention was made of a Gender |
|                                |Policy.                         |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender action plan is in place, |
|                                |and the nature thereof.         |
|                                |No mention was made of          |
|                                |strategies to mainstream gender.|
|                                |The report did not give an      |
|                                |indication of the link between  |
|                                |the provincial OSW and the      |
|                                |programmes of the GFP.          |
|                                |Insufficient information on the |
|                                |work of the OSW.                |
|North West                      |Do all the positions in the OSW |
|                                |have exclusively gender         |
|                                |responsibilities?               |
|                                |In which ways does the location |
|                                |of the OSW assist or hamper the |
|                                |office?                         |
|                                |The JMC should advocate for the |
|                                |OSW having a dedicated gender   |
|                                |budget.                         |
|                                |No mention was made of a Gender |
|                                |Policy.                         |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender action plan is in place, |
|                                |and the nature thereof.         |
|                                |No mention was made of          |
|                                |strategies to mainstream gender.|
|                                |The report did not give an      |
|                                |indication of the link between  |
|                                |the provincial OSW and the      |
|                                |programmes of the GFP.          |
|                                |Insufficient information of the |
|                                |work of the OSW.                |
|Western Cape                    |Is the OSW located in the       |
|                                |Premier’s Office?               |
|                                |Establish whether the OSW has a |
|                                |dedicated gender budget and a   |
|                                |breakdown of the budget for the |
|                                |2003/04 and 2004/05 should be   |
|                                |provided?                       |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender action plan is in place, |
|                                |and the nature thereof.         |
|                                |No mention was made of          |
|                                |strategies to mainstream gender.|



   National Gender Focal Points


   1. Recommendations with regard to the structure of the GFPs


   1.1 Capacity


   It is recommended that where resources can be appropriated, GFPs  should
   be staffed with at least 3 staff members.  This is so that the  GFP  can
   realistically give effect to its role with regard to the development and
   review of policies,  in  mainstreaming  gender  into  the  work  of  the
   department and in effecting both internal and  external  transformation.




   1.2 Location


   As per the recommendations of the Gender Policy, the  GFP  needs  to  be
   located in the Office of the Director General if its  impact  is  to  be
   maximised.  This is not the case in most Departments and the feasibility
   of so doing needs to be explored.


   3. Level of appointment


   The Gender Policy recommends appointment of GFP coordinators at director
   level.  Most Departments have not given effect to this and  the  reasons
   for this should be explored further.


   The Gender Policy further provides that GFP staff must have commensurate
   skills.  Given that the reports submitted sometimes reveal a superficial
   understanding  of  basic  gender-related   concepts   such   as   gender
   mainstreaming, and given the poor quality of gendered programmatic  work
   in some instances, there is possibly a need to conduct a skills audit to
   ensure that the GFPs are capacitated with appropriately skilled people.


   1.4  Area of focus


   It can be seen from the reports, that the  GFPs  that  focus  on  gender
   alone appear to be having a  far  greater  impact  than  those  who  are
   responsible for other areas  of  competency  as  well.  It  is  strongly
   recommended that GFPs focus primarily on gender. This will empower  them
   to make a meaningful impact, as opposed to focusing on a broad range  of
   areas in very superficial ways.


   2.  Budget


   It is recommended that the GFPs that  do  not  have  dedicated  budgets,
   strive to move towards a situation where the GFP has a budget of its own
   and consequently has direct control over how its financial resources are
   managed.


   Given that on the whole, meagre resources are allocated to  GFPs,  there
   is a need to conduct a needs assessment in this regard so as to  compare
   what is needed with  what  is  allocated.    Strategies  for  increasing
   resource allocation to GFPs need to be further explored.


   3. Policy and Gender Action Plan


   1. Policy


   GFPs have a critical role to play in both the development and  review  of
   Departmental policies.  As far as policy development is concerned, it  is
   advisable that the GFPs play a role in  securing  an  overarching  gender
   policy for the Department.  This policy will provide the framework within
   which the Department articulates  its  commitments  to  promoting  gender
   equity.


   It is also important that GFPs play a role in reviewing all  Departmental
   policies to consider their gendered impact and repercussions.  Given that
   many GFPs are not doing this, this should be monitored.


   Given that policy analysis is a  specialist  area  of  expertise,  it  is
   important that the GFP has the related skills for  engaging  in  work  of
   this nature. Where this is not the case, training must be provided.


   3.2  Gender Action Plans


   Given that most Departments make no mention of having developed a  gender
   action plan, it is important that this is pursued.  If  most  Departments
   have not produced such a plan as a result of capacity problems, then  the
   possibility of providing technical support  and  advice  in  this  regard
   should be considered.


   4.  Gender Mainstreaming


   On the whole, this was very poorly reported on and appears to be an  area
   of weakness in the work of most GFPs.  For this reason the  following  is
   recommended:


     1) The training of staff in gender mainstreaming where required.
     2) The development of clear strategies and plans that are documented.
     3) The development of key performance indicators in this regard.

   Because gender mainstreaming is a critical  part  of  eradicating  gender
   inequity, the mainstreaming initiatives of  GFPs  need  to  be  monitored
   periodically.

   5. Programmes


   The  following  is  recommended  with  respect  to  the  development   of
   programmes that promote gender equity:


     1) The development of  both  internal  (organisational)  and  external
        (service delivery) programmes.
     2) The ways in which programmatic work impacts on men and  women  need
        to be made clear.
     3) The development of ‘engendered’ programmes needs to be informed  by
        sound gender planning methodologies.  Where necessary, staff should
        be trained in gender planning.
     4) Programmatic work should have  clear  objectives,  methods,  target
        groups, key performance indicators and evaluation mechanisms.

   6. Areas for follow up with individual Departments


   The following table lists potential areas of follow-up with  the  various
   departments:


   |Department          |Area                                         |
|Arts and Culture    |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|                    |No dedicated budget.                         |
|Correctional        |No mention made of budget available.         |
|Services            |No mention made of policy -related work.     |
|                    |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |Statistics provided for staff component need |
|                    |to reflect the number of black and white     |
|                    |women.                                       |
|                    |Ways in which some of the programmes listed  |
|                    |promote gender equity are not clear.         |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Defence             |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |Need more information on how gender is       |
|                    |mainstreamed.                                |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Environmental       |Does not have dedicated budget, not clear how|
|Affairs and Tourism |much resources is being put into             |
|                    |gender-related work.                         |
|Health              |Need more information on how gender is       |
|                    |mainstreamed into the work of the Department.|
|Home Affairs        |Need to follow-up on why the GFP does not get|
|                    |involved in any policy-related work.         |
|                    |The usage of the term ‘add-ons’ in describing|
|                    |the work of the GFP is not clear and could be|
|                    |interpreted as detracting from the importance|
|                    |of gender-related issues. The usage of this  |
|                    |term should therefore be clarified.          |
|                    |No dedicated budget.                         |
|                    |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|                    |On the whole the GFP does not appear to be   |
|                    |doing much, judging from the information     |
|                    |provided in the report. The report           |
|                    |constitutes a series of proposals/ intended  |
|                    |work. This needs to be further explored.     |
|ICD                 |Need to elicit information on how the ICD    |
|                    |monitors the implementation of the DVA.      |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Labour              |No mention made of policy -related work.     |
|                    |Does not report on budget.                   |
|                    |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |Statistics provided for staff component could|
|                    |not be interpreted, need to resubmit this.   |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Land Affairs        |No mention made of policy -related work.     |
|                    |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |The ways in which the some of the            |
|                    |programmatic work has a gendered impact is   |
|                    |not clear.                                   |
|                    |Programme objectives and methodology not     |
|                    |clear.                                       |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Public Service and  |It is not clear whether the GFP has a budget |
|Administration      |of its own or not.                           |
|                    |Need further information on policy-related   |
|                    |work.                                        |
|                    |Report does not touch on the systems and     |
|                    |methods for gender mainstreaming.            |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|NIA                 |Has not established a GFP.                   |
|NPASA               |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Public Enterprises  |Has not established a GFP.                   |
|Safety and Security |Has not established a GFP.                   |
|Secretariat         |                                             |
|Social Development  |No mention made of policy -related work.     |
|                    |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |Reports that there are there have been       |
|                    |difficulties in developing indicators for    |
|                    |gender mainstreaming.  Further information   |
|                    |required here.                               |
|                    |Very little programmatic work is reported,   |
|                    |this problematic particularly in light of the|
|                    |fact that social development ahs very        |
|                    |important gendered implications.             |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|SAPS                |Budgetary allocation for gender-related work |
|                    |not stipulated.                              |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |The objectives of some of the programmes are |
|                    |not clear.                                   |
|                    |The intended gendered impact of some of the  |
|                    |programmes are not clear.                    |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Science and         |Not indicated whether GFP has budget or not. |
|Technology          |No challenges have been identified.          |
|SASC                |Not clear whether the budget mentioned is    |
|                    |intended solely for gender-related work.     |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |Very little information provided about       |
|                    |programmatic work.                           |
|Trade and Industry  |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|Water Affairs and   |No information budget allocated to gender    |
|Forestry            |–related work.                               |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |

Provincial Departmental Gender Focal Points

  1. Recommendations pertaining to the structure of GFPs

1. Capacity

The provincial GFP has a critical  role  to  play  as  part  of  the  gender
machinery. As such, it has very specific roles assigned to it and  forms  an
integral part in  ensuring  that  the  goals  of  gender  equality  and  the
empowerment of women are met. Thus, it is of critical importance  that  GFPs
be established within the Departments and be staffed with persons  with  the
necessary skills, which are outlined in  the  Gender  Policy.  A  disservice
will be done to all the women and men in the  provinces  if  structures  are
established, but the incorrect people are employed in these positions.

It is also necessary to ensure that more than 1 person is appointed  to  the
GFPs. The tasks assigned to them are mammoth and thus  appointing  1  person
to the GFP is unrealistic and sets it up for failure.

Furthermore, Premiers, MECs and the Heads  of  Departments  should  be  held
accountable for failing  to  establish  properly  resourced  GFPs  in  their
Departments. In addition, Provincial OSWs, the National OSW as well  as  the
respectively National Department can play an integral role  in  guiding  the
establishment and setting up of GFPs at a provincial level.

1.2 Location

One of the concerns about the location  of  GFPs  is  the  impact  that  the
location has on the ability of the persons in the GFP to influence decision-
making or to take decisions that have wide ranging impact. Furthermore,  the
location of the GFPs grants the coordinators the opportunity to either  have
a holistic and comprehensive idea of what is happening  in  the  Department,
or  restricts  their  knowledge  to  the  particular  directorate  or   sub-
directorate that it is located in. GFPs should thus be located in  the  Head
of Department’s office, as is recommended by the Gender Policy.

3. Rank of GFPs

As with all the other aspects pertaining to the setting up of the  GFPs,  it
is important that GFP coordinators be appointed at  director  level,  as  is
recommended by the Gender Policy. However, this implies that the  incumbents
should have the necessary skills that are commensurate with  a  position  at
this level.

It is furthermore recommended  that  the  skills  within  existing  GFPs  be
assessed to ascertain whether current personnel can perform at the  rank  of
director,  whether  the  personnel  can  acquire  these  skills  or  whether
additional personnel with the required skills need to be employed.

4. Area of focus

Although this theme has not emerged as dominant in the reports made  by  the
provincial OSWs, it is essential to note that the impact of  GFPs  could  be
far greater if GFPs focus on gender issues exclusively and gender is not  be
seen as an add on function. This  will  allow  for  a  more  consistent  and
powerful impact.

2. Budget

Establishing GFPs with no resources would  amount  to  not  having  GFPs  in
provinces. Therefore, the establishing of GFP should be done in  conjunction
with the adequate resourcing of  these  structures.  The  budget  allocation
should be commensurate with the plans, programmes, and outputs envisaged  by
the GFPs.

Budgetary concerns have been raised in the existing GFPs. It impacts on  the
ability to meet goals  and  objectives.  It  is  thus  recommended  that  an
assessment be done of all the existing budgets of  GFPs  and  the  necessary
resources be allocated which would enable them to fulfill  their  functions.
It  is  essential  to  allocate  the  necessary  resources  to  programmatic
functions and not only to salaries.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

Against the backdrop of the functions assigned to GFPs as these  pertain  to
policies, it is essential that the following information  be  elicited  from
the Departments:

       • What progress  has  been  made  by  GFPs  to  review  Departmental
         policies in order to ensure that it is in line with  the  national
         or provincial Gender Policy?
       • What role do GFPs  play  in  the  strategic  planning  process  of
         Departments to ensure that gender is taken into account?

In addition, it is  recommended  that  provincial  OSWs  and  National  GFPs
assist provincial GFPs to acquire the necessary skills, which  would  enable
them to review existing policies, as  well  as  the  development  of  gender
sensitive policies for the respective Department.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

Given  the  limited  information  collated  on   gender   mainstreaming   in
provincial Departments, it  is  recommended  that  in-depth  information  be
collected on this topic. Secondly, it is suggested that provincial OSWs,  in
conjunction with national  GFPs  provide  guidance  to  provincial  GFPs  on
developing strategies to mainstream gender in Departments. GFP  coordinators
furthermore, would need to equip themselves with  the  necessary  skills  to
fulfill this function of their work.

5.  Programmes


Based on the analysis  of  the  results,  it  is  recommended  that  further
information be elicited from Departments by the provincial OSWs as  well  as
the JMC on the programmes within the Departments,  their  aims,  objectives,
outputs, measurement indicators and budget allocations. GFPs  would  further
benefit from training on the utilization of gender  planning  techniques  to
inform their planning of projects, programmes, etc.

6. Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement  of  Quality  of  Life  and
Status of Women

Very specific recommendations are made above to the  various  structures  of
the gender machinery. The following  is  thus  suggested  as  very  specific
recommendations  to  the  JMC  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  process  of
monitoring the work of the OSWs and  GFPs  and  making  interventions  where
necessary, is taken forward:

    • The JMC needs to  discuss  the  problems  raised  in  the  report  and
      identify ways of dealing with these in terms of its oversight role.
    • The JMC needs to hold consultative meetings with the OSW  as  well  as
      the CGE to consider the  report  and  the  recommendations  made.  The
      different  roleplayers   need   to   decide   on   their   roles   and
      responsibilities in ensuring  that  the  recommendations  are  carried
      forward and the implementation of recommendations are monitored.
    •  It  is  proposed  that  the  JMC  elicit  information  that  was  not
      forthcoming from the OSWs and GFPs. This could be done in the form  of
      a questionnaire that is sent to all OSWs and GFPs and this data  could
      be used to collate a more comprehensive report.
    • The JMC should set a date by which  to  hold  similar  hearings.  This
      should then be communicated to OSWs and GFPs so that they are able  to
      work towards this and are in a position to show the progress made from
      reports submitted at the end of 2003 (which can be  used  as  baseline
      data) to when they next report.
    • It is essential that the JMC meet with the various Premiers  to  share
      their findings of this report. It is  essential  that  their  concerns
      around the status of the provincial  OSWs  be  raised  with  Premiers.
      Among other concerns, the JMC should raise the issue that the OSWs are
      not being placed in the Premiers’ offices, lack of staff in  the  OSWs
      and the insufficient budgets allocated to the OSWs.
    • The JMC, as part of the  budgetary  process,  needs  to  intervene  on
      behalf of the Gender Machinery to ensure that the various budget votes
      allocate sufficient resources to the various gender structures for the
      implementation of policies, programmes, etc.
    • As part of  the  annual  reporting  of  Departments,  it  is  strongly
      recommended  that  Director-Generals  report  on  how  the  respective
      Department had progressed towards improving the status  of  women  and
      the  relevant  programmes  that  pertain  to  women.  This  should  be
      monitored by the JMC.
    • In addition  to  the  above  recommendation,  part  of  the  Director-
      General’s performance assessment  should  include  their  progress  on
      addressing gender issues and meeting gender targets.

Conclusion

In conclusion, the hearings have proved to be  a  very  useful  exercise  in
investigating what gender machinery  structures  have  been  established  at
national and provincial level. Furthermore, it has also given an  indication
of what these structures have been doing to promote gender equity  in  their
respective contexts. The hearings have been particularly useful in  bringing
to the fore the problems, obstacles and challenges that  exist  in  enabling
the GFPs and OSWs to execute their mandate. These have been  articulated  in
the  report  and  the  JMC  has  a  pivotal  role  to  play  in  identifying
appropriate interventions in dealing with these.

Given  that  there  have  been  certain  instances  where  information   was
unavailable, it is imperative that outstanding information is sourced and  a
more comprehensive report is compiled. The information  collated  here  thus
serves as important baseline data to  the  follow-up  report.  In  addition,
this document serves as an important instrument against which  the  progress
of GFPs and OSWs can be measured, when next they report.

References
Fourth World Conference on Women Platform for Action.
www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/platform/declar.htm

Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and  Status
of  Women  (September  2003).  Report  on  the  study  tours  undertaken  to
Provinces (2000 – 2003)  to  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  Domestic
Violence Act [Act No.116 of 1998] and the  Maintenance  Act  [Act  No.99  of
1998].

Parliament of South Africa (2002). Women  &  Lawmaking:  A  study  of  civil
society participation.

Reports of Departments received and distributed at hearings of  21  November
2003.

The Office on the Status of Women. South Africa’s National Policy  Framework
for Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality.

[13] Report compiled by Ms.  Carmine  Rustin  and  Ms.  Joy  Watson  of  the
Information Services Section, Research Unit, Parliament of South Africa.



                        WEDNESDAY, 28 SEPTEMBER 2005

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly
        1. The following member vacated his seat in the National Assembly
        with effect from 22 September 2005:

        Ramatlhodi, N A.




TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements on the Office of the Auditor-
        General for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 193-2005].


2.    The Minister of Transport


    (a)     Report on the National Freight Logistics Strategy – September
        2005.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
        Rescue (SASAR) organisation for 2003-2004.


3.    The Minister of Labour


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Police, Security, Legal,
        Justice and Correctional Services Sector Education and Training
        Authority (POSLEC SETA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 101-
        2005].


4.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
        Authority of South Africa (NPA) for 2004-2005, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
        [RP 156-2005].


                         THURSDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


      (a)   Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the
          Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 29
          September 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
          and Constitutional Development and the Select Committee on
          Security and Constitutional Affairs.
          (b)    Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill, 2005,
          submitted by the Minister for Provincial and Local Government on
          29 September 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Provincial and Local Government and the Select Committee on Local
          Government and Administration.




TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
        Services
         (SARS) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 211-2005].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Statistics South Africa for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 166-2005].


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
        Centre for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 176-2005].


     (d)    Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
        Deposits for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.
     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of Collective
        Investment Schemes for the year ended 31 December 2003.

2.    The Minister of Transport


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund (UTF)
        for  2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 207-2005].


3.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
        Provincial and Local Government for 2004-2005, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for Vote 5 for
        2004-2005 [RP 200-2005].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the Promotion
        and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic
        Communities (CRL Communities) 2004-2005, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
        183-2005].


4.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
        Agriculture for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 26 for 2004-2005 [RP
        165-2005].
5.    The Minister of Communications


     a) Report and Group Annual Financial Statements of South African Post
        Office Limited for 2004-2005, including the Report of Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media
        Institute of South Africa (NEMISA) for 2004-2005, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
        2005 [RP 150-2005].

6.    The Minister of Labour


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Mining Qualification
        Authority (MQA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 98-2005].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
        Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and Training
        Authority (MAPPP SETA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 96-
        2005].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector Education and
        Training Authority (ESETA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
        88-2005].


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Education and
        Training Authority (TETA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
        103-2005].

7.    The Minister of Housing


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
        Reconstruction and Housing Agency (NURCHA) for 2004-2005.

8.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of Minerals
        and Energy for 2004-2005, including the Report of Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements of Vote 31 for 2004-2005 [RP 44-2005].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 55-2005].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Electricity
        Regulator (NER) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 184-2005].


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear Regulator
        (NNR) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 56-2005].


     e) Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
        Council (MHSC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 141-2005].


     f) Annual Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund (CEF) Group
        of Companies for 2004-2005, including the Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        for 2004-2005 [RP 143-2005].


     g) Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity Distribution
        Industry Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2004-2005, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
        2005.


     h) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond Board
        (SADB) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 59-2005].


     i) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear Energy
        Corporation (NECSA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 168-
        2005].

National Assembly
1.    The Speaker

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
         Unit (SIU) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 181-2005].

     (b)    Letter from the Minister of Minerals and Energy dated 23
         September 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
         section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No
         1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
         Report of MINTEK for 2004-2005:

            LATE TABLING OF MINTEK ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2004/5

         All public entities are required to submit their annual reports,
         financial statements; and audit reports on those financial
         statements to the National Assembly. This requirement is in terms
         of Section 65 (1) (a) of the Public Finance Management Act.
         However, should they fail to do so the Executive Authority should
         table a written explanation (S 65 (2) (a)).


         Early February this year the Mintek computer software (SAP
         Enterprise Wide Operating system) crashed and was only restored on
         the 26 April 2005, which resulted in a delay in the preparation of
         the annual financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2005.


         Mintek requested an extension to submit their annual report by no
         later than 17 October 2005. I have granted this approval.


        I wish you well and thank you for your support.




        signed
        Mrs Lindiwe Hendricks, MP
Minister of Minerals and Energy


                          FRIDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (i)     Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2005]
             (National Assembly – sec 74) [Bill published in Government
             Gazette No 27962 of 26 August 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as well
         as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 30 September 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 15 – Department of
             Education for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 15 for 2004-2005
             [RP 162-2005].

    (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report. The
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of South African National
             Parks (SANparks) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration and report. The
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
             Technology Agency (Proprietary) Limited (SITA) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 39-2005].

    (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report. The
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Ingonyama Trust Board
             for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 134-2005].

    (5)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
          Gallery for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.



TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
         Rights Commission (SAHRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
         208-2005].

2.    The Presidency

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for
         2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of Vote 1 for 2004-2005 [RP 191-2005].

3.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
         Corporation (PIC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 147-
         2005].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
         Development Programme Fund for 2004-2005, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
         169-2005].

     (c)    The Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank on
         24 August 2005.

     (d)    Report of the South African Reserve Bank on the eighty-fourth
         ordinary general meeting of shareholders for 2004.

4.    The Minister of Transport

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
         Transport for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 33 for 2004-2005.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
         Safety Authority (SAMSA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements (including the Maritime
         Fund) for 2004-2005.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
         Aviation Authority (CAA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
         82-2005].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
         (RSR) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

5.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National House of
         Traditional Leaders (NHTL) for 2004-2005.

6.    The Minister for Public Enterprises


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 – Department of Public
        Enterprises for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 9 for 2004-2005.

7.    The Minister of Social Development


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
        Social Development for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 19 for 2004-
        2005 [RP 210-2005].

8.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of South African Management
         Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2004-2005, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
         [RP 198-2005].

9.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 – Department of Land
         Affairs for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 30 for 2004-2005 [RP 132-2005].

10.   The Minister of Communications
     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service Agency
        (USA) for 2003-2004, 2004-2005 and the Report and Financial
        Statements of the Universal Service Fund (USF) for 2004-2005,
        including the Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements of the Universal Service Agency (USA) for 2003-2004,
        2004-2005 and the Universal Service Fund (USF) for 2004-2005 [RP
        196-2005].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service Agency
        (USA) on the Universal Agency Fund (USF) for 2003-2004, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
        2003-2004 [RP 15-2005].

11.   The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
         Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2004-2005, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for 2004-2005.

12.   The Minister of Home Affairs

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publications
         Board for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

     (b)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Mozambique regarding the
         Waiver of Visa Requirements for Holders of Ordinary Passports,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No
         108 of 1996).
13.   The Minister of Arts and Culture

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 – Department of Arts
         and Culture for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 14 for 2004-2005.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council of
         South Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 180-2005].

14.   The Minister of Science and Technology

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of
         Science and Technology for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 18 for 2004-
         2005.

15.   The Minister of Housing


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of Housing
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements of Vote 29 for 2004-2005 [RP 142-1005].

16.   The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 – Department of
        Justice and Constitutional Development for 2004-2005, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
        24 for 2004-2005 [RP 190-2005].

17.   The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
        Service for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 139-2005].

18.   The Minister of Correctional Services


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Department of
        Correctional Services for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 178-
        2005].

19.   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of Water
        Affairs and Forestry for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 34 for 2004-
        2005 [RP 130-2005].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission
        (WRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 116-2005].
        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon
        Tunnel Authority (TCTA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

20.   The Minister of Health


        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
           Health for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements of Vote 16 for 2004-2005 [RP
           136-2005].

21.   The Minister of Sport and Recreation


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Department of Sport
        and Recreation for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 20 for 2004-2005.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)     Written comments received from the public and provincial
        legislatures on the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B 33 -
        2005], submitted by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
        Development in terms of section 74(6)(a) of the Constitution, 1996.

            Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
        Constitutional Development.
                           MONDAY, 3 OCTOBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

        1) South African Abattoir Corporation Act Repeal Bill [B 21 – 2005]
           – Act No 17 of 2005 (assented to and signed by President on 30
           September 2005).




TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Social Development


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Development Agency
        (NDA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 197-2005].

 2. The Minister of Communications


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of
        Communications for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 27 for 2004-2005 [RP
        212-2005].

                           TUESDAY, 4 OCTOBER 2005




TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Youth Commission
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 173-2005].


                          WEDNESDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

    1.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
             Corporation (RTMC) for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP
             26-2004].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
             (RSR) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 81-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
             Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    2.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Safety and Security for consideration and report. The Reports of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department for
             Safety and Security for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             187-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Independent
             Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
             Vote 23 for 2004-2005 [RP 771-2005].

    3.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government
             Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 172-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Sentech for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    4.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administrations and the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister of Public Service and Administration
             dated 16 September 2005 to the Speaker of the National
             Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance
             Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay
             in the tabling of the Annual Report of South African Management
             Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2004-2005.

    5.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture and the Joint Monitoring Committee on the
        Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
        Disabled Persons for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library
             for the Blind for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    6.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Foreign Affairs for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of
             Foreign Affairs for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 3 for 2004-
             2005.

    7.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Works for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
             Development Board (CIDB) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
             [RP 206-2005].
          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Build
             Environment (CBE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
             [RP 177-2005].

    8.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
             Marketing Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 1-
             2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural
             Development Bank of South Africa (Land Bank) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 164-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort Biological
             Products Limited for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    9.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Housing for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to
        the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Thubelisha Homes for 2004-
             2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing
             Foundation for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the People’s Housing
             Partnership Trust (PHPT) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
             (RHLF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    10.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Reports of
        the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
             Foundation (NRF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of GODISA for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of
             South Africa for 2004- 2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences
             Research Council (HSRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
             [RP 140-2005].


    11.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Ntsika Enterprise Promotion
             Agency for the nine months ended 31 December 2004, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             for the nine months ended 31 December 2004.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
             Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          c) Report of the South African Council for the Non-Proliferation
             of Weapons of Mass Destruction for the period 1 July 2003 to 30
             June 2004.
    12.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Correctional Services for consideration:

          a) Draft Directives regarding Complainant Participation in
             Correctional Supervision and Parole Boards, tabled in terms of
             section 299A of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of
             1977) as amended.

    13.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

          a) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 20
             September 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly
             informing Members of the National Assembly of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force in the Democratic
             Republic of Congo.



TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for the
        Arts for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


                          THURSDAY, 6 OCTOBER 2005

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


   a) Proclamation No R.47 published in Government Gazette No 27986 dated 31
      August 2005: Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the Public Funding
      of Represented Political Parties Act, 1997 (Act No 103 of 1997).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

           a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
              Management of State Housing [RP 30-2005].

     (b)    Letter from the Minister of Transport dated 30 September 2005 to
         the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a)
         of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
         explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Reports of Public
         Entities for 2004-2005:

            WRITTEN EXPLANATION ON THE LATE SUBMISSION AND TABLING OF THE
         ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF PUBLIC ENTITIES FOR THE
         YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2005

            I write to inform Parliament that in terms of Sections 65(1)(a)
         of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), as
         amended (PFMA), I was unfortunately not able to table the Annual
         Reports and audited Financial Statements for the year ended 31
         March 2005 of the Cross-Border Road Transport Agency (C-BRTA), the
         Road Accident Fund (RAF) and the Road Traffic Management
         Corporation (RTMC) before or on Friday, 30 September 2005, as
         required by the PFMA. The written explanation in terms of
         subsection (2)(a) of the PFMA for the delay in the tabling of the
         three Public Entities Annual Reports are as follows:-

            The C-BRTA, RAF and RTMC met the requirement to submit their
         Annual Financial Statements to the Office of the Auditor-General
         (OAG) by 31 st May 2005. However, the OAG raised certain queries
         with the Public Entities in question in relation to their financial
         reporting, which lead to an unforeseen delay in the auditing of
         their Financial Statements.

            I have instructed the Department of Transport to ensure that
         the outstanding Annual Reports are tabled as soon as possible.

            I trust that this will be in order.

            Kind regards


            signed
            Mr J T Radebe, MP
                 Minister of Transport

     (c)    Letter from the Minister of Housing dated 29 September 2005 to
         the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 55(d) of
         the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
         explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the
         National Home Builders Registration Council for 2004-2005:

            NON-COMPLIANCE WITH SECTION 55(d) OF THE PUBLIC FINANCE
         MANAGEMENT ACT (PFMA) WITH REGARDS TO THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE
         NATIONAL HOME BUILDERS REGISTRATION COUNCIL

            This letter serves to inform you of the non compliance with
         section 55(d) of the Public Finance Management Act 1 of 1999 (PFMA)
         by the National Home Builders Registration Council, a public entity
         under the control of the Department of Housing, for your noting.

            All entities have submitted their annual reports to the
         Department of Housing (DOH) on or before the 31 August 2005 except
         for the NHBRC which could not finalise their Annual Financial
         Statements (AFS) by 31 August 2005. On following-up by the DOH, the
         NHBRC indicated that extensive time is still required to finalise
         the outstanding matters regarding the AFS for the issuance of an
         annual report.

            The NHBRC was then requested to provide a report on the extent
         of progress with regards to the preparation of the annual report.
         The following series of events were given in the report as reasons
         for the delay and non-compliance.

            31 May 2005: two sets of AFS were submitted to the Auditor-
         General by 31 May 2005. One set incorporated the principles of
         International Financial Reporting Statements (IFRS 4) and the other
         set did not incorporate the IFRS 4. A final decision on the set of
         AFS to be used for audit purposes dependant on the results of the
         actuarial valuation which was still outstanding.

            19 June 2005: The actuarial valuation has been done by a newly
         appointed actuarial supplier who’s appointment was effected in
         order to rotate suppliers in terms of the NHBRC’s Procurement
         Policy. The simultaneous change in the accounting standards in
         terms of IFRS 4, culminated in a final report dated 19 June 2005,
         which included the final calculations which had to be incorporated
         into the unaudited financial statements.

            21 June 2005: The financial statements, which incorporated the
         IFRS 4 adjustments were populated on the National Treasury template
         and copied to the Auditor-General on 21 June 2005.

            29 July 2005: The financial statements were submitted to the
         Auditor-General on 29 July 2005, under Section 55(1)(c) again, as
         the financial statements submitted on 31 May 2005, 21 June 2005 and
         those issued as working copies during the audit could not be relied
         upon.

            The Auditor-General had to obtain an external opinion on the
         assumptions and presentation adopted by the NHBRC in respect of
         IFRS 4.

            The Auditor-General indicated to the NHBRC on the 26 September
         that they are reviewing the report by the consultants on the
         adoption of the IFRS 4, and that findings on the management letter
         including IFRS 4 issues will be discussed with the NHBRC on
         Wednesday, 28 September 2005.

            In terms of moving forward the following are still outstanding:

                   • The NHBRC has to respond on the management letter,
                     after which the Auditor-general will then issue a
                     signed audit report.
                   • On receipt of the audit report, the NHBRC will submit
                     the financial statements to the printers to produce the
                     “proof” annual report.
                   • The printed “proof” annual report will be submitted to
                     the Auditor-General for final checking before printing.
                     The printing of the final annual financial statements
                     after proof reading by the Auditor-General is estimated
                     to take one week.

            On review of the report given, it is evident that execution of
         the outstanding matters for the completion of the annual report and
         the financial statements is outside the control of the DOH and as
         such no corrective measures could be taken by DOH to speed up the
         processing of those matters.

            Kind regards


            signed
            L N SISULU (MP)
                 MINISTER OF HOUSING

                           FRIDAY, 7 OCTOBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

(a) Bills returned to Executive

      On 5 October 2005 the Speaker, after consultation, referred the
    Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29 – 2005], introduced in the National
    Assembly as a section 75 Bill on 2 September 2005, back to the Minister
    of Minerals and Energy, as it contains both section 75 and section 76
    provisions.




TABLINGS


1.    The Speaker

    (a)    Communique and synthesis of working group reports of the
         Conference of African Parliamentarians on the New Partnership for
         Africa’s Development (Nepad), held in Abuja, Nigeria, from 20 to 23
         June 2005.

     COMMUNIQUE OF THE CONFERENCE OF AFRICAN PARLIAMENTARIANS ON THE NEW
                    PARTNERSHIP FOR AFRICA’S DEVELOPMENT

                   (Abuja, Nigeria – June 20 to 23, 2005)

    A four-day Conference of African Parliamentarians on the theme, “The
    Role of African Parliamentarians in the New Partnership for Africa’s
    Development (NEPAD)”, was organised by the House of Representatives of
    the Federal Republic of Nigeria in Abuja between June 20-23, 2005. The
    conference was declared open by His Excellency Chief Olusegun Obasanjo,
    President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, who was the Special Guest
    of Honour, while the opening ceremony was chaired by His Excellency
    Alhaji Shehu Shagari, former President of Nigeria.


    The conference brought together over 130 participants from 32 countries
    drawn from all regions of Africa. Participants included Speakers,
    Presidents and Members of the Parliaments, as well as leaders and
    members of regional parliamentary bodies, including the Pan-African
    Parliament, the Ecowas Parliament, the SADC Parliament and the East
    African Legislative Assembly, representatives of governments, civil
    society organisations and academia.


    The objective of the conference was, inter alia, to provide a platform
    for African Parliamentarians to improve their knowledge of the
    evolution, aims and objectives of NEPAD and its African Peer Review
    Mechanism (APRM) with the view to mobilising the participants for
    effective engagement in the implementation processes.


    In the plenary and working group sessions, the conference discussed a
    variety of issues relating to the NEPAD and APRM documents and in
    particular the role of African Parliamentarians in these initiatives.
    In this respect, participants welcomed the NEPAD and APRM processes as
    important and timely initiatives for leveraging Africa’s social,
    economic and political development. The conference observed that there
    is limited knowledge of NEPAD and APRM initiatives among
    Parliamentarians.


    Furthermore, participants noted that Parliamentarians, as the most
    important force for galvanising sustainable development, ought to play
    a leading role in the NEPAD initiative, particularly in order to ensure
    that the people of Africa effectively take ownership of the process.
    Accordingly, they agreed and made the following recommendations:

      • That African Parliamentarians should take a more active interest in
        broadening their awareness of NEPAD and the APRM, and proactively
        engage the NEPAD document with a view to enriching it through their
        inputs.
      • That as representatives of the people, African Parliamentarians
        should help to popularise NEPAD, create awareness about its
        evolution, aims and objectives, and mobilise support for it among
        the peoples of Africa.
      • That African Parliaments must ensure adherence by African
        governments and other stakeholders to the NEPAD principles,
        including, inter alia, a guarantee of free and fair elections,
        observation of the rule of law and institution of good governance.
      • That all African countries be encouraged to accede to the APRM.
      • That African Parliaments should undertake legislative measures to
        domesticate the NEPAD blueprint in their respective Parliaments,
        amending national laws that are inconsistent with the objectives of
        NEPAD and the APRM.
      • That African Parliamentarians should effectively engage on the
        issue of the debt overhang, which has held back development efforts
        in Africa for decades. The conference therefore calls for the
        cancellation of Africa’s debts as a first step towards restoring
        economic growth on the continent and meeting the Millennium
        Development Goals (MDGs).
      • That African Parliamentarians should engage more frequently among
        themselves and hold similar conferences at regular intervals to
        update themselves about the NEPAD and APRM processes, including the
        challenges they face and the progress of the implementation effort.
      • African Parliamentarians should establish partnerships and linkages
        with civil society organisations to facilitate the sharing of
        information on the NEPAD and APRM processes, as well as build the
        capacity of both sectors to effectively engage on the issues. In
        this regard, there should be regular joint workshops for
        Parliamentarians and members of civil society.
      • That Parliamentarians must ensure that gender equality and youth
        participation becomes cross-cutting in the various programmes and
        Plan of Action of NEPAD and the APRM.
      • That the NEPAD and APRM processes should be used to engage the
        international community in advancing Africa’s interest,
        particularly in the context of the on-going reform of the United
        Nations system, including the quest for permanent seats for African
        countries in the UN Security Council.
      • Participants commended the Nigerian House of Representatives for
        taking the initiative to organise the conference and expressed
        gratitude to the government and people of Nigeria for their
        hospitality.

    The conference report, the reports of the working groups, and the
    Agenda for Action, which emerged from the conference, provide further
    details.


    Unanimously agreed in Abuja, Nigeria, on Thursday, June 23, 2005.

                         SYNTHESIS OF GROUP REPORTS

 The conference was broken into five (5) working groups. The issues
 considered by the groups were:
   1. NEPAD and African Parliamentarians: Engagement framework and
      strategies
   2. Mainstreaming NEPAD/APRM objectives and principles into national
      legislation: Strategies and concrete modalities
   3. Mainstreaming NEPAD/APRM objectivesand principles into
      regional/subregional legislation: Strategies and concrete modalities
   4. Defining the role and responsibility of African Parliamentarians in
      the implementation of the NEPAD/APRM
   5. NEPAD/APRM and African Parliamentarians: Sensitisation and
      mobilisation


    Within the groups participants deliberated extensively on the issues.
    The summary of the recommendations, as presented to the plenary and
    adopted, is as follows:

    Effective engagement of Parliament
    Noting the essence of strategic comprehensive in-depth and broad-based
    consultation with all stakeholders for the success of NEPAD/APRM, the
    following recommendations emerged towards the effective engagement of
    African Parliaments:
    • Parliaments are encouraged to develop institutional frameworks for
      effective engagement on NEPAD/APRM issues. The framework should
      include designs to facilitate an effective understanding by
      Parliamentarians of NEPAD and its objectives, bridge the current gap
      existing between the executive and legislature, and facilitate the
      sensitisation and mobilisation of the citizenry of their various
      constituencies.
    • Parliamentarians must engage the NEPAD document with a view to
      enriching and fine-tuning it and popularise NEPAD as representatives
      of the people.
    • The strengthening of Parliaments across the continent to enhance the
      effective performance of oversight functions.
    • Parliaments should become more independent.
    • Parliamentarians must be involved in constructive engagement with
      their heads of state and government.
    • Capacity-building and institutional support for the effective
      operation and functioning of Parliaments on NEPAD, eg through training
      and recruitment of adequate support staff.
    • A two-way reporting system should be built into the engagement process
      of Parliaments with regional and subregional parliamentary bodies.

Role of African Parliaments in the NEPAD and legislative measures
The need to establish a nexus of collective effort between heads of state
and government, Parliamentarians and the people towards the transformation
of African economies and societies based on a set of commonly derived
values through the NEPAD/APRM initiatives requires that Parliaments play a
significant role through some legislative measures:
    • African Parliaments must ensure adherence to NEPAD principles by the
      government and other stakeholders, for instance on free and fair
      elections, the rule of law and good governance. African Parliaments
      should make the executive act on a consistent basis in developing
      projects within the framework of NEPAD.
    • Parliamentarians should initiate and enact laws to domesticate the
      NEPAD blueprint in their respective countries and take measures to
      enhance the necessary internal cooperation and regional and
      subregional cooperation in all facets of national activities and
      development.
    • There must be collaboration between Parliaments of all NEPAD nations
      and the other arms of government.
    • Establishment of a Parliamentary Committee on the AU and NEPAD
      exclusive of any that may be in existence for Foreign Affairs.
    • Create a direct network with the NEPAD Secretariat.
    • Parliaments are to have a technical group or team that will help it to
      analyse and engage the NEPAD process, in other words provide technical
      back-up.
    • Need to establish and subscribe to the African Parliamentary Network
      on NEPAD.
    • Parliaments, through the prescribed committee, should exercise an
      oversight function over all NEPAD-related activities being handled by
      the executive arm of government.
    • Parliament should exercise the power of appropriation on the funding
      of NEPAD in the respective countries, that is on internally and
      externally generated or sourced funds.
    • Subnational Parliaments (state or provincial or regional Houses of
      Assembly) should be engaged in active dialogue on the NEPAD agenda,
      particularly as it affects the peculiarities of their respective areas
      of jurisdiction.
    • Exchanging of information and experiences between national and
      regional Parliaments in order to reinforce communication about the
      goals of NEPAD for their popularisation so as to allow African
      societies to own them.
    • Reinforcing the role of the African Parliament in the implementation
      of NEPAD and the APRM.
    • Harmonising national and regional laws on customs, trade and
      migration.
    • Putting up regional Parliaments in every economic bloc of regional
      integration like Ecowas, SADC, etc and exchanging information and
      experiences between national and regional Parliaments in order to
      reinforce communication about the goals of NEPAD for their
      popularisation so as to allow African societies to own them.
    • African Parliamentarians should amend all national laws that are not
      consistent with the objectives of NEPAD and the APRM. In the same vein
      they should legislate on laws that will assist in the overall
      implementation of NEPAD.


 Funding
 The conference noted the current challenges related to the funding of
 NEPAD and the APRM and recommended the urgent need to diversify the
 projected sources of funding, with emphasis on internal funding to
 guarantee sustainability:
    • There is an urgent need to carry out a reprioritisation of the NEPAD
      programmes in order to undertake in a sequential manner critical areas
      of need.
    • The NEPAD agenda in countries should be focused on sustainable micro
      projects that impact positively on the peoples of Africa as opposed to
      the current grandiose macro projects.
    • African Parliaments are encouraged to address the issue of
      undertaxation by embarking on appropriate tax reform agendas in their
      respective countries.
    • Each African country should enhance its tax profile to make more funds
      available for developmental projects.
    • The current initiative to source funding for the AU (the proposed
      taxation on air travel) should incorporate NEPAD.
    • While not relying on external funding, African Parliaments and
      executives should make concerted efforts to secure external support in
      financing NEPAD – the details of such support should be well analysed
      in order not to create a future liability for Africa.

 Mobilisation, public enlightenment and awareness creation
      • Training programmes should be organised for parliamentary staff,
        the media and related institutions to aide the work of
        Parliamentarians as it relates to NEPAD/APRM.
      • Parliamentarians should be proactive and should not always wait for
        the executive in getting and providing information concerning NEPAD
        and the APRM to the media and citizenry.
      • Improve partnerships with civil society organisations that have
        experience on NEPAD and the APRM and use them to reach communities,
        develop links with the communities and organise programmes on NEPAD
        and the APRM.
      • Constitute a network of media organisations on NEPAD and the APRM.

    Additional issues
    The other recommendations that should make Parliamentarians provide an
    enabling environment in terms of funding and oversight processes for
    the effective implementation of NEPAD, its monitoring and the
    evaluation of its programmes and activities to ensure project
    discipline, efficiency and sustainability, are:
      • African Parliamentarians should partner with civil society in
        moving NEPAD forward in terms of information-sharing and capacity-
        building. In this regard, regular workshops should be organised for
        Parliamentarians.
      • Encourage governments to include NEPAD in the school curriculum,
        both at university and college level.
      • African Parliaments should as a matter of urgency debate and
        formally adopt NEPAD as the framework for national development
        policy.
      • Embark on public enlightment campaigns, especially at constituency
        and grassroots level.
      • African Parliaments should create appropriate parliamentary
        structure(s) that will guarantee an engagement process with NEPAD,
        using ICT and other means to achieve this.
      • A capacity-building fund should be created by Parliament through
        the national budgetary process and other means to ensure the
        continuous engagement of Parliament with NEPAD.
      • African Parliamentarians should engage Africans in the diaspora and
        sensitise them about the need for them to mobilise global support
        and encourage the wider international community to appreciate the
        developmental needs of Africa.


Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs for consideration,
the Subcommittee on African Union to advise on the role of Parliament in
South Africa’s APRM process.

                           MONDAY, 10 OCTOBER 2005




TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
        Language Board (PanSALB) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 205-
        2005].
2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
        South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Decentralised Development Programme, tabled in terms
        of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Decentralised
        Development Programme.


     c) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Promotion of Rural Livelihoods in Eastern Cape
        Province Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     d) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Promotion of Rural
        Livelihoods in Eastern Cape Province Project


     e) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Training and Support for Natural Resource Management
        (Transform) Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     f) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Training and Support
        for Natural Resource Management (Transform) Project.


     g)  Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
        South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Broadening Agricultural Services and Extension
        Delivery Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     h) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Broadening
        Agricultural Services and Extension Delivery Project.


     i) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Training System for Education, Training and
        Development Practitioners (ETDP SETA) Project, tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     j) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Training System for
        Education, Training and Development Practitioners (ETDP SETA)
        Project.


     k)  Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
        South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Trade and Industrial Policy Secretariat (TIPS)
        Consultancy Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     l) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Trade and Industrial
        Policy Secretariat (TIPS) Consultancy Project.


     m)  Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
        South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning Assistance for the National Housing Finance Corporation
        (NHFC) Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     n) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning Assistance for the
        National Housing Finance Corporation (NHFC) Programme.


     o)  Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
        South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Municipal Finance Management Programme, tabled in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of
        1996).


     p) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Municipal Finance
        Management Programme.


     q) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Provincial Administration Support Programme in the
        Eastern Cape, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


    (r)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Provincial
        Administration Support Programme in the Eastern Cape.


    (s)     Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
        South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Vocational Education and training Fund Project,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No
        108 of 1996).


     t) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Vocational Education
        and training Fund Project.


     u) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Urban Upgrading and Development Programme, tabled in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of
        1996).


     v) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Urban Upgrading and
        Development Programme.


     w) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Planning and Implementation Management Support
        Systems for Municipalities Programme, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     x) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Planning and
        Implementation Management Support Systems for Municipalities
        Programme.


     y) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Economic and Development Policy Advisory Programme,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No
        108 of 1996).


     z) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Economic and
        Development Policy Advisory Programme.
    aa) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the HIV/AIDS Cross-Sectoral Fund Project, tabled in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of
        1996).


    ab) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the HIV/AIDS Cross-
        Sectoral Fund Project.


    ac) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Advisory Support for the Consolidation of the
        Mpumalanga Provincial Administration Project, tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


    ad) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Advisory Support for
        the Consolidation of the Mpumalanga Provincial Administration
        Project.


    ae) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning the Basic Employment and Skills Training Programme in
        the Free State and Eastern Cape Provinces, tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


    af) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Basic Employment and
        Skills Training Programme in the Free State and Eastern Cape
        Provinces.


    ag) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Norway regarding Mutual
        Assistance between their Customs Administrations, tabled in terms
        of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


    ah) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Kingdom of Norway regarding Mutual Assistance between their
        Customs Administrations.


    ai) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Republic of Turkey regarding Mutual
        Assistance between their Customs Administrations, tabled in terms
        of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


    aj) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
        Turkey regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
        Administrations.


    ak) Government Notice No R.794 published in Government Gazette No 26868
        dated 12 August 2005: Determination of amounts for purposes of the
        Act, in terms of the Military Pensions Act, 1976 (Act No 84 of
        1976).


    al) Government Notice No R.860 published in Government Gazette No 27976
        dated 2 September 2005: Determination of limit on amount of
        remuneration for purposes of determination of contribution in terms
        of section 6, in terms of the Unemployment Insurance Act, 2002 (Act
        No 4 of 2002).

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Trade and Economic Agreement between the Republic of South
        Africa and the Republic of Turkey, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 van 1996).

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Trade and Economic Agreement
        between the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of Turkey.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     (a)    Reply from Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs to
        recommendations in the Report of Portfolio Committee on Agriculture
        and Land Affairs on Public Hearings on Pace of Land Reform, as
        adopted by the House on 7 June 2005.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
    National Credit Bill [B 18 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated
    7 October 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
        the subject of the National Credit Bill [B 18 - 2005] (National
        Assembly - sec 76), referred to it and classified by the Joint
        Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B 18A - 2005].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry on
    the Forestry Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec
    76), dated 7 October 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Water and Forestry, having considered
        the subject of the Forestry Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2005]
        (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it and classified by the
        Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B 24A - 2005].


                          TUESDAY, 11 OCTOBER 2005

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    Designation of Acting Speaker
    As I will be absent from Parliament from 11 to 24 October, in
    accordance with the resolution adopted by the House on 24 June 2004 I
    have designated Deputy Speaker G L Mahlangu-Nkabinde to act as Speaker
    for the period 11 to 14 October and House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge
    to act as Speaker for the period 15 to 24 October.

2.    Designation of Acting Deputy Speaker


    As both the Deputy Speaker and I will be absent from Parliament during
    certain periods in October, in accordance with the resolution adopted
    by the House on 24 June 2004, I have designated –

     1. House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge to act as Deputy Speaker for the
        period 11 to 14 October, and


     2. House Chairperson Ms C-S Botha to act as Deputy Speaker for the
        period 15 to 24 October.

3.          Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

    1. The following Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of Vote 1 is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
       Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for
             2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements of Vote 1 for 2004-2005 [RP 191-2005].


    2. The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on
       Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women for consideration
       and report.

          a)  Office on the Status of Women contained in the Report and
             Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements of Vote 1 for 2004-2005 [RP 191-2005]:

    3. The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on
       Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
       Disabled Persons for consideration and report:

          a) Office on the Rights of the Child and the Office on the Status
             of Disabled Persons contained in the Report and Financial
             Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for 2004-2005, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             of Vote 1 for 2004-2005 [RP 191-2005].


    4. The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on
       Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
       Disabled Persons for consideration and report. The Report of the
       Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
       Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Youth Commission
            for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
            the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 173-2005].



TABLINGS


National Assembly
1.    The Speaker


    (a)     Letter from the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
        dated 10 October 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
        terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act,
        1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
        Annual Report of Marine Living Resources Fund for 2004-2005:

        MARINE LIVING RESOURCES FUND: DELAY IN SUBMITTING OF THE ANNUAL
        REPORT FOR THE 2004/05 FINANCIAL YEAR


         1. In terms of section 65(2)(a) of the PFMA, the Executive
            Authority must table a written
           explanation in the legislature setting out the reasons why an
           annual report was not tabled. To this end, this communication
           serves to inform you about the MLRF’s reasons for the delay in
           submitting their Annual report to the relevant Legislature for
           the financial year in question.


         2. Audits for the 2002/03 and 2003/04 financial years were done
            during May to August
           2004. The Audit reports pertaining to the aforementioned
           financial years are currently under review by the Auditor-
           General. Although a draft report has been issued in respect of
           the 2004/05 financial year, the Financials and auditor-General
           Report for the 2002-2004 financial years has not been finalized.

        3. A formal letter was sent to the Auditor-General on Tuesday, 27
           September 2005 to obtain a written commitment in terms of dates
           to enable the MLRF to finalize their Audit Report. We have
           subsequently been in contact with the AG’s office, but they were
           unable to give us a definite date for the completion of the
           reports. We anticipate that it will take approximately 2-3 weeks
           for them to finalize the review of the 2002/03 and 2003/04
           reports.

            Kind regards
      MARTHINUS VAN SCHALKWYK
      MINISTER OF ENVIROMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly:

1.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office Mr M S E Khumalo,
    Head of Office at the Amsterdam Magistrate Court,  dated  22  September
    2005:

      The Portfolio Committee for Justice and  Constitutional  Development,
    having considered the report on the provisional suspension from  office
    of Magistrate M S E Khumalo, tabled by the  Minister  for  Justice  and
    Constitutional  Development  in  terms  of  section  13(3)(b)  of   the
    Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

       1)  The Portfolio Committee noted from the report that  the  Minister
          provisionally suspended Mr Khumalo from office on  the  22  August
          2005 in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the  Magistrates  Act,  1993.
          The report  of  the  Minister  which  indicates  reasons  for  the
          provisional suspension was tabled in Parliament on 23 August 2005,
          in compliance with section 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

    2)     The Portfolio Committee invited Mr Khumalo on the 30 August 2005
          to submit written representations to the Committee regarding the
          recommendation of the Magistrates Commission. The Committee did
          not receive any response to the invitation by the 13 September
          2005.

    3)     The Portfolio Committee noted that Mr Khumalo  is  charged  with
          stealing monies belonging to a deceased estate in  the  amount  of
          R240 951,96 during the period between 31 July  1999  and  3  April
          2001.


    4)      In  terms  of  section  13(3)(c)  of  Magistrates  Act,   1993,
          Parliament  must  as  soon  as  is  reasonably  possible  pass   a
          resolution as to whether or not the provisional suspension of  the
          magistrate is confirmed. The  Portfolio  Committee  considers  the
          allegation  to  be  of  such  a  serious  nature  as  to  make  it
          inappropriate  for  Mr  Khumalo  to  perform  his   functions   as
          magistrate while the inquiry referred to in  section  13(3)(e)  of
          the Magistrates Act, 1993 is being held and  therefore  recommends
          that the National Assembly  resolve  to  confirm  the  provisional
          suspension of Mr Khumalo in terms of section 13  (3)  (c)  of  the
          Magistrates Act, 1993.

    5)     The Committee further  recommends  that  a  progress  report  in
          respect of the inquiry of the Magistrates Commission be tabled  in
          accordance  with  the  provisions  of  section  13(3)(f)  of   the
          Magistrates Act, 1993  and  the  first  report  to  be  tabled  in
          Parliament by the 13 January 2006.


      Report to be considered.

2.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office Mr M F Mathe,  an
    Additional Magistrate at Pinetown, dated 22 September 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee for  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
    having considered the report on the provisional suspension from  office
    of Magistrate M F  Mathe,  tabled  by  the  Minister  for  Justice  and
    Constitutional  Development  in  terms  of  section  13(3)(b)  of   the
    Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

    1)     The Portfolio Committee noted from the report that the  Minister
        provisionally suspended Mr Mathe on the 22 August 2005 in  terms  of
        section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.  The  report  of  the
        Minister indicated reasons for the provisional suspension was tabled
        in Parliament on 23 August 2005, in compliance with section 13(3)(b)
        of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

         2)       The Portfolio Committee invited Mr Mathe on the 30  August
            2005 to submit written
        representations to the Committee regarding the recommendation of the
        Magistrates Commission. The Committee did not receive  any  response
        to the invitation by the 13 September 2005.


   3) The Portfolio Committee noted that Mr Mathe is charged with  stealing
        monies belonging to a deceased estate in the amount  of  R16  200,00
        during the period between December 2002 and January 2003.
   4) In terms of section 13(3)(c) of  Magistrates  Act,  1993,  Parliament
        must as soon as is reasonably possible  pass  a  resolution  as  to
        whether or not the provisional  suspension  of  the  magistrate  is
        confirmed. The Portfolio Committee considers the allegation  to  be
        of such a serious nature as to make it inappropriate for Mr.  Mathe
        to perform his functions as magistrate while the  inquiry  referred
        to in section 13(3)(e) of the Magistrates Act,  1993  is  held  and
        therefore recommends that the National Assembly resolve to  confirm
        the provisional suspension of Mr. Mathe in terms of section 13  (3)
        (c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

   5) The Committee further recommends that a progress report in respect of
        the inquiry of the Magistrates Commission be  tabled  in  accordance
        with the provisions of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act, 1993
        and the first report to be tabled in Parliament by  the  13  January
        2006.

  Report to be considered.


                         WEDNESDAY, 12 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees

    1) Ms D G Nhlengethwa has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio
       Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs with effect from 11
       October 2005.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development on the Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of
      Certain Laws Bill [B 25 - 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76), dated 11
      October 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional  Development,
        having considered  the  subject  matter  of  the  Repeal  of  Black
        Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Bill [B 25 – 2005]
        (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it and classified by  the
        Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  as  a  section  76  Bill,  endorses  the
        classification of the Bill and reports the Bill with amendments  [B
        25A -2005].


           The Committee wishes to report further, as follows:


             Many provisions of the Black Administration Act, 1927 (Act  38
             of 1927) (the Act), which this Bill seeks to repeal, cannot be
             repealed until such time as the relevant competent authorities
             at the national, provincial and  local  levels  of  government
             have enacted and implemented suitable substitute  legislation.
             That being the case, the approach adopted in the  Bill  is  an
             incremental one, with sunset clauses being used to give  these
             authorities time to pass and implement the required substitute
             legislation, where necessary.  After receiving information  on
             the readiness of these authorities as far as the enactment and
             implementation of this substitute  legislation  is  concerned,
             the Committee decided to  extend  the  date  in  these  sunset
             clauses from  31  December  2005,  proposed  in  the  Bill  as
             introduced into Parliament, to 31 July 2006.  Failure  by  the
             authorities in question to meet this deadline, will result  in
             the provisions of the Act being repealed which could  possibly
             give rise to a  legal  vacuum.    The  Committee  consequently
             instructs the following authorities to  report  to  it  by  31
             January 2006 on the following issues in order to  monitor  the
             progress being made before the expiry of the sunset clauses:


             (i)  The  relevant  provinces,  through  the   Department   of
                  Provincial and Local Government, must   report on progress
                  made with the enactment and implementation of  appropriate
                  substitute provincial  legislation  on  matters  currently
                  dealt with in –
                 *     section 2(7), (7) bis, (7) ter and (8)  of  the  Act,
                       dealing with the powers of  the  Governor-General  to
                       appoint chiefs and prescribe their duties, powers and
                       their conditions of service;
                 *     if applicable and desirable, section 5(1)(a)  of  the
                       Act, dealing with the powers of the  Governor-General
                       to define the boundaries of the area of any tribe  or
                       tribal settlement and with the amalgamation of tribes
                       or parts  of  tribes  into  a  single  tribe  or  the
                       constitution of a new tribe.
             (ii)       The  Department  of  Justice   and   Constitutional
                 Development must report on progress made with the enactment
                 and implementation of  appropriate  substitute  legislation
                 which is currently dealt with in -
                 *     sections 12 and 20 and the Third Schedule of the Act,
                      dealing with the judicial  functions  of  traditional
                      leaders;  and
                 *     section 22(7)  and  (8)  of  the  Act,  dealing  with
                       proprietary rights of a  certain  category  of  women
                       married according to customary law.  (The  Department
                       is also  requested  to  investigate  the  proprietary
                       rights of other women who are in  relationships  that
                       are not regulated by the Marriage Act, 1961, and  who
                       might be in a vulnerable  position  as  a  result  of
                       their relationships not  being  recognised  as  valid
                       marriages and to include any such categories of women
                       into  the  substitute  legislation,  should  this  be
                       necessary).
             (iii)      The  Department  of  Land  Affairs,  as  the   lead
                 Department, together with the Department of Provincial  and
                 Local Government, in  conjunction  with  the  provinces  in
                 question, and any other relevant authority,  must  initiate
                 an inter-departmental investigation  to  determine  whether
                 there will be any unintended  consequences  which  will  be
                 brought about by the repeal of the subordinate  legislation
                 that has been kept  alive  by  sections  5  and  8  of  the
                 Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act, 1991, and on
                 progress made in identifying, repealing  or  amending  such
                 subordinate legislation, or enacting  new  legislation,  as
                 may be required by the circumstances.
             iv) The Department of Justice and  Constitutional  Development,
                 having undertaken a preliminary investigation  to  identify
                 possible  authorities  in  relation  to   the   subordinate
                 legislation referred  to  in  paragraph  (iii)  above,  has
                 produced the attached table containing the results of  this
                 investigation.  The  Committee  consequently  requests  the
                 Department, immediately after  the  National  Assembly  has
                 voted on the Bill, to bring this table to the attention  of
                 all role-players who might possibly be responsible for  the
                 administration of any  subordinate  legislation  which  has
                 been kept alive by sections 5 and 8  of  the  Abolition  of
                 Racially Based Land Measures Act, 1991, requesting them  to
                 either repeal  or  amend  this  legislation  or  enact  new
                 legislation, as may be required by the circumstances before
                 the expiry of the sunset clause of 31 July 2006.


             The Committee considered clause 3 of the  Bill  as  introduced
             into  Parliament,  dealing  with  the  manner   in   which   a
             traditional leader can bind a traditional community for his or
              her personal  obligations.   The  Committee  noted  that  the
             concept dealt with in this clause   had  its  origins  in  the
             Black  Administration  Act,  1927,  which  is   a   piece   of
             legislation  that  promoted  Apartheid   and   the   Committee
             expressed the view that a provision of this nature seems to be
             at  odds  with  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution  and   more
             specifically the Bill of Rights.   The  Committee  raised  the
             question whether a provision of this nature  is  necessary  or
             desirable in a constitutional  dispensation  and  consequently
             suggested that the clause be deleted after the  Department  of
             Provincial and Local Government indicated that it did not feel
             strongly that the clause remain in the  Bill.   The  Committee
             nevertheless invited the Department of  Provincial  and  Local
             Government, in conjunction with the provinces in question,  to
             investigate the matter further  and  to  submit  any  proposed
             legislation to Parliament or to the  Provincial  Legislatures,
             should this appear to be necessary.


 Report to be considered.

2.    Fifty-Eighth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
      Unauthorized Expenditure (Government Communication and Information
      Services), dated 14 September 2005:

      UNAUTHORIZED EXPENDITURE FROM PREVIOUS YEARS


      Background


      The Committee notes the unauthorized expenditure totaling R1 591
      000.00 incurred during the 2003/04 financial year and reports as
      follows:


      2003/04 Financial year


      (a)  R1 591 000.00 over-expenditure in the recurrent budget of the
      Department.


      In oral evidence provided by the National Treasury on the above-
      mentioned instances of unauthorized expenditure, the National Treasury
      confirmed that:


    ❑ Services for the expenditure were received to the satisfaction of the
      department;
    ❑ No individual benefited from such expenditure and;
    ❑ Control measures are in place to prevent this from reoccurring.


      Recommendation

      In light of the above, the Committee recommends that Parliament
      approve the amount of R1 591 000.00 incurred during the 2003/04
      financial year.


      The Committee reviewed the written evidence submitted by the
      Department and is satisfied that it is implementing measures to
      prevent a reoccurrence. The Committee will monitor the Department’s
      progress in this regard.


      In addition, the Committee wishes to point out that Parliament has
      ensured that the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) contains
      provisions aimed at strict budgetary discipline. All future instances
      of unauthorized expenditure will therefore be thoroughly scrutinized
      in terms of sections 34, 38 and 81 of the PFMA.

Report to be considered.

3.    Fifty-Ninth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
      Unauthorized Expenditure (Presidency), dated 14 September 2005:

      UNAUTHORIZED EXPENDITURE FROM PREVIOUS YEARS


      Background


      The Committee notes the unauthorized expenditure totaling R491 210.99
      incurred during the 1998/99 financial year and unauthorized
      expenditure totaling R2 569 000.00 incurred during the 2002/03
      financial year, and reports as follows:


      1998/99 Financial year

      a) R139 118.86 was incurred as a result of non-compliance with
      procurement procedures and regulations.


      b) R270 480.03 was incurred as a result of non-compliance with
      treasury regulations.


       c) R81 612.10 was incurred as a result of non-compliance with
   procurement procedures.


      2002/03 Financial year


      c) R2 569 000.00 was incurred as a result of overspending on the vote.


      In oral evidence provided by the National Treasury on the above-
      mentioned instances of unauthorized expenditure, the National Treasury
      confirmed that:


       ❑ Services for the expenditure were received to the satisfaction of
         the department;
       ❑ No individual benefited from such expenditure and;
       ❑ Control measures are in place to prevent this from reoccurring.


      Recommendation


      In light of the above, the Committee recommends that Parliament
      approve the amount of R491 210.99 relating to the 1998/99 financial
      year and the amount of R2 569 000.00 relating to the 2002/03 financial
      year.


      Notwithstanding the above recommendation, the Committee views lack of
      adherence to State Tender Board directives with concern. The Committee
      will monitor the department’s progress in this regard.


      In addition, the Committee wishes to point out that Parliament has
      ensured that the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) contains
      provisions aimed at strict budgetary discipline. All future instances
      of unauthorized expenditure will therefore be thoroughly scrutinized
      in terms of sections 34, 38 and 81 of the PFMA.

Report to be considered.

4.    Sixtieth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
      Unauthorized Expenditure (Department of Home Affairs), dated 14
      September 2005:

      UNAUTHORIZED EXPENDITURE FROM PREVIOUS YEARS


      Background


      The Committee notes the unauthorized expenditure totaling R4 682
      751.20 incurred during the 2000/01 financial year and reports as
      follows:


      2000/01 Financial year


     a)  R388 842.60 was incurred as a result of non-compliance with State
        Tender Board directives in procuring the services of Chubb
        Protection Services (Pty) Ltd
     b)  b) R4 293 908.60 incurred for the transportation of deportees by
        air without prior approval from the State Tender Board.


      In oral evidence provided by the National Treasury on the above-
      mentioned instances of unauthorized expenditure, the National Treasury
      confirmed that:


          ❑ Services for the expenditure were received to the satisfaction
            of the department;
          ❑ No individual benefited from such expenditure and;
          ❑ Control measures are in place to prevent this from
            reoccurring.


      Recommendation


      In light of the above, the Committee recommends that Parliament
      approve the amount of R4 682 751.20 incurred during the 2000/01
      financial year.


      Notwithstanding the above recommendation, the Committee views lack of
      adherence to State Tender Board directives with concern. The Committee
      will monitor the department’s progress in this regard.


      In addition, the Committee wishes to point out that Parliament has
      ensured that the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) contains
      provisions aimed at strict budgetary discipline. All future instances
      of unauthorized expenditure will therefore be thoroughly scrutinized
      in terms of sections 34, 38 and 81 of the PFMA.


Report to be considered.

5.    Sixty-First Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
      Unauthorized Expenditure (South African Management Development
      Institute), dated 14 September 2005:

      UNAUTHORIZED EXPENDITURE FROM PREVIOUS YEARS


      Background


      The Committee notes the unauthorized expenditure totaling R4 370
      000.00 incurred during the 2002/03 financial year and reports as
      follows:


      2002/03 Financial year


        a) R4 370 000.00 was incurred when the Department overspent on
           certain programs. The main reason was that donor funding for the
           programs ended and the Department had to continue funding them.




      In oral evidence provided by the National Treasury on the above-
      mentioned instances of unauthorized expenditure, the National Treasury
      confirmed that:


       ❑ Services for the expenditure were received to the satisfaction of
         the Department;
       ❑ No individual benefited from such expenditure and;
       ❑ Control measures are in place to prevent this from reoccurring.


      Recommendation
      In light of the above, the Committee recommends that Parliament
      approve the amount of R4 370 000.00 incurred during the 2002/03
      financial year.


      Notwithstanding the above recommendation, the Committee views lack of
      adherence to State Tender Board directives with concern. The Committee
      will monitor the Department’s progress in this regard.


      In addition, the Committee wishes to point out that Parliament has
      ensured that the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) contains
      provisions aimed at strict budgetary discipline. All future instances
      of unauthorized expenditure will therefore be thoroughly scrutinized
      in terms of sections 34, 38 and 81 of the PFMA.


Report to be considered.

6.    Sixty-Second Report of  Standing Committee on Public on Public
      Accounts: South African Diamond Board, dated 14 September 2005:

          1. Introduction

      The   Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts,  having   heard   and
      considered evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-
      General on the financial statements of the South African Diamond Board
      (Board) for the year ended 31 March 2003/ 2004  tabled  in  Parliament
      and reffered to it, reports as follows:

   2. Investigation relating to the export and sale of diamonds in terms  of
      the Diamonds Act, 1986 (page 29-31 of the Annual Report)

      The  Committee  noted  with   concern   the   significant   weaknesses
      highlighted in the audit report with regards to the export and sale of
      diamonds. The following issues were raised:


        a) validity of exemptions given under section  63  of  the  Act  to
           diamond producers and dealers by virtue  of  agreements  entered
           into in terms of section 59 of the Act;
     b) limited documentation for Section 59 agreements;
     c) the drastic decline in export duties;
        d) differences and disputes between the Government Diamond Valuator
           (GDV) and  the  SA  Diamond  Board  relating  to  the  role  and
           functions of the GD; and
     e) The length of time the above issue remain unresolved.


      Having heard and considered the views of National Treasury, SA Diamond
      Board, the Department of Minerals and Energy and the  Auditor-General,
      the Committee is  of  the  view  that  this  matter  has  been  unduly
      prolonged.


      The Committee is aware  of  the  many  administrative  initiatives  to
      resolve these issues  but  notes  the  failure  of  these  to  produce
      positive result.


      The Committee therefore recommends that:


      a)    the relevant state institutions initiate legal proceedings with
             a view towards resolving the section 59 exemption in question
             – a special meeting should be convened by the Auditor General
             for this purpose within 30 days after this report has been
             adopted by Parliament;
      b)          the Board ensures that all South African produced diamonds
             be valued in SA on a fair market basis;
      c)     the  Board  strengthens   its   efforts   to   increase   local
             beneficiation of SA diamonds; and
      d)    the Board confers with the Department of Minerals and Energy  to
             finalise and implement the new legislation.


      The  Committee  expresses  its  disappointment   at   the   inadequate
      representation from the Department  of  Minerals  and  Energy  at  the
      hearing and insists that future representation  be  at  an  Accounting
      Officer level.


   3. Conclusion


     The Committee requests the Board to furnish it with a  progress  report
     covering all the above-mentioned  issues  within  60  days  after  this
     report has been adopted by Parliament.


Report to be considered.

7.    Sixty-Third Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  POSLEC-
      SETA, dated 14 September 2005:

      1. INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of the Police, Private Security, Legal and
         Correctional Services Sector Education and Training Authority
         (POSLEC- SETA) for the year ended 31 March 2004, tabled in
         Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

      2. AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the


         Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
         equally unqualified.

      3. CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
         Accounting Authority of the POSLEC-SETA is necessary for the
         financial year under review.
         The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the
         Report of the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.

8.    Sixty-Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  Primary
      Agriculture  Education  and  Training  Authority  (PAETA),  dated   14
      September 2005:


1. INTRODUCTION
           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Primary  Agriculture  Education  and
           Training Authority (PAETA) for the year  ended  31  March  2004,
           tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

      2.    AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by
           the
           Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will  be
           equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of  the  PAETA  is  necessary  for  the
           financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor-General.

Report to be considered.

9.     Sixty-Fifth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on   Public   Accounts:
      Financial and Fiscal Commission, dated 14 September 2005:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements of the Financial & Fiscal Commission (FFC)
           for the year ended 31 March 2004, tabled in Parliament and
           referred to it, reports as follows:


      2.    AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by
           the independent auditor, and trusts that future audit opinions
           will be equally unqualified.

      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with
           the Accounting Authority of the Financial and Fiscal Commission
           is necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the
           Report of the
           Independent Auditors.

Report to be considered.

10.    Sixty-Sixth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on   Public   Accounts:
      Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA), dated 14
      September 2005:

1. INTRODUCTION
           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Independent Communications Authority
           of South Africa (ICASA) for the year ended 31 March 2004, tabled
           in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions shall
           be equally unqualified.


           However, the Committee submitted a number of  questions  to  the
           Accounting Authority of the ICASA on matters, which according to
           the Committee, required clarification.


           Having considered the  written  replies  from  the  entity,  the
           Committee  is  satisfied  that  the  Accounting   Authority   is
           attending to the matters in question, except for the interest on
           late payment of VAT. The Committee will refer  ICASA's  response
           to the National Treasury for its view on the funding problems of
           VAT liability.


           The Committee recommends that it be updated  with  the  progress
           report and expects the  Accounting  Authority  to  expeditiously
           rectify the issues in question.


3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of  the  view  that,  except  for  the  aspects
           highlighted above no further  interaction  with  the  accounting
           authority of the ICASA is necessary at this stage.
           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.

11.   Sixty-Seventh Report of Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  The
      Council for Scientific and Industrial  Research,  dated  14  September
      2005:

        1.  INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial  Statements  of  The  Council   for   Scientific   and
           Industrial Research (CSIR) for the year  ended  31  March  2004,
           tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


        2.  AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the
           Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
           equally unqualified.


      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the accounting authority  of  the  CSIR  is  necessary  for  the
           financial year under review.

           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor-General


Report to be considered.

12.   Sixty-Eighth Report of Standing Committee on  Public  Accounts:  South
      African Broadcasting Corporation Limited  (SABC), dated  14  September
      2005:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditor  on  the
           Financial  Statements  of   the   South   African   Broadcasting
           Corporation Limited (SABC) for the year  ended  31  March  2004,
           tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

      2.    AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by
           the
           independent auditor, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.

      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority  of  the  SABC  is  necessary  for  the
           financial year under review.
           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the independent auditors.

Report to be considered.

13.   Sixty-Ninth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
      Competition Tribunal, dated 14 September 2005:

      1.   INTRODUCTION

        The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
        Annual  Report  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal (Tribunal) for the
        year ended 31 March 2004, tabled in Parliament  and referred to it,
        reports as follows:

      1.  AUDIT OPINION

        The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
        Auditor-General, and trusts that future  audit  opinions  shall  be
        equally unqualified.


      3.   GENERAL MATTERS

        The  Committee  noted  with  concern  that  the  Tribunal  incurred
           wasteful expenditure.
        Although it has indicated that  there  are  now  systems  in  place
           regarding fruitless and
        wasteful expenditure. The Committee is of the view  that  this  was
           due to negligence and that
        the Accounting  Authority  should  have  taken  steps  against  the
           individuals concerned.


     1. RECOMMENDATION

        The Committee recommends that the Accounting  Authority  report  to
        Parliament within two weeks after this report has been  adopted  by
        Parliament  on steps taken with regard to section 38 (1)(g) and (h)
        of the PFMA.

     2. CONCLUSION

        The  Committee  is  of  the  view  that  except  for  the   aspects
        highlighted above no further interaction with the Tribunal would be
        necessary for the financial year under review.


        The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
        Report of the Auditor-General.

Report to be considered.

14.   Seventieth Report of Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  South
      African Veterinary Council, dated 14 September 2005:

       1.   INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
Annual Report and the
           Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
           of the South African Veterinary Council for the year ended 31
           March 2004, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
           follows:


2.    AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
         independent auditors, and trusts that future audit  opinions  will
         be equally unqualified.

     3.     CONCLUSION

        The Committee is of the view that no further interaction  with  the
        Accounting Authority of the South  African  Veterinary  Council  is
        necessary for the financial year under review.


        The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
        Report of the Independent Auditors.


Report to be considered.

15.   Seventy-First Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Local
      Government Water and Related Services Seta, dated 14 September 2005:

       1. INTRODUCTION
          The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the
          Annual Report and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
          Financial Statements of the Local Government  Water  And  Related
          Services Seta (LGWSETA) for the year ended 31 March 2004,  tabled
          in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

       2. AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
         Auditor-General, and trusts that future  audit  opinions  will  be
         equally unqualified.

       3. GENERAL MATTERS

          The Committee noted  that  LGWSETA  have  not  submitted  written
          reasons as to why it should not be amalgamated with another SETA.
          The Committee expects this issue to be addressed as a  matter  of
          urgency and will monitor this concern in the next Annual Report.


       4. CONCLUSION


          The  Committee  is  of  the  view  that  except  for  the  aspect
          highlighted above; no further interaction with the LGWSETA  would
          be necessary for the financial year under review.


          The Committee therefore awaits the next  Annual  Report  and  the
          Report of the Auditor-General.

Report to be considered.

16.   Seventy-Second Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
       Financial Services Board, dated 14 September 2005:

         1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual
           Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements of
           the Financial Services Board (FSB) for the year ended 31 March
           2004, tabled
           in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


         2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by
           the
           Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
           equally
           unqualified.

         3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with
           the Accounting
           Authority of the Financial Services Board (FSB) is necessary for
           the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the
           Report of the
           Auditor-General.

Report to be considered.

17.    Seventy-Third  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:
      Clothing, Textile, Footwear and Leather Seta, dated 14 September 2005:



   1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of  the  Clothing,  Textile,  Footwear  and
           Leather Seta (CTFL- SETA) for the  year  ended  31  March  2004,
           tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

      2.    AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by
           the
           Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will  be
           equally unqualified.


      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the CTFL-SETA is necessary  for  the
           financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.

18.   Seventy-Fourth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:
      Airports Company South Africa Ltd (ACSA), dated 14 September 2005:

   1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on  the
           Financial Statements of the Airports Company  South  Africa  Ltd
           (ACSA) for the year ended 31 March 2004,  tabled  in  Parliament
           and referred to it, reports as follows:

       2.   AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the independent auditors, and trusts that future audit  opinions
           will be equally unqualified.

      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the ACSA is necessary for the financial year under review.

           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Independent Auditors.


Report to be considered.

19.   Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) on the 2005
      Australasian Council of Public Accounts Committees (ACPAC) 8th
      Biennial Conference, held at Parliament House, Brisbane, Australia,
      dated 14 September 2005:

      A.    Background


           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) was invited by
           the Australasian Council of Public Accounts Committees (ACPAC)
           to participate at a Conference that took place from 6 to 8
           February 2005, at Parliament House, Brisbane, Australia. The
           main theme of the Conference was “Current Challenges Facing
           Public Accounts Committees”.


      B.    The delegation

           SCOPA was represented by four of its members and control
           committee secretary. The multi-party delegation consisted of: Mr
           PJA Gerber (ANC), Mr RS Ndou (ANC), Ms TV Tobias (ANC), Dr SM
           Van Dyk (DA) and Mr L Pakati (Official).

       C.   Objectives of the visit
           The objective of the visit was informed by the need for the
           Committee to continuously enhance its oversight capacity, and
           build on its knowledge capital by exchanging ideas with its
           counterparts, both at domestic and international levels. It was
           anticipated that the knowledge gleaned at the Conference would
           go a long way towards empowering members in order to continue to
           exercise their oversight function from an enlightened
           perspective that takes cognizance of global trends.

       D.   Significance of the Conference to the Committee

           Conference papers were delivered by Members from various
           Parliaments falling within the ACPAC jurisdiction, as well
           Parliamentarians from South Africa’s ten Legislatures, and
           experts from tertiary institutions in Australia. All themes
           attempted to deal with topical issues relating, largely, to the
           oversight role of Public Accounts Committees, and provided
           recommendations as a way forward.

       E.   Flight delays

           Due to flight delays caused by South African Airways and Quantas
           airline, the delegation joined the conference in the second
           session of the first day of the proceedings, thereby missing the
           first morning session.

       F.   Conference Proceedings and Themes

           Key themes that the delegation participated in on the first day
           of the Conference included:
             - Information and the public service – balancing privacy,
               confidentiality and accountability
             - Trends in performance reporting
             - Accountability issues relating to government outsourcing

           Second day presentations were made on the following themes:


             - Improving governance and accountability including government
               corporations and heads of agencies
             - Accountability of non-profit organizations: The Queensland
               Chart of Accounts project was used as a case study
             - Public private partnerships
             - Risk management – the relationship between planning, risk
               and accountability
             - Public liability changes
             - Report on the establishment of the public sector governance
               and accountability
             - Research centre.

       G.   Conference Papers Presented

        1. Information and public service – balancing privacy,
           confidentiality and accountability: Hon Jim Wilkinson (Member of
           Joint Standing committee on Public Accounts Tasmania)

           The paper raised critical issues around the matter of
           confidentiality and accountability. The main argument was that
           there have been claims that governments and the public service
           are reluctant to release information to the public. The paper,
           however, recognizes that there is a clear need for some
           information to be kept confidential for reasons relating to
           privacy and commercial considerations. However, the decision of
           what legitimately falls within these categories and what could
           be released without compromising privacy cannot reside solely
           with the public service or government. The Auditor General,
           Parliament and the Public Accounts Committee have the
           responsibility to intervene as part of their oversight function.


           The paper provided examples where, in Tasmania, the Public
           Accounts Committee successfully intervened and compelled
           government to release information that was classified as
           extremely confidential and could course harm to the public.


           The paper concluded by stating that systems should be  developed
           to allow the public to be  reassured  that  the  government  and
           public service are not the sole adjudicators on the  release  of
           information; that it is essential  that  the  decision  to  make
           information public is independently tested, e.g. by Parliament.

   1. Trends in performance reporting: Auditors General Panel


           The theme focused on trends in performance reporting. Its
           central thesis was that output based budgeting and management is
           a useful tool and yet is under used. It argues that government
           departments are still locked in the thinking that they are
           producers of goods and services rather than consumers of goods
           and services. In this sense, they do not often look for value
           for money in what they do.

           The same argument applies to Parliaments. When scrutinizing
           government spending, they tend to focus largely on inputs and
           processes as opposed to outputs i.e. quality of services
           rendered. The paper recommends that Public Accounts Committees
           should begin to focus on the purpose of expenditure, performance
           indicators, benchmarking, targets and the relevance of these
           targets. They should also consider providing incentives to good
           performers.


           The paper concludes by recommending that the PACs should ask
           critical questions such as: does a program add value to life, is
           there an alternative way to better carry it out using the same
           resources, is it sustainable, and what should be prioritized?

        3. Accountability Issues relating to government outsourcing:
           Proffessor Neal Ryan (Head of School of Management, Queensland
           University of Technology)


           The paper was presented by Professor Neal Ryan of the Queensland
           University of Technology. It focused on research the university
           has conducted over the years. The research projects focus on
           agreements that the Australian government has entered into with
           non – profit service providers.


           The objective of the research is to ascertain whether the
           government is able to get value for its money subsequent to the
           awarding of contracts, and whether the outcomes meet political
           objectives and whether the public benefits over the private
           sector? It concludes by asserting that so far research indicates
           that governments in Australia and several other countries in the
           world tend to focus more on inputs and less on outputs, and the
           quality thereof. For this reason there is an increasing need for
           a shift in this kind of paradigm

        4.  Improving  governance  in  public  institutions:  Hon   Clayton
           Cosgrove, Chairperson of Finance and Expenditure Committee,  New
           Zealand)

           The paper was presented by the Hon, Clayton Cosgrove,
           chairperson of Finance and Expenditure Committee in Wellington,
           New Zealand. It argues that while New Zealand is regarded as a
           country that enjoys a high degree of transparency and
           accountability in relation to its public institutions, and
           relatively high quality governance, there have been a number of
           challenges to the quality of governance of public institutions.
           This led to a call to strengthen a number of areas in the public
           management system. The presentation mentioned a number of policy
           initiatives undertaken in this regard, such as:


           The Ministerial Advisory Group:  In  July  2001,  a  Ministerial
           Advisory Group was appointed by the Prime Minister and Ministers
           of State Services and Finance to look  at  New  Zealand’s  whole
           public management system to determine how it was  responding  to
           the  needs  and   expectations   of   citizens,   business   and
           communities. In its November  2001  Report  the  advisory  group
           finding was that New  Zealand’s  public  management  system  was
           providing only a reasonable platform to work from, and that some
           significant shifts in emphasis were needed to better respond  to
           the needs of the future.


           Departmental Statement of  Intent:  Another  effective  tool  to
           improve  service  delivery  in   public   management   was   the
           development  of  departmental  statements  of  intent  for   all
           government departments. This happened  for  the  first  time  in
           December 2001 wherein the Cabinet approved the roll-out of  this
           approach  to  planning  and  reporting  on   the   business   of
           departments.


           Legislative change: Public Finance Bill: The Public Finance Bill
           was introduced by the Government on  3  December  2003  and  was
           referred to Finance and Expenditure  Committee  on  6  September
           2004.  The Bill became law on 16 December 2004. The Act set  out
           reporting  requirements  for  Departments.  The  Act   provides,
           amongst other things, that the Chief Executive of  a  department
           is responsible for the financial performance of  the  department
           and for ensuring that the  department  complies  with  statutory
           reporting requirements.


           Parliament: The presentation concluded by placing parliaments at
           the centre stage of the accountability process. It does that  by
           its emphasis on the fact that democracy  entails  accountability
           of the excise of power. Such  accountability  has  a  number  of
           facets, one of  which  is  the  executive  being  answerable  to
           Parliament for its use of public resources to achieve  specified
           outcomes.  In  this  connection,  the  Public  Finance  Act  was
           considered  instrumental  in  establishing  or  redefining   the
           mechanisms  that  enable  Parliament  to  carry  out   effective
           scrutiny of executive.


        5. Risk management: The relationship between planning, risk and
           accountability: Hon Len Kiely, Chairperson Public accounts
           Committee, Northern Territory)

           Risk management is relevant to Public Accounts Committees
           because of the MPs’ responsibilities to look at the
           effectiveness of public sector agencies on behalf of Parliament.
           Risk management is a central component of good management
           practice as well as an important means by which organizations
           demonstrate accountability to their stakeholders. Recent
           corporate collapses in Australia illustrate the continuing
           importance of effective risk management not only with regards
           the private sector but also with regards to the public sector.




           Risk management is an essential component of good corporate
           governance and Audit Committees can play an important role in
           ensuring that risk management is prioritized. For example, an
           effective audit committee can help the CEO of a department or
           the board of directors of a statutory authority or state owned
           cooperation with financial reporting, risk management and the
           internal and external control system.


           According to the presentation, the audit committee provides an
           opportunity where the CEO of a department or the directors, the
           management and the auditors can meet together to deal with
           issues relating to the management of risks and with financial
           reporting obligations.


           By taking a positive, proactive and holistic approach to risk
           management, organizations stand to reap the many benefits risk
           management has to offer, including:
         - Improved planning, performance and effectiveness;
         - Economy, efficiency and exploitation of opportunities
         - Improved stakeholder relations and enhanced reputation;
         - Director/executive protection; and
         - Accountability, assurance and governance.


        6. Public liability changes: Hon C Campbell (Victoria Public
Accounts Committee)
           In Australia, the debate around the matter of public liability
           funding was fuelled by the 11 September bombings in New York
           where a considerable number of Australians were victims of the
           attacks. There was a subsequent need to amend legislation
           dealing with public liability. The legislation has been in
           operation for more than two years and the presentation
           considered how this legislation is affecting both the
           availability and cost of insurance in the manner intended by the
           legislatures.


           Since in Australia the debate about the effectiveness of the
           legislation has continued unabated, the paper reminds the
           Economic and Finance Committee of its obligation to contribute
           to the debate from the perspective of the legislature that
           initially enacted the changes.


           The paper looked at the process and considered future options
           that are based on best practice. It this regard it mentioned
           that there was a Ministerial Forum on Insurance, which was
           scheduled to meet on 25 March 2005 to discuss the impact of the
           reforms. In addition, the Economic and Finance Committee has
           sought information on models of dealing with this issue around
           the world. One scheme of interest has been the New Zealand
           Accident Compensation Scheme (ACS), which provides accident
           cover for all New Zealand citizens, residents and temporary
           visitors. The scheme is funded by premiums paid by employers and
           earners, and by drivers through fuel levies and license fees.


           The presentation concludes by mentioning that, increasingly,
           reforms are necessary in order to improve the provision and
           affordability of insurance and the quality and security of the
           lives of Australians.
      7.    Public Sector Governance and Accountability Research Centre: La
           Trobe University (Professor Kerry Jacobs and Dr Bill Stent)

           The Centre prides itself on being the first institution in the
           world to provide academic support to Public Accounts Committee
           Members. It is an independent resource of information for
           Members. It conducts workshops and conferences for Members and
           staff. It has established an extensive network of contacts/
           relations with organizations such as: the Commonwealth
           Parliamentary Association, Commonwealth Secretariat, Accounting
           Profession firms, World Bank, etc. It also organized the ICPAC
           Conference in Singapore in 2002.


           The centre’s vision is to strengthen parliamentary democracy,
           synthesis of practical and academic skills and to generally
           serve the needs of parliamentarians and parliamentary staff.


           It seeks to achieve the following;


          - Exchange information across regions
          - Develop accounting standards and approaches
          - Best practice
          - Develop training material for PAC members and staff.


       8.   International Committee Activity Reports

           The following Public Accounts Committees presented papers
           detailing, inter alia, their respective mandates, activities,
           membership and other internal arrangements:


           a) Republic of South Africa – Hon, PJA Gerber
           b) Free State – Hon, A P Oosthuizen
           c) Limpompo – Hon, Dr H E Mateme
           d) North West Province – Hon M N Matladi
           e) Western Cape – Hon, J Gelderbloem
           f) Gauteng –  Hon, M Seloane
           g) PNG – PAC – Hon, J Hickey
           h) Northern Territory PAC (New Zealand) – Hon C Cosgrove
           i) New South Wales – Hon, M Brown
           j) Legislative Assembly for the Australian Capital Territory –
              Hon, S Mikak
           k) Tasmania – Hon, H Hobart
           l) Queensland PAC – Hon, G Fenlon
           m) Victorian PAC – Hon, C Campbell
           n) Papua New Guinea PAC – Hon, T Hanley
           o) South Australian Economic and Finance Committee – Hon, G
              Thompson
           p) Tasmanian Joint Standing Committee on Public Accounts – Hon,
              T Fletcher.


       9.   Auditors General Present


        a) Mr Des Pearson – Western Australia
        b) Ms Wendy Venter – Assistant Auditor General of New Zealand
        c) Mr Shauket Fakie – Auditor General of South Africa
        d) Mr Wayne Cameron – Auditor General of Victoria.
        e) Mr Junias Kandjeke – Auditor General

       10.  Conclusions and Way Forward: Hon Garry Fenlon (Chairperson of
           the Queensland Public Accounts Committee)

           Mr Fenlon gave a summary of the presentations and briefly
           suggested issues to be considered at future conferences. He
           observed that it was clear that there was diversity with regards
           to the role and functions of Public Accounts Committees around
           the world. However, there were fundamental functions that Public
           Accounts Committees must perform and, for this reason, they must
           have certain powers in order to perform those functions. For
           example, the powers to obtain information, to take evidence and
           to inquire, must be regarded as very fundamental.


           He added that an issue that needed to be considered for future
           debate relates to the need to give PACs constitutional security.
           In essence, their powers should be guaranteed in the
           Constitutions of countries and states/provinces so that a
           government of the day is prevented from tampering with these
           powers. He thought that the role of PACs is so important that it
           must be given that very strong foundation as part of the fabric
           of the constitution of a country.


       11.  Summary of Observations and Insights Obtained by the Delegation


           The delegation gained profound insight into the common
           challenges facing most Public Accounts Committees. In this
           regard the following observations were made:
             a) The increasing need to encourage internal Auditing in the
                public sector and to implement effective risk management
                strategies. Risk management is an essential component of
                good corporate governance and Audit Committee can play an
                important role in ensuring that risk management is
                prioritized.
             b) The need to strengthen forensic auditing. The Office of the
                Auditor General to play a prominent role in this regard.
             c) Public Accounts Committees to encourage government
                departments to move away from Cash Basis to Accrual
                Accounting. Accrual accounting is more desirable because it
                records all transactions when they occur and not when they
                are paid for as in cash basis of accounting. Therefore the
                consumption of resources represents the true state of equity
                available in government.
             d) Public Accounts Committees should encourage performance
                auditing to ensure good value for money. The goal of the
                performance auditing would be to improve programs and
                operations, saving taxpayers money, providing better
                services to the public and obtaining the best value for
                money. However, the initiative is faced with a number of
                challenges. The major constraint being the lack of funds and
                sufficient personnel at the office of the Auditor General.
             e) The need to fight corruption in the Public Sector by
                promoting openness and transparency. There was an agreement
                that corruption thrives in environment of secrecy.
             f) Research capacity to assist the PAC Committees in holding
                the government departments accountable.
             g) Enhance accountability by placing Parliament at the centrer
                of the accountability chain. Such accountability has a
                number of facets, one of which is the executive being
                answerable to Parliament for its use of public resources.
             h) The need to track and make follow-ups on implementation of
                PAC recommendations.
             i) Public Accounts Committees to have access to information and
                powers to make enquiries and taking evidence.
             j) The need to look into the issue of constitutionalsing the
                powers of the Public Accounts Committees. This means that
                the powers of the PAC should be guaranteed in the
                Constitutions of countries and states/provinces.




       12.  Acknowledgements

           The delegation would want to thank the organizers of the
           Conference, especially the ACPAC Secretariat for making the
           attendance of the Committee possible.  Special thanks goes to
           the Hon, Gary Fenlon for inviting the Committee to participate
           at the Conference.


Report to be considered.

20.   Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Appointment of Deputy Public
      Protector, dated 12 October 2005:

      The Ad Hoc Committee on Appointment of Deputy Public Protector, having
      considered the matter of the filling of the vacancy of Deputy Public
      Protector, referred to it, reports as follows:


      The Ad Hoc Committee on Appointment of Deputy Public Protector was
      appointed by the House on 17 May 2005 to make a nomination to the
      House in order to enable it to recommend to the President in terms of
      section 2A(1) of the Public Protector Act (Act No 23 of 1994) a person
      for appointment as Deputy Public Protector, reports as follows:


      The Committee invited the public to submit nominations to it.
      Nominations were received in respect of 16 candidates.


      The following candidates were short listed and interviewed on 10, 11
      and 12 October 2005:


      1. Prof. Byron Fikile Ndaki
      2. Adv Mamiki Shai
      3. Mr Roshan Rai Dehal
      4. Mr Anandroy Ramdaw
      5. Dr Uys van Zÿl
      6. Mr Vasavan Samuel
      7. Mr Raynmond Stanley Zungu
      8. Mr Mokgale Norman Moabi
      9. Adv. Francois Rousseau
     10. Adv Wynand Frederick Bezuidenhout


      Having interviewed the candidates, the Committee recommends that the
      House, in accordance with section 2A of the Act, make a recommendation
      to the President that the following candidate be appointed as Deputy
      Public Protector:

        Adv Mamiki Shai

Report to be considered.

                          THURSDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 20 September 2005 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section
         75 Bill:


            i) Auditing Profession Bill [B 31 – 2005] (National Assembly –
               sec 75)


2.    Membership of Committees


      1) The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
         Committees, viz:


        Defence:

        Appointed: Montsitsi, Mr S D



National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees
     1) The following changes have been made to the membership of Portfolio
        Committees, viz:


        Arts and Culture:

        Appointed: Jacobus, Ms L



        Defence:


        Appointed: Tobias, Ms T V


        Provincial and Local Government:


        Appointed: Tsenoli, Mr S L

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

   1. The Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
      Development on the Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of
      Certain Laws Bill, which was published in the  Announcements, Tablings
      and Committee Reports of 12 October 2005 (p 2266), referred to a table
      containing results of an investigation into subordinate legislation.
      That table is printed in full hereunder:

 THE POSITION OF DIFFERENT CATEGORIES OF SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION MADE UNDER
       THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT, 1927, WHICH IS STILL REFLECTED IN
                      BUTTERWORTHS AS BEING APPLICABLE:


|REGULATION  |GOVERNMENT    |DATE        |CONTENTS OF SUBORDINATE  |PARTICULARS     |POSSIBLE RESPONSIBLE OR       |
|GAZETTE NO  |NOTICE NO     |            |LEGISLATION              |RELATING TO     |ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY       |
|            |(P)           |            |                         |ASSIGNMENT OF   |COMMENTS ON USAGE AND LEGAL   |
|            |PROCLAMATION  |            |                         |SUBORDINATE     |IMPLICATIONS OF               |
|            |              |            |                         |LEGISLATION TO  |THE REPEAL ?                  |
|            |              |            |                         |PROVINCES       |                              |
|1.  Subordinate legislation (proclamations) made under section 25 of the Black Administration Act, 1927, kept     |
|alive by virtue of section 5(2) of the Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act, 1991 (Act 108 of 1991) and  |
|still reflected in Butterworths                                                                                   |
|(Section 25 was repealed by section 5(1) of the Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act, 1991 (Act 108 of   |
|1991).  Section 25 originally empowered the Governor-General to proclaim laws for scheduled native areas, that is |
|by proclamation)                                                                                                  |
|            |R110          |1957        |Regulations Prescribing  |Assigned (whole)|Department of Provincial and  |
|            |              |            |the Duties, Powers,      |to a competent  |Local Government (DPLG) and   |
|            |              |            |Privileges and Conditions|authority within|relevant provinces            |
|            |              |            |of service of Chief and  |the government  |                              |
|            |              |            |Headmen                  |of the Provinces|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of Eastern Cape,|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Eastern         |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Transvaal,      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |KwaZulu/Natal,  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Northern        |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Province and    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Orange Free     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |State under     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution,   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1993, Gazette No|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15951,  Proc.139|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of 1994 dated 9 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |September 1994. |                              |
|140         |R293 (P)      |16/11/1962  |Regulations for the      |Proc. R293 of   |Department of Land Affairs    |
|            |              |            |Administration and       |1962 assigned   |(DLA) (security of tenure,    |
|            |              |            |Control of Township in   |(whole) to North|upgrading land rights and     |
|            |              |            |Bantu Areas –            |West and Eastern|registration) will coordinate |
|            |              |            |Establishment of         |Cape, under     |the process .                 |
|            |              |            |Townships, Ethnic        |Section 235 (8) |Department of Housing (DOH)   |
|            |              |            |Character of Population  |of the Interim  |DPLG and Provinces  (control  |
|            |              |            |of Township, Township    |Constitution    |of Township0                  |
|            |              |            |administration etc.      |Gazette No.     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15813,  Proc.   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |R110 and 111 of |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1994 dated 17   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |June 1994.      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |                |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Proc. R293 of   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1962 was also   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |assigned        |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |(excluding those|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |provisions (if  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |any) which fall |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |outside the     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |functional areas|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |specified in    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Schedule 6 to   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |the Constitution|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |or which relate |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |to matters      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |referred to in  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |paragraphs (a)  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |and (e) of      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 126 (3) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the          |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution) to|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Eastern         |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Transvaal       |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |(Mpumalanga),   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |KwaZulu/Natal   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |and Northern    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Transvaal       |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |(Limpopo) under |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution,   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Gazette No. 1604|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |, Proc . R162 of|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1994 dated 31   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |October 1994.   |                              |
|415         |R5            |11/1/1963   |Regulations  for the     |Assigned to     |Department Of Water Affairs   |
|            |              |            |Control of Irrigation    |Eastern Cape,   |and Forestry (DWAF) or        |
|            |              |            |Schemes in Bantu Area    |Limpopo ,       |Department of Agriculture     |
|            |              |            |                         |Mpumalanga and  |(NDA) and partly              |
|            |              |            |                         |North West under|DLA                           |
|            |              |            |                         |Section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Gazette No.     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15813,  Proc.   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |R109,110, 111   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |and 112 of 1994 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |dated 17 June   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1994.           |                              |
|1839        |R192          |8/9/1967    |Regulations for the      |Assigned to     |DLA                           |
|            |              |            |Control of the Residence |Eastern Cape,   |DOH;and                       |
|            |              |            |on and Occupation of     |Limpopo ,       |DPLG and the Relevant         |
|            |              |            |Privately or Tribally-   |Mpumalanga and  |provinces                     |
|            |              |            |owned land in Bantu Areas|North West under|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Gazette No.     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15813,  Proc.   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |R109,110, 111   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |and 112 of 1994 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |dated 17 June   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1994.           |                              |
|1841        |R196          |8/9/1967    |Limitation, Control and  |Assigned to     |NDA                           |
|            |              |            |improvement of Livestock |Eastern Cape,   |DPLG and relevant proinces    |
|            |              |            |and of Pastoral and      |Limpopo ,       |                              |
|            |              |            |Agricultural Resources in|Mpumalanga and  |                              |
|            |              |            |Bantu Areas (Betterment  |North West under|                              |
|            |              |            |Areas Proclamation)      |Section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Gazette No.     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15813,  Proc.   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |R109,110, 111   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |and 112 of 1994 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |dated 17 June   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1994.           |                              |
|1842        |R199          |8/9/1967    |Regulations Relating to  |Assigned (whole)|Department of Public Works    |
|            |              |            |the Protection of Works  |to a competent  |(DPW)                         |
|            |              |            |in Bantu Areas           |authority within|Relevant provinces            |
|            |              |            |                         |the government  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Provinces|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of Eastern Cape,|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Eastern         |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Transvaal,      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |KwaZulu/Natal,  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Northern        |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Province and    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Orange Free     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |State under     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution,   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1993, Gazette No|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15951,  Proc.139|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of 1994 dated 9 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |September 1994. |                              |
|1842        |R200          |8/9/1967    | Regulations relating to |Assigned (whole)|DPLG                          |
|            |              |            |Community Services in    |to a competent  |(Not clear why it was assigned|
|            |              |            |Bantu Areas .  Repealed  |authority within|in 1994  when it was repealed |
|            |              |            |by Proc R95 of 23 June   |the government  |in 1989)                      |
|            |              |            |1989- GG No 11965        |of the Provinces|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of Eastern Cape,|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Eastern         |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Transvaal,      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |KwaZulu/Natal,  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Northern        |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Province and    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Orange Free     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |State under     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution,   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1993, Gazette No|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15951,  Proc.139|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of 1994 dated 9 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |September 1994. |                              |
|2165        |R269          |20/9/1068   |Sanitary Regulations –   |Assigned (whole)|DPLG and Provinces            |
|            |              |            |Rural Bantu Areas        |to a competent  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |authority within|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |the government  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Provinces|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of Eastern Cape,|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Eastern         |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Transvaal,      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |KwaZulu/Natal,  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Northern        |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Province and    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Orange Free     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |State under     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution,   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1993, Gazette No|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15951,  Proc.139|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of 1994 dated 9 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |September 1994. |                              |
|1037        |R300          |18/10/1968  |The Payment by Bantu of  |Assigned to     |DLA                           |
|            |              |            |Rentals for Arable and   |Eastern Cape,   |DPLG  and provinces           |
|            |              |            |Residential allotment and|Limpopo ,       |NDA                           |
|            |              |            |of fees for grazing Stock|Mpumalanga and  |                              |
|            |              |            |on certain Land Owned by |North West under|                              |
|            |              |            |the  South African Bantu |Section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |Trust                    |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Gazette No.     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15813,  Proc.   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |R109,110, 111   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |and 112 of 1994 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |dated 17 June   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1994.           |                              |
|1154        |R188          |11/7/1969   |Bantu Area Land          |Assigned (whole)|DLA – will conduct            |
|            |              |            |Regulations – Freehold   |to a competent  |investigation on registration |
|            |              |            |Tenure, Commonage,       |authority within|issues                        |
|            |              |            |Quitrent Tenure,         |the government  |Comment- can possible be      |
|            |              |            |Permission to Occupy etc.|of the Provinces|repealed                      |
|            |              |            |                         |of Eastern Cape,|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Eastern         |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Transvaal,      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |KwaZulu/Natal,  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Northern        |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Province, North |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |West and Orange |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Free State under|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution,   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1993, Gazette No|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15951,  Proc.139|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of 1994 dated 9 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |September 1994. |                              |
|2589        |R6            |13/1/1978   |Nature Conservation in   |Assigned (whole)|DPLG                          |
|            |              |            |Bantu Areas              |to a competent  |Department of Environmental   |
|            |              |            |                         |authority within|Affairs and Tourism (DEAT)    |
|            |              |            |                         |the government  |Provinces                     |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Provinces|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of Eastern Cape,|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Eastern         |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Transvaal,      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |KwaZulu/Natal,  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Northern        |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Province and    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Orange Free     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |State under     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution,   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1993, Gazette No|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15951,  Proc.139|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of 1994 dated 9 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |September 1994. |                              |
|2940        |R12(P)        |18/1/1980   |Application of certain   |                |Limpopo Provincial Govt.      |
|            |              |            |Acts made by the Lebowa  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Legislative Assembly to  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |apply in Segop's Location|                |                              |
|            |              |            |in the District of Letaba|                |                              |
|2972        |R64(P)        |28/3/1980   |Outstanding moneys and   |                |DLA                           |
|            |              |            |moneys paid in advance in|                |                              |
|            |              |            |respect of Ashdown and   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Imbali residential areas |                |                              |
|            |              |            |and Black villages shall |                |                              |
|            |              |            |be deemed to be debts due|                |                              |
|            |              |            |to the SA Development    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Trust                    |                |                              |
|3130        |R211(P)       |24 /10/1980 |Application and repeal of|                |DPLG and Limpopo Provincial   |
|            |              |            |laws in respect of the   |                |Govt.                         |
|            |              |            |district Moutse in the   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Province of the          |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Transvaal.  The          |                |                              |
|            |              |            |administration and       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |control of the district  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |of Moutse removed        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |/excised from  the Lebowa|                |                              |
|            |              |            |Legislative Assembly     |                |                              |
|3099        |R231(P)       |14/11/1980  |Application of Transvaal |                |Department of Transport and   |
|            |              |            |Road Traffic Ordinance of|                |Mpumalanga Prov Govt.         |
|            |              |            |1966 in KaNgwane         |                |                              |
|3130        |R18 (P)       |23/1/1981   |Continuation of          |                |DPLG and KwaZulu/Natal Prov   |
|            |              |            |membership to the KwaZulu|                |Govt                          |
|            |              |            |Legislative Assembly of  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Chiefs and Chairmen of   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Community Authorities    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |residing in areas excised|                |                              |
|            |              |            |from KwaZulu.  Excision  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |deemed not to have been  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |done for the purpose of  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |membership.              |                |                              |
|7499        |R61 (P)       |20/3/1981   |Repeal of Proclamation   |                |DPLG and Mpumalanga Prov. Govt|
|            |              |            |R206 of 14 September 1979|                |                              |
|            |              |            |regarding the            |                |                              |
|            |              |            |establishment of         |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Departments - Kwandebele |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Legislative Assembly.    |                |                              |
|7699        |R124 (P)      |3/7/1981    |Promulgation of          |                |DPLG and Limpopo Prov. Govt.  |
|            |              |            |Regulations  for the     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |administration of        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Gazankulu                |                |                              |
|3306        |R195 (P)      |2/10/1981   |Promulgation of          |                |DPLG and Free State Prov Govt |
|            |              |            |Regulations for the      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |administration of Qwaqwa |                |                              |
|3341        |R243 (P)      |27/11/ 1981 |Transfer of land and     |                |DLA                           |
|            |              |            |certain rights to the    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Government of Ciskei.    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Land listed in a schedule|                |                              |
|            |              |            |transferred to and       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |registered in the name of|                |                              |
|            |              |            |the Chief Minister of the|                |                              |
|            |              |            |Ciskei to hold in trust  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |for a black person, tribe|                |                              |
|            |              |            |or community.  Mineral   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |rights in respect such   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |land transferred to the  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Government of Ciskei.    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Such transfer to be      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |endorsed in the title    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |deed by the Registrar of |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Deeds for proof.         |                |                              |
|3382        |R31 (P)       |5/3/1982    |Promulgation of          |                |DPLG and Limpopo Prov. Govt   |
|            |              |            |Regulations for the      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |administration of Lebowa |                |                              |
|3418        |R76 (P)       |26/4/1982   |Postponement of the fifth|                |DPLG and Mpumalanga Prov. Govt|
|            |              |            |session of second        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Legislative Assembly  -  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |KaNgwane Legislative     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Assembly                 |                |                              |
|8226        |R 98 (P)      |4/6/1982    |Regulations for the      |                |DPLG and Limpopo Prov. Govt   |
|            |              |            |Administration of Lebowa |                |                              |
|            |              |            |– Amendment of           |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Proclamation R31 of 1982 |                |                              |
|8285        |R117 (P)      |2/7/1982    |Regulations for the      |                |DPLG and Free State Prov Govt |
|            |              |            |administration of Qwaqwa |                |                              |
|            |              |            |– Amendment of           |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Proclamation  R195 of    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |1981                     |                |                              |
|3445        |R121 (P)      |28/6/1982   |Excision of certain areas|                |DPLG and KwaZulu/Natal Prov   |
|            |              |            |in the district of       |                |Govt                          |
|            |              |            |Ingwavuma from KwaZulu.  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Administration of the    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |District of Ingwavuma    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |taken away from the      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Government of KwaZulu.   |                |                              |
|3517        |R 232 (P)     |9 /12/1982  |Repeal of Proclamation   |                | Can be repealed              |
|            |              |            |R.108 of 1982.           |                |                              |
|10560       |R228 (P)      |24/12/1986  |Transfer of Land and     |                |DLA and Limpopo Prov. Govt –  |
|            |              |            |Certain Rights to the    |                |can be repealed               |
|            |              |            |Government of Lebowa.    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Land  (including mineral |                |                              |
|            |              |            |rights) listed in a      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |schedule transferred  and|                |                              |
|            |              |            |registered in the name of|                |                              |
|            |              |            |the  Government of Lebowa|                |                              |
|            |              |            |in trust for  a black    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |person , tribe or        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |community.  Registrar of |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Deeds to endorse the     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |transfer for proof.      |                |                              |
|10560       |R229 (P)      |24/12/1986  |Transfer of Land and     |                |DLA and                       |
|            |              |            |Certain Rights to the    |                |Mpumalanga Prov. Govt         |
|            |              |            |Government of Kangwane.  |                |DLA indicated this can be     |
|            |              |            |Land (including mineral  |                |repealed.                     |
|            |              |            |rights)listed in a       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |schedule transferred and |                |                              |
|            |              |            |registered in the name of|                |                              |
|            |              |            |the Government of        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Kangwane  in trust for  a|                |                              |
|            |              |            |black person , tribe or  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |community.  Registrar of |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Deeds to endorse the     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |transfer for proof.      |                |                              |
|10560       |R230 (P)      |24/12/1986  |Transfer of Land and     |                |DLA and Limpopo Prov. Govt    |
|            |              |            |Certain Rights to the    |                |DLA indicated this can be     |
|            |              |            |Government of Gazankulu. |                |repealed.                     |
|            |              |            |Land (including mineral  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |rights) listed in a      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |schedule transferred and |                |                              |
|            |              |            |registered in the name of|                |                              |
|            |              |            |the Government of        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Gazankulu in trust for a |                |                              |
|            |              |            |black person , tribe or  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |community.  Registrar of |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Deeds to endorse the     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |transfer for proof.      |                |                              |
|10560       |R231 (P)      |24/12/1986  |Transfer of Land and     |                |DLA and  Free State Prov Govt |
|            |              |            |Certain Rights to the    |                |DLA indicated this can be     |
|            |              |            |Government of Qwaqwa.    |                |repealed.                     |
|            |              |            |Land (including mineral  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |rights) listed in a      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |schedule transferred and |                |                              |
|            |              |            |registered in the name of|                |                              |
|            |              |            |the Government of Qwaqwa |                |                              |
|            |              |            |in trust for a black     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |person, tribe or         |                |                              |
|            |              |            |community.  Registrar of |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Deeds to endorse the     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |transfer for proof.      |                |                              |
|10560       |R232 (P)      |24/12/1986  |Transfer of Land and     |                |DLA and KwaZulu/Natal Prov    |
|            |              |            |Certain Rights to the    |                |Govt                          |
|            |              |            |Government of KwaZulu.   |                |DLA indicated this can be     |
|            |              |            |Land (including mineral  |                |repealed.                     |
|            |              |            |rights) listed in a      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |schedule transferred and |                |                              |
|            |              |            |registered in the name of|                |                              |
|            |              |            |the Government of KwaZulu|                |                              |
|            |              |            |in trust for  a black    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |person , tribe or        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |community.  Registrar of |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Deeds to endorse the     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |transfer for proof.      |                |                              |
|10560       |R233 (P)      |24/12/1986  |Transfer of Land and     |                | DLA and                      |
|            |              |            |Certain Rights to the    |                |Mpumalanga Prov. Govt         |
|            |              |            |Government of KwaNdebele.|                |DLA indicated this can be     |
|            |              |            |Land (including mineral  |                |repealed.                     |
|            |              |            |rights) listed in a      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |schedule transferred and |                |                              |
|            |              |            |registered in the name of|                |                              |
|            |              |            |the Government of        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |KwaNdebele in trust for a|                |                              |
|            |              |            |black person, tribe or   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |community.  Registrar of |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Deeds to endorse the     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |transfer for proof       |                |                              |
|11014       |R156 (P)      |30/10/1987  |Repeal of proclamation   |                |Can be repealed               |
|            |              |            |R321 of 1970             |                |                              |
|11050       |R2648 (P)     |1/12/1987   |Prescribing fees         |                |DPLG and Mpumalanga Prov. Govt|
|            |              |            |(referred to in schedule)|                |                              |
|            |              |            |in respect of selling    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |price, redemption        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |instalments rent and     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |service charges in       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |respect of the town of   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Ekangala.                |                |                              |
|11166       |R29 (P)       |9/3/1988    |Regulations Concerning   |Assigned (whole)|DLA – to investigate whether  |
|            |              |            |Land Tenure in Towns –   |to a competent  |there is sufficient provision |
|            |              |            |Rights conferred by Deed |authority within|for upgrading and             |
|            |              |            |of Grant Rights, Who may |the government  |registration.                 |
|            |              |            |grant deed of grants,    |of the Provinces|                              |
|            |              |            |Conversion of deed of    |of Eastern Cape,|                              |
|            |              |            |grant ,ownership.        |Eastern         |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Transvaal,      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |KwaZulu/Natal,  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Northern        |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Province, North |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |West and Orange |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Free State under|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution,   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1993, Gazette No|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15951,  Proc.139|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of 1994 dated 9 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |September 1994. |                              |
|11167       |R31 (P)       |9 /3/1988   |Repeal of Proclamation   |                |DPLG and Provinces            |
|            |              |            |R264 of 1968 as amended  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |by Proclamation R339 of  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |1970 and Proclamation    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |R101 of 1982 – regarding |                |                              |
|            |              |            |control of certain       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |activities in black      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |areas.                   |                |                              |
|11699       |R8 (P)        |17/2/1989   |Licensing and control of |                |DPLG and Western Cape Prov    |
|            |              |            |dogs in black areas in   |                |Govt                          |
|            |              |            |the province of Good Hope|                |                              |
|            |              |            |– Amendment of           |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Proclamation R351 of     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |1963.                    |                |                              |
|12688       |R131 (P)      |10/09/1990  |Regulations for the      |                |DPLG                          |
|            |              |            |Establishment and        |                |DLA ? (possible on the        |
|            |              |            |Development of Towns –   |                |question of registration)     |
|            |              |            |Repeal of Proclamation   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |R154.  This proclamation |                |                              |
|            |              |            |did not apply in self-   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |governing territories    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |established under        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |National States          |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Constitution Act No. 21  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |of 1971.                 |                |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |                |                              |
|                                                                                                                  |
|2.  Subordinate legislation (regulations) made under section 30 of the Black Administration Act, 1927, kept alive |
|by virtue of section 8(2) of the Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act, 1991 (Act 108 of 1991) and still  |
|reflected in Butterworths                                                                                         |
|(Section 30 was repealed by section 8(1) of the Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act, 1991 (Act 108 of   |
|1991).  Section originally empowered the Governor-General to make regulations regarding the control and management|
|of certain native villages and townships)                                                                         |
|2165        |R163 (P)      |11/11/1974  |Regulations Governing the|                |DLA                           |
|            |              |            |administration and       |                |DPLG and KwaZulu/Natal Prov   |
|            |              |            |Control of designated    |                |Govt                          |
|            |              |            |Areas.  Control of       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Citizenship and          |                |                              |
|            |              |            |occupation or ownership  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |of land by the manager in|                |                              |
|            |              |            |consultation with the    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Bantu Advisory Board,    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Minister may approve     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |citizenship for the      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |purpose of this          |                |                              |
|            |              |            |regulation.  Provisions  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |do not apply to ownership|                |                              |
|            |              |            |acquired through         |                |                              |
|            |              |            |inheritance or before the|                |                              |
|            |              |            |regulations cane into    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |force.                   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Control of buildings and |                |                              |
|            |              |            |any erected structure in |                |                              |
|            |              |            |the designated Areas.    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |General control of life  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |of the inhabitants of    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |these designated areas.  |                |                              |
|5800        |R320 (P)      |11/11/1977  |Amendments of the        |                |DPLG and KwaZulu/Natal Prov   |
|            |              |            |Regulations Governing the|                |Govt                          |
|            |              |            |Administration and       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Control of the areas     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Clermont and Edendale,   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |1974                     |                |                              |
|9846        |R1561 (P)     |19/7/1985   |Amendments of Regulations|                |DLA                           |
|            |              |            |for the Administration   |                |DPLG and Provinces            |
|            |              |            |and control of Townships |                |                              |
|            |              |            |in Black Areas. (General |                |                              |
|            |              |            |plan , demarcation of    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |sites)                   |                |                              |
|10081       |R149 (P)      |31/1/1986   |Amendment of Regulations |                |DPLG and KwaZulu/Natal Prov   |
|            |              |            |Governing the            |                |Govt                          |
|            |              |            |Administration and       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Control of the Areas of  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Clermont and Edendale,   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |contained in Proc R163,  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |1974.                    |                |                              |
|10081       |R150 (P)      |31/1/1986   |Amendment of the         |                |DLA                           |
|            |              |            |Regulations for the      |                |DPLG and Provinces            |
|            |              |            |Administration and       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Control of Townships in  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Black Areas, amending    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |regulations published    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |under Proc R263 of 1962. |                |                              |
|10364       |R1538         |23/7/1986   |Amendment of the         |Proc. R293 of   |DLA                           |
|            |              |            |Regulations for the      |1962 assigned   |DPLG and relevant Provinces   |
|            |              |            |Administration and       |(whole) to North|                              |
|            |              |            |Control of Township in   |West and Eastern|                              |
|            |              |            |Black Areas , amending   |Cape, under     |                              |
|            |              |            |Regulations promulgated  |Section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |by Proc. R293 of 1962.   |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |(Manner of purchased of  |Constitution    |                              |
|            |              |            |property, special        |Gazette No.     |                              |
|            |              |            |provisions in respect of |15813,  Proc.   |                              |
|            |              |            |deed of grant,           |R109,110and 111 |                              |
|            |              |            |substitution of a deed of|of 1994 dated 17|                              |
|            |              |            |transfer for deed of     |June 1994.      |                              |
|            |              |            |grant or right of        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |leasehold, Consolidation |Proc. R293 of   |                              |
|            |              |            |or substitution of land  |1962 was also   |                              |
|            |              |            |held under a deed of     |assigned        |                              |
|            |              |            |grant or right of        |(excluding those|                              |
|            |              |            |leasehold)               |provisions (if  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |any) which fall |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |outside the     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |functional areas|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |specified in    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Schedule 6 to   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |the Constitution|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |or which relate |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |to matters      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |referred to in  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |paragraphs (a)  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |and (e) of      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 126 (3) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the          |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution) to|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Eastern         |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Transvaal       |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |(Mpumalanga),   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |KwaZulu/Natal   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |and Northern    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Transvaal       |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |(Limpopo) under |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution,   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Gazette No.     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |16049 , Proc .  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |R162 of 1994    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |dated 31 October|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1994            |                              |
|10372       |R136 (P)      |1/8/1986    |Defining and Setting     |                |DPLG and Gauteng Prov Govt    |
|            |              |            |apart of a Township known|                |                              |
|            |              |            |as Soshanguve, District  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |of Soshanguve  -         |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Amendment of Notice  760 |                |                              |
|            |              |            |dated 12 April 1979.     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Defining boundaries.     |                |                              |
|11050       |R2647 (P)     |1/12/1987   |Setting  apart of Land as|                |DLA                           |
|            |              |            |a Town known as Ekangala,|                |DPLG and Mpumalanga Prov. Govt|
|            |              |            |district of              |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Bronkhorstspruit, as town|                |                              |
|            |              |            |for occupation by or for |                |                              |
|            |              |            |industrial or business   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |purposes of Black persons|                |                              |
|11166       |R30 (P)       |9/3/1988    |Establishment of         |                |DLA                           |
|            |              |            |Registration Offices for |                |                              |
|            |              |            |the Registration of      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Deeds of Grant rights and|                |                              |
|            |              |            |Rights of Leasehold in   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Towns established of     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Deemed to be established |                |                              |
|            |              |            |under Section 30 (1) of  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |the Black Administration |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Act, 1927 (Act 38 of     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |1927) and Related        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |matters.                 |                |                              |
|11166       |R403          |9/3/1988    |Regulations for the      |                |DLA                           |
|            |              |            |Registration of Deeds in |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Towns.                   |                |                              |
|11166       |R404 (P)      |9/3/1988    |Regulations for Land use |                |DLA                           |
|            |              |            |in Towns – existing uses,|                |                              |
|            |              |            |Extended Residential use,|                |                              |
|            |              |            |Zoning and re-zoning,    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |planning maps and        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |records.                 |                |                              |
|11985       |R1414 (P)     |30/12/1989  |Regulations for Local    |                |DPLG                          |
|            |              |            |Authorities.  Amendment  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |of schedule to Government|                |                              |
|            |              |            |Notice No. R405 of 9     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |March 1988               |                |                              |
|12076       |R1878 (P)     |1/9/1989    |Selling prices,          |                |DPLG and KwaZulu/Natal Prov   |
|            |              |            |Conditions of payment ,  |                |Govt                          |
|            |              |            |Rent and Service Charges |                |                              |
|            |              |            |in respect of Trust Town.|                |                              |
|12076       |R1879         |1/9/1989    |Rates and charges for the|                |DPLG and KwaZulu/Natal Prov   |
|            |              |            |areas Clermont and       |                |Govt                          |
|            |              |            |Edendale, determining    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |that Notice  in respect  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |of Trust Towns published |                |                              |
|            |              |            |under Government Notice R|                |                              |
|            |              |            |1878 of 1 September 1989 |                |                              |
|            |              |            |shall be applicable  in  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |the areas Claremont and  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Edendale from the date of|                |                              |
|            |              |            |publication.             |                |                              |
|12688       |R1886         |10/8/1990   |Township Development     |Assigned (whole)|DPLG  and relevant provinces  |
|            |              |            |Regulations for  Towns – |to a competent  |                              |
|            |              |            |dealing with Application |authority within|                              |
|            |              |            |for development, Land    |the government  |                              |
|            |              |            |availability and         |of the Provinces|                              |
|            |              |            |development agreement,   |of Eastern Cape,|                              |
|            |              |            |investigation of mineral |Eastern         |                              |
|            |              |            |rights, Publication of   |Transvaal,      |                              |
|            |              |            |notice, Objections or    |KwaZulu/Natal,  |                              |
|            |              |            |Representations, Approval|Northern        |                              |
|            |              |            |of application, Procedure|Province and    |                              |
|            |              |            |for declaring an approved|Orange Free     |                              |
|            |              |            |Township etc.            |State under     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution,   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1993, Gazette No|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15951,  Proc.139|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of 1994 dated 9 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |September 1994. |                              |
|12691       |R1888 (P)     |10/8/1990   |Land use and Planning    |Assigned (whole)|DLA ( Land Use Management     |
|            |              |            |Regulations – dealing    |to a competent  |Bill)                         |
|            |              |            |with Town planning       |authority within|DPLG and relevant provinces   |
|            |              |            |Schemes generally ,      |the government  |Presidency                    |
|            |              |            |Schemes for existing     |of the Provinces|                              |
|            |              |            |area, new schemes        |of Eastern Cape,|                              |
|            |              |            |,Consent by Local        |Eastern         |                              |
|            |              |            |Authorities etc.         |Transvaal,      |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |KwaZulu/Natal,  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Northern        |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Province and    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Orange Free     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |State under     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution,   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |1993, Gazette No|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15951,  Proc.139|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of 1994 dated 9 |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |September 1994. |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |                |                              |
|                                                                                                                  |
|                                                                                                                  |
|3.  Subordinate legislation (by-laws) made under section 30A of the Black Administration Act, 1927, kept alive by |
|virtue of section 8(2) of the Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act, 1991 (Act 108 of 1991) and still     |
|reflected in Butterworths                                                                                         |
|(Section 30 was repealed by section 8(1) of the Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act, 1991 (Act 108 of   |
|1991).  According to Butterworths there is no subordinate legislation left under this provision)                  |
|Nil         |Nil           |Nil         |Nil                      |Nil             |Nil                           |
|4.  Subordinate legislation (proclamations) made under section 87(1) of the Abolition of Racially Based Land      |
|Measures Act, 1991 (Act 108 of 1991) and still reflected in Butterworths.                                         |
|(Section 87(1) empowered the State President to repeal, amend or supplement any proclamation, regulation or by-law|
|which was kept alive by section 5(2) or 8(2) of this Act.  This power ended on 31 December 1994, when the said    |
|section 87 lapsed by virtue of section 87(4))                                                                     |
|13906       |R27 (P)       |31/1/1992   |Repeal of Amendments of  |                |DPLG                          |
|            |              |            |laws under Section 78 of |                |                              |
|            |              |            |the Abolition of racially|                |                              |
|            |              |            |based Land Measures Act, |                |                              |
|            |              |            |1991 (Act No. 108 of     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |1991)  Laws repealed or  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |amended include  Black   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Laws Amendment Act 56 of |                |                              |
|            |              |            |1949, National States Act|                |                              |
|            |              |            |46 of 1968 ,             |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Self-governing           |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Territories Constitution |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Act  21 of 1971, Health  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Matter in Black Area Proc|                |                              |
|            |              |            |34 of 1989 etc)          |                |                              |
|14690       |R84 (P)       |7/8/1992    |Amendments of the        |                |DLA and Provinces             |
|            |              |            |Regulations for the      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Registration of Deeds in |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Towns, 1988 (Government  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Notice No. R 403 of      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |1988.)  Amendments       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |include the insertion of |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Regulation 5A in         |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Government Notice R403 of|                |                              |
|            |              |            |1988 regarding the       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |transfer of rights by    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |township developers.     |                |                              |
|14688       |R23 (P)       |12/4/1993   |Amendment of the Black   |                |DLA and relevant provinces    |
|            |              |            |Areas Land Regulations,  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |1969 (Proclamation No.  R|                |                              |
|            |              |            |188 of 1969).  Some      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |section were repealed ,  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |some amended and some    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |inserted, eg. Section 3A |                |                              |
|            |              |            |dealing with issuing of  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |permission to occupy     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |(PTO)                    |                |                              |
|15469       |R13 (P)       |28/1/1994   |Amendment of the         |                |DPLG and provinces            |
|            |              |            |Regulations concerning   |                |Possible Department of Trade  |
|            |              |            |the Brewing and Sale of  |                |and industry                  |
|            |              |            |Sorghum Beer in Black    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Areas, 1963 (Proclamation|                |                              |
|            |              |            |No. 50 of 1963) –        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |providing for application|                |                              |
|            |              |            |for sale of sorghum beer,|                |                              |
|            |              |            |giving notice to hold a  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |beer party  the chief or |                |                              |
|            |              |            |headman or the Director- |                |                              |
|            |              |            |General.                 |                |                              |
|15469       |R14 (P)       |28/1/1994   |Repeal of the Regulations|Proclamation No.|DPLG and provinces            |
|            |              |            |concerning the Payment by|R300 of 1968 (as|DLA                           |
|            |              |            |Blacks of Rental for     |a whole) was    |                              |
|            |              |            |Arable and Residential   |assigned to     |                              |
|            |              |            |Allotments and of fees   |North West,     |                              |
|            |              |            |for grazing stock on     |Eastern         |                              |
|            |              |            |certain Land owned by the|Transvaal       |                              |
|            |              |            |South African Development|(Mpumalanga),   |                              |
|            |              |            |Trust, (Proclamation No. |Eastern Cape and|                              |
|            |              |            |R300 of 1968)            |Northen         |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Transvaal       |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |(Limpopo) under |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |section 235 (8) |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of the Interim  |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Constitution,   |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |Gazette No.     |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |15813, Proc.    |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |R109,110 and 111|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |of 1994 dated 17|                              |
|            |              |            |                         |June 1994.      |                              |
|15636       |R66 (P)       |22/4/1994   |Black Communities        |                |DPLG                          |
|            |              |            |Amendment Proclamation,  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |1994, the date of 22     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |April 1994 was proclaimed|                |                              |
|            |              |            |as the date on which the |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Black Communities        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Development Proclamation |                |                              |
|            |              |            |comes  into operation.   |                |                              |
|15692       |R87 (P)       |264/1994    |Amendment of Laws        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |containing Reference to  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Racially based area      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |measures, laws amended   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |include  Durban          |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Waterworks Act 5 of 1937,|                |                              |
|            |              |            |Marburg Immigration      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Settlement Regulations   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Act 50 of 1971.          |                |                              |
|15808       |R116 (P)      |24/6/1994   |Amendment of Laws        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Relating to Agricultural |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Affairs.  This           |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Proclamation was repealed|                |                              |
|            |              |            |by  Subdivision of       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Agricultural Land Act    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Repeal Act 64 of 1998,   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |however this Act is not  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |yet in force.            |                |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |                |                              |
|5.  Subordinate legislation (regulations) made under section 27 of the Black Administration Act, 1927 which are   |
|still reflected in Butterworths                                                                                   |
|(These regulations will be repealed when their enabling provision, section 27, is repealed by the Repeal of the   |
|Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Bill)                                                      |
|1839        |R194 (P)      |8/9/1967    |Control of Bantu         |                |DPLG and relevant provinces   |
|            |              |            |Circumcision school in   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Certain areas of the     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Province of Transvaal.   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Chief Bantu Affairs      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Commissioner to give     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |permission and have      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |control of the           |                |                              |
|            |              |            |circumcision schools in  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |the District of          |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Barberton, Letaba,       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Lydenburg,  Nelspruit,   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Pilgrim’s rest,          |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Pietersburg, Sibasa and  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Soutpansberg             |                |                              |
|2165        |R1673 (P)     |20/9/1968   |Regulations relating to  |                |DPLG                          |
|            |              |            |the Advertisement of     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Bantu Medicines and the  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |financial Protection of  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Bantu.                   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |(i)  Prohibition of the  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Advertisement of Bantu   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Medicine.                |                |                              |
|            |              |            |(ii)  Recording of       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Financial dealings with  |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Bantu                    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |(iii)  Auditing of Books,|                |                              |
|            |              |            |Records and Accounts.    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |(iv)  Offences and       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Penalties.               |                |                              |
|6.  Subordinate legislation  (Regulations)  made under section 20 of the Black Administration Act, 1927           |
|            |R45 (P)       |13/1/1961   |Regulations made in terms|                |DOJ                           |
|            |              |            |of section 20 (9)        |                |                              |
|            |              |            |regarding the appeal from|                |                              |
|            |              |            |chief’s court to the     |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Native Commissioner’s    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |court.                   |                |                              |
|7.  Subordinate legislation  (Regulations)  made under section 12 of the Black Administration Act, 1927           |
|1929        |R2082 (P)     |29/12/1967  |Regulations regarding    |                |DOJ                           |
|            |              |            |Chief’s and Headmen’s    |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Civil Court : rules      |                |                              |
|            |              |            |(Relating to procedures, |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Hearing, Written Records,|                |                              |
|            |              |            |Reasons for judgement,   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Legal Representation ,   |                |                              |
|            |              |            |Scale of fees etc,       |                |                              |
|            |              |            |                         |                |                              |






Other Assignment

KwaZulu Act on Code of Zulu Law (Act 16 of 1985) was assigned under Section
235 (8) of the Interim Constitution, per Gazette No. 15813, Proclamation
107 of 1994 dated 17 June 1994.

Natal code of Zulu Law,  was assigned to KwaZulu/Natal under Section 235
(8) of the Interim Constitution, per Gazette No. 16049, Proclamation 166 of
1994 dated 31 October 1994.  (including the KwaZulu Corporation Act 14 of
1984 and the Black Authorities Act 68 of 1951.


Regulation  for the Control of the Residence on and Occupation of Privately
or Tribally owned Land in Black Areas Proc. 192 of 1967 was assigned to
Eastern Transvaal (Mpumalanga , Eastern Cape and Northern Transvaal  under
section 235 (8) of the Interim Constitution, Gazette No. 15813, Proc. R109,
110 and 111 of 1994 dated 17 June 1994.  (The Black Authorities Act 68/1951
was assigned to EC by the same Proc 111 of 1994)

Chapter VII (sections 97 – 103) of the Abolition of Racially based Land
Measures Act 108 of 1991 was assigned to provinces
 Gazette No 16049 Proc. R158 of 1994 dated 31 October 1994. (not related to
BAA).

Regulations for the Disposal of State Land in Towns, Proc R 402 of 1988 (as
a whole) was assigned to a competent authority within the government of the
Provinces of Eastern Cape, Eastern Transvaal, KwaZulu/Natal, Northern
Province and Orange Free State under section 235 (8) of the Interim
Constitution, 1993, Gazette No 15951,  Proc.139 of 1994 dated 9 September
1994.

Proc 139 of 1994 (ito section 235 (8) of the IC) assigned Sections 1 and 2
(7) (7) bis and (7)ter of the BAA  to  Eastern Cape, Eastern Transvaal
(Mpumalanga), KwaZulu/Natal, Northern Transvaal (Limpopo) Orange Free
State.

Government Notice R200 of 1987 - Regulation and Administration of the
Estates for Deceased Black

Other subordinate legislation in terms of the BAA

Section 27 – Control of Bantu Circumcision Schools in certain areas of the
Province of Transvaal  - R194 of 8 september1967
 Repeal of Legislation administered by the Department of Bantu
Administration and Development- R265 of 20 September 1968
Regulations relating to the advertising of Bantu medicine and the financial
protection of Bantu – R1673 of 20 September 1968

-----------------------
[1] Eastern Cape, Free  State,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Gauteng,  Mpumalanga,  North
West and the Western Cape.
[2] Fourth World Conference on Women Platform for Action.
www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/platform/declar.htm
[3] Due to time constraints in the hearings, NIA informed the JMC that  they
did not have a Gender Desk. No further presentation was made by the NIA  and
no report was available.
[4] As with the NIA,  Public  Enterprises  delivered  only  a  short  report
indicating that they don’t have a GFP and that transversal issues,  such  as
gender, youth and disability issues are addressed. No report was available.
[5] The implementing agencies  are  the  provincial  OSWs  as  well  as  the
national and provincial GFPs.
[6] The OSW in Mpumalanga did not make a presentation to  the  committee.  A
written submission was received.
[7] The Western Cape OSW did not make a presentation to the committee.
Written submission was received.

[8] Meaning ‘to comfort’
[9] This report only provided information on the structure, reporting  lines
and budget of the GFP.
[10]  The Secretariate had not made  a  report  available  at  the  time  of
compiling this document. Only a short oral  presentation  was  made  by  the
Secretariat.
[11] As indicated earlier, the Gauteng Province currently does not have an
OSW but instead has a Directorate fulfilling the function. They are in the
process of establishing a Gender/HIV unit. These are the positions that are
reported on here.
[12] The Department of Science and Technology has appointed an external co-
ordinator at Director level and an internal co-ordinator at a Deputy
Director level.


