---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 10 June 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2005-06-10
---

FRIDAY, 10 JUNE 2005
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 11:00.

The Speaker of the National Assembly took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.


 WELCOMING OF INCOMING LEADERSHIP OF THE JUDICIARY, CHIEF JUSTICE PIUS LANGA
   AND DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE DIKGANG MOSENEKE, AND FAREWELL TO THE OUTGOING
                      CHIEF JUSTICE, ARTHUR CHASKALSON




The SPEAKER: Hon members, the President has called a Joint Sitting of the
National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces in terms of the
Constitution and the Rules in order to welcome the incoming leadership of
the judiciary, Chief Justice Pius Langa and Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang
Moseneke, and to bid farewell to the outgoing Chief Justice, Arthur
Chaskalson.

We have today represented in the House the three branches of government,
namely the executive, the judiciary and the legislature. While each of
these arms of our democracy has distinct functions, they nevertheless work
together to give effect to the constitutional provisions that underpin our
democracy.

The President will hand over the certificates of appointment to the Deputy
Chief Justice and the Chief Justice. Thereafter, the outgoing Chief Justice
will hand over the robe of office to the new Chief Justice, thereby
symbolising the change of leadership in the judiciary.

In the course of this sitting, the President and the political parties will
have an opportunity to address the Joint Sitting, after which the retired
Chief Justice will respond.

As it is the function of the President, and not of Parliament, to appoint
the Chief Justice and his deputy, I will suspend proceedings to allow the
President to conduct the presentations. While business is suspended,
Justice Chaskalson, Chief Justice Langa and Deputy Chief Justice Moseneke
will be conducted from their seats to join the President in front of the
podium for the presentations. I now suspend business.

Business suspended at 11:02 and resumed at 11:06.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, please take your seats, business now resumes. I
now call upon the President of the Republic to address the Joint Sitting.
[Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, Deputy Speaker, Deputy Chairperson and the other
presiding officers, Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice, outgoing Chief
Justice Arthur Chaskalson, leaders of our political parties, Premiers, hon
Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members of Parliament, fellow South
Africans, when I spoke from this podium on 11 February to deliver the
annual state of the nation address I announced that, with effect from 1
June, Chief Justice Arthur Chaskalson would retire from the Bench.

I said then:

  I trust that later this year, Parliament will give all of us an
  opportunity to bid this giant among the architects of our democracy the
  fitting farewell that the constraints of time today prohibit.

I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the presiding officers, the
political leaders and the hon members for responding to that request, which
has given us the possibility to convene here today in what I am certain
will, up to its conclusion, be a dignified ceremony that will communicate
the respect of our people for our judiciary and the judges we are
privileged to honour today.

As we approached the day of his assumption of office, I requested the then
Chief Justice-elect to advise me about the formal ceremony we would have to
conduct publicly to signal the changing of the guard at the apex of our
judicial system. It transpired that nothing existed in our state protocols
providing for such a ceremony. It is, therefore, the first time in the
history of our country that we have convened as we have today.

I would like to thank the Speaker of the National Assembly, the Chairperson
of the National Council of Provinces, their deputies, leaders of the
political parties, the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice, the
Minister and Deputy Minister of Justice, the Chief of State Protocol, the
Director-General in the Presidency and his staff for everything they have
done to design today’s proceedings, which set a precedent for what should
happen in future when our country honours an outgoing chief justice and
welcomes his or her successor.

The ceremony, as Madam Speaker has said, has been designed in such a way
that it respects both the separation of powers that is entrenched in our
Constitution relating to the legislature, the executive and the judiciary,
as well as co-operation among these three centres of state power without
which our body politic would cease to exist. In this latter eventuality,
ineluctably, mere anarchy would be loosed upon our world.

I believe that it is right and proper that we should convene, as we have
done today, bringing together the national legislature, the national
executive and the judiciary to salute our compatriots who have served and
will serve at the apex of the leadership of our judicial system.

This marks the culmination of the process of the appointment of the
presiding judges of the Constitutional Court and the judiciary, which
involves the three branches of our system of governance. It is, therefore,
fitting that we should come together as we have done today in the Houses of
Parliament, finally to confirm to all our people our confidence in the
fellow South Africans who had and will have the responsibility to lead our
judiciary.

In this regard, speaking as the President of the Republic and the sponsor
of the candidatures of our Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice, I would
like to convey my profound gratitude to the Judicial Service Commission and
the leaders of the political parties represented in our national Parliament
for their unanimous agreement that Justice Pius Langa and Justice Dikgang
Moseneke should serve as our Chief and Deputy Chief Justices respectively.
[Applause.]

We meet here today to bid farewell to the outgoing Chief Justice, the hon
Judge Arthur Chaskalson, and to welcome the new leadership of our
judiciary, Chief Justice Pius Langa and Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang
Moseneke. In paying tribute to our recently retired Chief Justice, we draw
inspiration from the Preamble of our Constitution, which states that:

    We, the people of South Africa. . .
    Respect those who have worked to build and develop our country; and
    Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
    diversity.


Long before assuming the Office of Chief Justice of South Africa, Arthur
Chaskalson worked hard to lay the foundation for a South Africa that would
truly belong to all who live in it, united in our diversity. He dedicated
his professional life to the defence of those who were regarded as
subhuman, and accordingly treated as such by the legal system that
prevailed then. He and his colleagues worked tirelessly, using the laws of
the day, however deficient, to try to protect the rights of the poor and
the oppressed.

Speaking about the significance of the period following the end of World
War II, a period when, according to him, “humanity appeared to seek a new
mutation, a humanity that had come so perilously close to its own
annihilation”, our former Chief Justice Ismail Mahomed, said that a
defensible and durable civilisation can only sustain itself legitimately
and effectively if it recognises the inherent dignity of every member of
the human family.

Arthur Chaskalson’s lifelong work is a testimony to his belief in the
inherent dignity of all people. In the past 11 years of our democracy, the
judiciary has not shunned its role to become part of the construction of a
South Africa that recognises the inherent dignity of all its citizens. We
too are citizens of a country that came perilously close to its own
annihilation. It was through the efforts of progressive lawyers such as
Arthur Chaskalson, acting together with all other progressive forces in our
country, that we were able to pull ourselves away from the abyss.

Because of his refusal to give up when some of the best among us lost hope
in the promise of a better future, he served as one of the experts that
assisted in drafting our Constitution. After assuming the Office of the
President of the Constitutional Court of South Africa, Arthur Chaskalson
worked with distinction to restore the credibility of a judiciary that had
been totally discredited in the eyes of the majority during the apartheid
years.

He steered the judiciary at a time when it was grappling with defining its
proper role in a democracy, a matter that will continue to engage us as our
democracy matures. Speaking about this matter, in April 2000, in an address
on the role of the judiciary in a democratic state, Justice Rosalie
Silberman Abella, a judge of the court of appeal of Ontario, Canada,
referred to the historically erroneous premise that judicial institutions
do not form part of the democratic framework. She went on to say that, I
quote:

   While all branches of government are responsible for the delivery of
   justice, the judiciary has a different relationship with the public. It
   is accountable less to the public’s opinions, and more to the public
   interest. This means that the occasional judgment will collide with some
   public expectations, which will inevitably create controversy, but
   judgments that are controversial are not thereby illegitimate or
   undemocratic. They are in fact democracy at work.

What Arthur Chaskalson did during his years as a fighter for liberation and
an architect of the new South Africa constituted the democracy at work of
which Judge Abella spoke. On 1 June 2001, acting in terms of the
Constitution, I appointed Justice Pius Langa as the successor to Arthur
Chaskalson. On the same date I also appointed Justice Moseneke as the
Deputy Chief Justice, successor to Justice Pius Langa.

I take this opportunity to wish them well as they lead the judiciary during
this second decade of our freedom, confident that they will accomplish
their mission with distinction. We face continuing challenges with regard
to the judiciary, principal among them being its transformation. Among
other things, gender parity within our judicial ranks remains a matter of
concern.

The role of the judiciary in a constitutional state, with a history such as
ours, also continues to pose a challenge. I believe that the new leaders of
our judiciary will help us successfully to respond to these challenges, as
well as continue to create the space for these and other matters to be
debated, confident that, in the words of former Chief Justice Mahomed:


   A viable and credible constitutional culture evolves most effectively
   within the crucible of vigorous intellectual combat and even moral
   examination of judicial officers.


The debate about the role of the judiciary in South Africa should never be
portrayed as an intention or desire to interfere in any manner with its
independence. It is not. Happily, I know that the leadership of our
judiciary agrees with us in this regard.

Among other things, the struggle we waged with Justices Chaskalson, Langa
and Moseneke as our fellow combatants was precisely about the convergence
of the concepts of the law and justice, and therefore the need for an
independent judiciary that would ensure that law and justice would not
stand in opposition to each other, as they did in our country for many
centuries.

I am honoured to extend to Chief Justice Arthur Chaskalson, an esteemed
member of the Order of the Baobab, the heartfelt thanks of our diverse and
united nation for everything he has done to restore to our people their
freedom, their dignity and esteem among the peoples of the world.
[Applause.]

On behalf of our nation, I wish him and his dear wife happiness, long life
and success in their future endeavours. I trust that the nation will still
have the privilege to access their wisdom and experience as we continue our
journey towards the formation of the South African, the African and the
world society to which they dedicated their lives.

I thank him, Chief Justice Pius Langa, Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang
Moseneke, their spouses and all other judges and eminent guests present in
the House today, for the privilege they have accorded all of us to salute
them, to thank them, to wish them well during this unique ceremony in the
history of our country, and I extend the nation’s best wishes and message
of confidence to them all. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Madam Speaker, hon President and Deputy
President of the Republic of South Africa, retired Chief Justice Arthur
Chaskalson, Chief Justice Pius Langa, Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang
Moseneke, members of the judiciary, provincial Premiers and Speakers,
members of the diplomatic corps, members of Parliament and distinguished
guests, the announcement by the President of the Republic, Mr Thabo Mbeki,
on the occasion of his state of the nation address on 11 February earlier
this year that Chief Justice Arthur Chaskalson would retire at the end of
May marked the passing of an era - a critical era in the history of the
transformation of our society and the entrenchment of the rule of law.

Judge Chaskalson has played a significant and crucial role in reshaping
South African jurisprudence to be in line with the Constitution of the
land. He is one of the most distinguished legal minds our country has ever
produced.

He is a recipient of numerous South African and international awards, and
an illustrious lawyer who played a leading role in using the law to fight
injustices, including setting up the non-profit Legal Resources Centre in
1978 to fight for justice and human rights in South Africa.

During the days of oppression under the apartheid regime, he appeared on
behalf of members of the liberation movement in several major political
trials, including the Rivonia Trial. His contribution to the struggle for
justice and respect for human rights saw him play a critical role as
adviser to the Namibian Constituent Assembly on Namibia’s constitution, and
to the ANC on constitutional issues prior to the transition, and serving on
the technical committee that advised the multiparty negotiating forum on
constitutional issues. He played an equally important part in drafting the
transitional Constitution.

Judge Chaskalson was appointed President of the newly established
Constitutional Court in 1994, and in 2001 became Chief Justice of South
Africa. This was in recognition of the role he had played in advancing and
protecting the integrity of justice, and his contribution to the drafting
of the Constitution, which all of us enjoy today.

The retired Chief Justice fully subscribes to the notion of a judiciary
that is informed by the vision and aspirations of the millions of South
Africans who waged a struggle to free our country from the apartheid
regime. He firmly holds the view that the values that are articulated in
the Constitution must inform the decisions made by judges.

Our judiciary needs people such as Judge Chaskalson, who welcome the
assertion that the judiciary has to be accountable to our people and be
inspired by their hopes, dreams and value systems, a judiciary that
understands the reality that the separation of powers and the independence
of the judiciary are issues central to our system of government. The
President touched on that.

The challenges facing our judiciary in the new South Africa demand our
nation’s discourse 11 years into our democracy. The continuing challenge of
the transformation of the judiciary remains one of our key goals in our
quest to bring about fundamental change in our society. Our democratic
government has the unenviable task of having to change the mind-set of a
section of our judiciary that does not understand or wish to see the need
to embrace transformation. Judge Chaskalson himself identified this
challenge when he said in an interview with the Institute for Global
Dialogue, and I quote:

   There are no doubt individuals within the system who find it hard to
   apply the new values, because it is different to their whole
   understanding of law, to their own training in law, and the way in which
   they previously viewed the law. There will also be people with particular
   social or political attitudes who find some of the values of the
   Constitution inconsistent with their own personal values.

Our Constitution is about these new values that Judge Chaskalson was
talking about. They are the values of the new democratic order that are
clearly articulated in the Preamble to the Constitution, which I will take
the liberty to quote, albeit not in full:

   We, the people of South Africa,
   Recognise the injustices of our past;
   Honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land;
   Respect those who have worked to build and develop our country; and
   Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
   diversity.


   We therefore, through our freely elected representatives, adopt this
   Constitution as the supreme law of the Republic so as to –


      Heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on
      democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights ...

In the same interview Judge Chaskalson also expressed the view that it
would be wrong to say that there is significant resistance within the legal
system to these values of our Constitution. Long before the adoption of our
country’s Constitution, the ANC had committed itself to the fundamental
provisions of the basic law of the land, which accords with its own vision
of a democratic and just society. This basic law of the land is our supreme
law, namely the Constitution. All the laws of our land must conform to its
principles, and all the organs of state and all individuals must comply
with these provisions.

The other important aspect of our Constitution is that it provides for a
truly representative form of government. This is a far cry from the
previous dispensation where Parliament, which represented a tiny fraction
of the total population of our country, was supreme.

However, this was to change as a result of the work of people such as Judge
Chaskalson, who tirelessly served as an agent of change for the kind of
South Africa visualised in our Constitution, a South Africa where all the
people shall be guaranteed human dignity, democracy, nonracialism,
nonsexism, equality and prosperity.

As we pay homage to one of our stalwarts in the legal struggle for the
protection and promotion of human rights, we cannot help but recall some of
the landmark decisions arrived at by our Constitutional Court, which
entrenched the values of our new society. One such decision was the ruling
that found that the death penalty had no place in the new South Africa. It
is a decision that changed the face of our country.

Mr President, it is a fitting tribute for Parliament to bid farewell to a
man of the calibre and stature of the eminent Judge Chaskalson. His record
speaks for itself. Parliament wishes him a long and happy retirement. We
will no doubt continue to seek his counsel.

In the same breath I wish, on behalf of Parliament, to welcome the new
leadership of our judiciary, Chief Justice Pius Langa and Deputy Chief
Justice Dikgang Moseneke. We hope that both Chief Justice Langa and Deputy
Chief Justice Moseneke will continue where Judge Chaskalson has left off.

We trust their leadership, and we have no doubt that they will be equal to
the task. We need not remind them that the road to realising a judiciary
that is attuned to the needs and aspirations of a democratic, nonracial,
nonsexist society is still a long one to go. I thank you all. [Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Mr President, Madam Speaker, Chief Justice, colleagues
and friends, it is not often that the leadership of the three institutions
of our state gather to pay tribute to one of their own in the manner that
we are doing today.

It is significant that today we all gather, taking time off from the
stresses and toils of our respective vocations, and pause in the ever-
unfolding story of our nation’s progress into the 21st century. It is
another notch marked in this era of democracy that will in time to come be
remembered as the first of hopefully many such happy occasions.

It is a particular honour for me to stand before you today to pay tribute
to our former Chief Justice Arthur Chaskalson for his contribution to this
unfolding history and as a personal tribute to one who has, in his
lifetime, given much of his talents and energies in the service of the
nation.

Justice Arthur Chaskalson - and he remains Justice Chaskalson - was the
first head of the Constitutional Court when it was established in 1994. In
2001, after the untimely death of another great jurist, Ismail Mahomed, he
became Chief Justice.

Born in Johannesburg on 24 November 1931, he graduated cum laude in 1954
from the University of the Witwatersrand. He was a member of the
university’s football team at the time and was selected . . . [Laughter.].
. . [Applause.]. . . for the combined South African universities’ football
team in 1952. I have it on good authority that his soccer career, however,
was always tenuous, given his excessive insistence on the audi alteram
partem principle every time the referee ruled him out of order. [Laughter.]

As a young, highly talented man, a great career lay ahead of him in the
field of law; much fame, acclaim and fortune awaited the young Arthur
Chaskalson in latter-day white South Africa. But this young white man had a
destiny with the nation. He chose a path not many of his peers would have
considered too clever.

Our story as a nation is full of little miracles, but 1994 produced the big
one. One of those little miracles was that this magnificent legal mind, as
Justice Albie Sachs calls him, put his enormous talents at the disposal of
justice, and not that of fame and fortune.

When he was made part of the defence team in the Rivonia Treason Trial the
accused didn’t know much about this young man, and it was Bram Fischer who
put paid to their concerns by saying to them: “Yes, he may be young but,
mark my words, he is the next Issie Maisels.” Such was Bram Fisher’s
confidence in the young man that he tasked him to deal with the vital
aspects of the case regarding the jurisprudence.

Anyone who understands the apartheid treason laws at the time would
understand that one would be forgiven for thinking that you didn’t need a
lawyer for the purpose but a magician. Young Arthur Chaskalson was indeed a
little of both.

He, again, showed his mettle when he gave up a lucrative practice and set
up the Legal Resources Centre, a non-profit organisation that seeks to use
law to pursue justice and human rights in South Africa. Indeed, many of the
members present here today were beneficiaries of the services of this noble
institution that to this day . . . [Applause.] . . . champions fundamental
freedoms for the poorest of the poor.

In 1994 Arthur Chaskalson was called upon to establish the Constitutional
Court. At a recent tribute in Johannesburg, the first secretary being
interviewed by him told of how she had to sit on the only piece of
furniture available, a chair. She remembered how frightened she felt at
that interview, not only at being interviewed by the great man, but also
having his tall frame circling her all the while.
During the time after 1994 there were two significant partnerships formed,
the first was between Arthur Chaskalson and Justice Ismail Mahomed, both of
whom were passionate, yet very different in their styles and in their
personalities. Meetings, I hear, were often interesting.

While Justice Mahomed was overtly passionate and lyrical - and powerfully
so - Justice Chaskalson has in his make-up a determination that is housed
in a dignified stance and true humanitarian belief in respect for all
people. This is true when dealing with other judges on the Bench or,
indeed, in the courts when dealing with counsel.

In this country, where judicial bullying so characterised our courts, this
is a lasting legacy that can only bode well for the future of our
judiciary.

The second partnership that he developed was with the current Chief
Justice, Pius Langa. I am told that when accepting the Peter Gruber Award
recently at the UN, which was awarded to both of these distinguished men,
each sang the praises of the other in a manner that would put traditional
praise singers to shame. [Laughter.]

It is a mark of such a true leader that one can say that Justice Arthur
Chaskalson, through a labour of love, built the institution of the
Constitutional Court, but that all 11 judges hold pride of place and that
all of them find a niche and are able to contribute to the extent of their
talents and interests.

The atmosphere is collegial and, in a large measure, this is attributed to
the strong leadership provided by both judges in that the energies of the
11 very strong personalities are harnessed in a lively ensemble.

Above all of these achievements, though, the most lasting legacy of all
must be found in the judgments of the Constitutional Court. During his
distinguished tenure Justice Chaskalson has given and has been part of a
number of landmark decisions covering various fields of public life.

They range from judicial independence, in the Van Rooyen case, and the
President of the Republic of South Africa and others v the SA Rugby
Football Union with regards to the right to a fair trial, the
constitutional review powers of the President, of Parliament’s freedom of
speech, and voting rights, to name a few.

But for me it is when the court talks about dignity for ordinary South
Africans, the downtrodden individual, the legal and the illegal immigrant,
the person sentenced to death, the Muslim woman seeking recognition of her
marriage, the child seeking maintenance, the child - again - used to
produce pornographic material in the name of freedom of expression and
other similar outrages that the heart of South Africa cries: “Viva!”

It was former President Nelson Mandela who, when inaugurating the
Constitutional Court in February 1995, said, and I quote:

   To Judge Arthur Chaskalson and other members of the Constitutional Court,
   let me say the following: Yours is the most noble task that could fall to
   any legal person. In the last resort, the guarantee of the fundamental
   rights and freedoms for which we have fought so hard, lies in your hands.
   We look to you to honour the Constitution and the people it represents.
   We expect from you, no, demand of you, the greatest use of your wisdom,
   honesty and good sense - no shortcuts, no easy solutions. Your work is
   not only lofty, it is also lonely.


   In the end you have only the Constitution and your conscience on which
   you can rely. We look upon you to serve both without fear or favour.


Justice Pius Langa said recently that as a six-year-old he was placed on a
box to recite “Twinkle, twinkle little star, how I wonder what you are”. He
says that he was particularly good at it and at the time he used to think
of all the children in South Africa reaching for these elusive stars. Even
at the age of six he displayed qualities on which this nation is built.

Well, the son of a humble priest from rural KwaZulu-Natal has now become
Chief Justice of a free South Africa. [Applause.] Twinkle, twinkle little
stars, we no longer wonder what they are. We have two of them in our midst.
[Applause.]

On behalf of the ANC and the people of our country, thank you to both of
you, and we wish you well. To the new Chief Justice and the new Deputy
Chief Justice Moseneke, may your tenure be guided, and may it be blessed
with wisdom and strength. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, Mr President, Judge Chaskalson, Chief
Justice Langa and Deputy Chief Justice Moseneke, hon members, it is a great
honour for me to participate on behalf of the DA in this parliamentary
ceremony to honour and bid farewell to our retiring Chief Justice, Arthur
Chaskalson, and to welcome our new Chief Justice, Pius Langa, and his
deputy.

Before I proceed, I would like to apologise that not all our members could
be present today. Our leader, the hon Tony Leon, would have liked to have
spoken himself, and indeed all our members would have liked to be present
as we have the highest respect for Judge Chaskalson and the greatest
expectations of Judge Pius Langa in his new elevated position, as we do for
Deputy Chief Justice Moseneke. Unfortunately, the notice was rather short.

On a personal note, I remember so well as a young attorney in Johannesburg
in the mid-seventies, who we regarded as the giants of the Johannesburg
Bar, among them the late Ismail Mohamed and Arthur Chaskalson who
successively became Chief Justices of our country. Even at the height of
the apartheid years, their brilliance was acknowledged and sought after. It
was very exciting being part of a legal team that briefed them at the time.

Judge Chaskalson’s unfailing courtesy, kindness and humility were as
noticeable then as they are today. Outgoing Chief Justice Chaskalson is an
outstanding jurist of principle, dedicated to excellence. During the 11
years that he has presided over the Constitutional Court, he has made an
immeasurable contribution to the development of our law, and, in
particular, to our constitutional jurisprudence.

It must be remembered that 11 years ago, when he took over as President of
the Constitutional Court, the guardian of our Constitution was merely a
thing outlined on paper. Its 11 new judges were from diverse backgrounds
and many had not previously been judges. It had no home and it had no
jurisprudence.

The sheer magnificence of what Arthur Chaskalson has achieved in building
that institution is evidenced in the body of judgments, internationally
acknowledged to include leading decisions, particularly in the field of
human rights; the vigorous independence of the court; the dedication of the
judges who so manifestly work as a team; and the beautiful building in
which the court is housed. To experience a sitting of the Constitutional
Court is to experience South African democracy at work. All can participate
and all can have their say.

For the past six years I have had the privilege of sitting on the Judicial
Service Commission, which Judge Chaskalson has chaired with a sure hand, as
we have tried to make appointments in terms of the constitutional
imperative that the judiciary reflect broadly the racial and gender
composition of South Africa.

While I agree with Judge Chaskalson that the commission has done well as
far as race is concerned, now that some 40% of judges and most of the
leaders of the judiciary are black, the same cannot be said for gender,
with only 13% of the judges being women. The President has rightly said
that more attention must be focused on ensuring that more women are
appointed as judges. [Applause.]

It is perhaps poignant that Judge Chaskalson is leaving the judiciary at a
time when judges perceive their independence to be threatened, and when
thuggish and ignorant attacks have been made on the judiciary, which
demonstrate a lack of respect for the rule of law.

These must be resisted, and I believe Judge Chaskalson spoke for all judges
when he said at his farewell ceremony at the Constitutional Court last
week:

   The independence of the judiciary and the separation of powers are
   foundational principles of constitutionalism. The delicate balance called
   for to give effect to this separation requires the three arms of
   government to pay attention to the interrelationship between them
   mandated by the Constitution and to the deference that each owes to the
   other. How this is done is of particular importance for the standing of
   the courts, their efficacy and the respect that their judgments command.
   It is crucial constitutionalism.
We wish Judge Chaskalson well in his retirement and we shall miss him. At
the same time, it is a pleasure to congratulate Chief Justice Langa and, of
course, his deputy on their appointments.

The DA has great faith that Judge Langa will be a worthy successor and an
outstanding leader of the judiciary. Everything that Judge Langa has said
since his appointment has tended to justify that faith - from his
commitment to maintaining the stability of the judiciary, to his laudable
outspoken position that judges should control the system of judicial
education, in keeping with the independence of the judiciary.

Judge Langa has also made it clear in his judgments that he takes his cue
from the Constitution, and he has said:

   The process of interpreting the Constitution must recognise the context
   in which we find ourselves, and the Constitution’s goal of a society
   based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights.

We wish him and his deputy well. Their success will be South Africa’s
success. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, Mr President, I first met Arthur
Chaskalson some 45 years ago when I was a registrar to a High Court judge
in Johannesburg. That judge told me: “Koos, watch this young Chaskalson. He
is very bright . . . maar pasop, hy is ’n kommunis.” [. . . but watch out,
he’s a communist.][Laughter.]

Today, after a lifetime, Adv Chaskalson may no longer be young, but we all
know that he is still very bright. Whether he is still a communist, I don’t
know. [Laughter.]

On behalf of the IFP, I wish to say: Thank you, Arthur, for always
demonstrating the purest form of judicial conscience, for fearlessly
protecting the independence of the judiciary, for dauntlessly protecting
the values contained in the Constitution and for being an outstanding
example of a dignified and honest jurist. We wish you well.

In the event of Judge Chaskalson still being a communist, I wish to say
goodbye to him in my best Russian: Прощайте, Вы мой товарищ. [Farewell to
you, my comrade.][Laughter.][Applause.]

The new Chief Justice is a good example of somebody who started at the
bottom of the judicial ladder and ended up at the very top. He reminds me
of somebody else, a relative of mine, who started at the bottom and ended
up at the top. He was first a bootmaker, and now he is a hairdresser.
[Laughter.] We now call Judge Langa “Dlondlobele”.

Pius Langa, I am told, was also a court interpreter, speaking many
languages, though not as many as Dikgang Moseneke, who speaks nine South
African languages. I am told that during a criminal trial Judge Langa once
interpreted for a young Zulu who was charged with stealing a sheep.
Interpreter Langa told the youngster that the magistrate had found him not
guilty and therefore he did not steal the sheep. [Laughter.] Then the
accused man asked Interpreter Langa: May I now keep the sheep? [Laughter.]

In welcoming Dlondlobele, we are confident that he will be the great
custodian of our Constitution; that he will be the great guardian of the
independence of the judiciary; that he will be the great mobiliser,
mobilising whatever is required to protect our judiciary from sliding
further into collapse; that he will be the great protector, jealously
protecting the integrity, dignity and efficiency of our courts, and
especially of our High Courts; that he will protect the language rights of
litigants; that he will be the great transformer, ensuring that the Bench
is transformed, but not at a rate that will erode the efficiency of the
judiciary with a resultant loss of trust in the judiciary.

In this respect, you are reminded of some Latin words: Festina lente.
[Hasten slowly.]

I now wish to say something in isiZulu.

Jaji elikhulu, sikufisela izilokotho ezinhle. Siyakwethemba,  uhambe  kahle.
[Chief Justice, we wish you everything of the best. We trust you, goodbye.]

And in Sesotho – this is for the benefit of the mojaperes and the
mojatransporotes. [Laughter.]

Moahlodi e moholo, re o lakaletsa mahlohonolo. Re motlotlo ka wena, re o
tshepile. Tsamaya hantle. [Chief Justice, we wish you good luck. We are
proud of you and we have faith in you. Go well.]

Agb Hoofregter, dit doen my ou Boerehart ook goed om met u ook in Afrikaans
te praat. [Gelag.] Ons wens u alles van die beste toe. Ons vertrou u en ons
staan by u. En ek dra graag aan u ’n Afrikaanse versie op:

     Gee my ’n man wat doen wat reg is
     As die regter weg is
     Wat sê wat waar is
     As die duiwel daar is
     En wat trou by sy gewete bly
     As hy straf in plaas van beloning kry.

In my laaste vyftien sekondes wil ek iets sê. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chief Justice, it also warms my old Boer heart  also to speak  to you
in Afrikaans. [Laughter.] We wish you everything of the best. We trust you
and we stand by you. And I take pleasure in dedicating a short Afrikaans
verse to you.

    Gee my ’n man wat doen wat reg is
    As die regter weg is
    Wat sê wat waar is
    As die duiwel daar is
    En wat trou by sy gewete bly
    As hy straf in plaas van beloning kry.

In my last fifteen seconds I want to say something.]

In conclusion, we welcome Judge Moseneke as the new Deputy Chief Justice,
the man who speaks nine of the official languages. We are confident that he
will play a pivotal role in our judiciary.

But we, today, would also like to tell him, as chairperson of the
commission looking into the improvement of salaries of members of
Parliament . . . [Laughter.][Applause.] . . .  that the ink on his
appointment form is not yet dry. [Laughter.][Applause.] And I believe the
President will check if we have a huge improvement in salaries, otherwise
we kick him out. [Laughter.][Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, hon President, retired Chief Justice
Chaskalson, incoming Chief Justice Pius Langa, hon members, thorough
justice is about far more than the application of law. It is about
impartiality and fairness, and about resolving disputes in a fashion that
reflects the values of society. In this sense, thorough and comprehensive
justice is something that only came to South Africa with the introduction
of the new democratic constitutional order.

Ours is not only a judicial system that is a vast improvement on the past;
it is also a shining example in comparison with other systems in the world.
The practice of justice can be a clinical business: It weighs arguments,
evidence and law with cold logic.

What distinguishes modern, South African constitutional justice is that its
clinical reasoning is balanced and complemented by a strong sense of
compassion and humanity. In no small measure, that remarkable achievement
achieved within a very short time can be attributed to the women and men
who actively set out to create a judicial system that is not only just, but
also compassionate.

Whilst, at any given time, many people might aspire to such noble goals, it
takes leadership to gather those disparate noble intentions and unify them
into an ethos that can transform an entire system.

Retired Chief Justice Chaskalson is such a leader. Whilst we know your
humility well, Sir, and we can confidently expect that you’ll remind us
that you were but one of many who strived towards these noble goals, we
must nonetheless single you out as a steadfast leader and guide to your
peers.

I will not attempt to single out isolated achievements in the life of
retired Chief Justice Chaskalson, but rather say that through highs and
lows his life was dedicated to the pursuit of justice in the true sense of
the word.

I can also say that he was never a passenger, swept along by the currents
of history, but always in the forefront, no matter the personal costs.

Sir, we salute your service to the nation up to this point and we do so
with the comfort of knowing that you have merely retired from your position
and not from the quarters of the pursuit of justice.

On behalf of the UDM, I’d like to also congratulate the incoming leadership
of the judiciary. Sirs, you have an onerous task ahead of you, but we are
confident you’ll measure up. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, Mr President, hon members of the judiciary,
the credentials and achievements of outgoing Chief Justice Arthur
Chaskalson read like the specifications of a luxury motor vehicle. The man
is a national monument and, indeed, is still alive.

Certainly, his contribution to the transformation and establishment of a
new order in our country’s judicial system is unique and immeasurable. The
judiciary, under his distinguished leadership, has been transformed to
levels that a few years ago were unthinkable.

The standards set by Chief Justice Chaskalson are high and this has created
an exciting challenge to our new Chief Justice Pius Langa and his Deputy
Chief Justice Dikgang Moseneke, who have inherited this important mission.
But these two jurists are undoubtedly icons in their own right, and South
Africans can be proud that we have such worthy successors. Their
contribution to the establishment of a new South Africa is equally
significant.

Deputy Chief Justice Moseneke has always been my source of inspiration, for
which I’m very grateful. I want to promise him that I will always respect
the principle of separation of powers between Parliament and the judiciary.
We therefore look forward to an era where we will be guided through the
final process of transformation of the judiciary under their good
leadership.

However, we still have many challenges facing us. We must continue the
debate around the independence of the judiciary. We must, furthermore,
ensure that access to justice is also there, especially for the poor. The
question of language in our courts must be addressed and, lastly, the
courts must be made more accessible, especially to the poor.

Lastly, as we say farewell to a truly great South African and also welcome
our new Chief and Deputy Chief Justice, we are truly convinced that our
country is blessed with great talents in the judiciary, and we hope that
these will be directed towards transforming our judicial system. I thank
you. [Applause.]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Let it be praised!]

Ms C B JOHNSON: Madam Speaker, hon President, Justices Chaskalson, Langa
and Moseneke, and hon members, for South Africans the Constitutional Court
is a symbol of our commitment to dignity, equality and freedom, and Justice
Arthur Chaskalson will always be remembered as the first President of the
first Constitutional Court of a free South Africa, and that is very
special.

He will be remembered for a long list of achievements - too many to mention
- from obtaining his LLB cum laude from Wits in 1954 at an early age; his
role in, amongst others, the Rivonia Trial; to the establishment of the
Legal Resources Centre in 1978, which sought to use the law to pursue
justice and human rights in South Africa.

But, mostly, he will be remembered as an architect of our new democracy,
and as a man who used his talents and his brilliant legal mind in a
lifetime of service to his fellow South Africans and in the creation of a
just society.

Of many of the judgments that he wrote, just from me, thank you, Justice
Chaskalson, for writing judgments that we as law students could actually
read easily. Thank you for that.

My favourite dictum from Justice Chaskalson, the one that stands out, is
from the Makwanyane case, when he said that the court will never allow
itself to be diverted from its duty to act as an independent arbiter of the
Constitution.
Chief Justice Langa, we congratulate you on your appointment and we wish
you well. Whenever one speaks to members of the legal profession they
always say the same thing: they will tell you that Pius Langa is highly
respected as a brilliant legal practitioner, but just as highly respected
for being an exceptional human being.

If I may now turn to one of the dictums of Chief Justice Langa, when he
spoke in a recent judgment about the type of society that we as South
Africans want to achieve. He said that the process of interpreting the
constitutional text must recognise the Constitution’s goal of a society
that is based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human
rights.

We thank you both and, in fact, all the members of the judiciary for your
commitment and your dedication in striving towards building this society, a
society based on democratic values, social justice and human rights.

We have been privileged to have two jurists of such a calibre and stature
as Justices Chaskalson and Langa, and we salute you for showing this nation
that it’s not simply about having a constitution, but about living a
constitution. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon members of the
judiciary and colleagues, today we bid farewell to a great man who has
spent many years helping to build the justice system we now have in South
Africa.

My colleague, Adv Madasa, who served with former Chief Justice Chaskalson
on the Judicial Service Commission for three years, has shared with me the
following, and I quote:

   Former Chief Justice has laid a solid foundation for the transformation
   of the Bench to continue without compromising its standards. He presided
   over issues of the transformation of the Bench with a rare ability, given
   the emotional nature of transformation in South Africa, to balance the
   demands of social equity and judicial efficiency with care.


Additionally, the former Chief Justice has passionately defended the
independence of the judiciary and he will always be respected for that,
particularly in the light of the recent controversy surrounding proposed
legislative amendments affecting the judiciary.

The ACDP salutes you, Sir, for serving your country with distinction, and
trust that you will enjoy your well-deserved rest.

We also welcome the incoming Chief Justice Pius Langa, whom we equally
respect, particularly for demonstrating to us that hard work is always
rewarded. He worked his way through the legal system to get to where he is
today.
Finally, the ACDP wishes to congratulate the Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang
Moseneke on his appointment. He too has a long, distinguished career in
law, as well as in business. We believe that, together with Chief Justice
Langa, they form a formidable team that will ensure that there will always
be justice for all in this beautiful country of ours.

The ACDP wishes them well in all their added responsibilities, and trust
that they will also be successful in ensuring that the independence of the
judiciary is retained for many years to come. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mevrou die Speaker, mnr die President, die VF Plus
vereenselwig hom met die woorde, uitgespreek deur lede van die ander
partye, van waardering teenoor die Hoofregter en ook teenoor die andere.

Die onafhanklikheid van die regbank is deur geslagte heen deur voorgangers
van die uittredende Hoofregter vreesloos toegepas en gekoester. Dié
tradisie is voortgesit deur die uittredende Hoofregter, en die VF Plus het
geen twyfel nie dat hoofregter Langa en adjunkhoofregter Moseneke hierdie
tradisie sal voortsit.

‘n Suksesvolle jong demokrasie het ‘n onafhanklike regbank, vertroue en
respek nodig. Dis die kultuur en tradisie van die Afrikaners om sodanige
respek te hê, en die Hoofregter en die Adjunkhoofregter kan staatmaak op
die ondersteuning, respek en agting van die VF Plus. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr F VAN HEERDEN: Madam Speaker, Mr President, the FF Plus identifies
itself with the words of appreciation expressed by members of the other
parties to the Chief Justice and others.

The independence of the Bench has throughout generations been treasured and
applied without fear by the predecessors of the outgoing Chief Justice.
This tradition was perpetuated by the outgoing Chief Justice and the FF
Plus has no doubt that Chief Justice Langa and Deputy Chief Justice
Moseneke will perpetuate this tradition.

A successful young democracy requires an independent Bench, confidence and
respect. It is the culture and tradition of Afrikaners to have such
respect, and the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice can rely on the
support, respect and regard of the FF Plus.]

In the pension case the outgoing Chief Justice gave judgment against us.
He’s now also going to be a pensioner. . .  [Laughter.] . . . and I think
he’s going to experience it himself and maybe sometimes wonder whether he
shouldn’t have given judgment in our favour. [Laughter.]

Nietemin, ons wens die uittredende Hoofregter ‘n aangename aftrede toe, en
sukses en voorspoed vir die nuwe Hoofregter en die Adjunkhoofregter. Ek
dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Nevertheless, we wish the outgoing Chief Justice a pleasant retirement and
we wish the new Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice success and
prosperity. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, President, outgoing Chief Justice, when
an eagle lands, other birds watch with awe and admiration because they know
that it is hard-working and is not limited by the skies.

When it prepares for the next take-off, the journey to the unknown skies
and destination, it does so with confidence, ready to explore and break new
ground in an attempt to discover what life has to offer, and it shares with
others.

We are proud that in South Africa we had our own legal eagle in Chief
Justice Chaskalson. He landed at a time when our country was in a state of
transition and in need of guidance to navigate through the waters of our
unjust legal system that favoured a specific race and the rich. It was a
time that our legal system was under severe pressure to change with times
and serve all South Africans, irrespective of their background.
We as a country were indeed blessed to have luminaries such as Chief
Justice Chaskalson at the helm of the Constitutional Court, including his
dedicated team of legal eagles. When the Chief Justice announced his
retirement we did not expect it as he still had so much to offer his fellow
countrymen.

But what can we do when the eagle takes off? We simply have to watch with
admiration and awe as it takes off. Many people say that the eagle is
unpredictable; it might decide to land again. [Laughter.]

Rona, jaaja ntsu re tla go galogelwa ka ditiro tsa gago tse di molemo. [We
will recognise you as an eagle, and also be reminded of the great work you
have done.]

To the new Chief Justice and his Deputy, the soil has been well prepared.
Yours is to plant the seed.

Gorogang ka pula Bakwena. Re solofetse go le go ntsi mo go lona. Aforika
Borwa ga e a bolo go kgeresiwa ke batswakwa. Kampanang le dikgwetlho tsa
segompieno. Lo tla di henya. Nayang badiredi ba rona thuso ya Modimo. A
kagiso e nne le lona. [Bring us happiness, Bakwena. We expect a lot from
you. Foreigners have always been a problem in South Africa. In facing
modern challenges, with the help of God you will overcome them. Peace be
with you.]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Speaker, Comrade President of the Republic, comrades and
hon members, I stand on behalf of the PAC and, indeed, on my own behalf to
join Parliament and the entire country in saying farewell to the outgoing
Chief Justice Judge Arthur Chaskalson.

It is with both a sense of loss and fulfilment that we bid farewell to an
outstanding and dedicated South African, whose involvement in the legal
field spans almost half a century. Judge Chaskalson could have chosen the
easy road of indifference to the inequities bedevilling our country, but
instead he chose the hard, least-travelled but noble route of struggle.

He used his vast talents to assist liberation fighters and resist the
abominable system of settler minority rule. It was therefore befitting and
appropriate that after the 1994 democratic breakthrough he became the first
President of South Africa’s Constitutional Court. It was under his
stewardship that the important, ongoing transformation process of the
judiciary began.

The PAC wishes you well and hopes that your wealth of experience and wisdom
will continue to be readily available to benefit our country.

We also want to take this opportunity to welcome the new Chief Justice
Judge Pius Langa and his deputy, Justice Dikgang Moseneke. The PAC would
like to thank the President for your appointments. The challenges of our
country are not new to you, especially the imperative of transformation.

Transformation is an objective and dialectical imperative to which we need
to give added vigour and pace. Your appointment is a powerful affirmation
that transformation is a must, urgent and non-negotiable.

On this joyous occasion the PAC wishes you well, Judge Chaskalson, and
heartily welcomes and celebrates your appointments, Chief Justice and
Deputy Chief Justice. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, hon President, Judge Arthur Chaskalson and
our other respected members of the judiciary, Ministers, our fellow
colleagues, our colleagues from the NCOP, the MF applauds and honours Chief
Justice Judge Arthur Chaskalson’s service to our nation.

During the apartheid regime you were, as a young attorney, a beacon of hope
for many freedom fighters. We admire you and express gratitude for your
contribution to the Legal Resources Centre, established in 1978. But, our
great admiration and gratitude extends to you for being the first head of
the Constitutional Court.

Chief Justice, you have been an inspirational contributor to the
transformation of our justice system, based on the spirit, purport and
values of our Constitution.

The MF is honoured to have had our judiciary headed by such an honourable
and humanitarian man as Chief Justice Chaskalson. We thank you, Sir,
abundantly, and wish you a peaceful and restful retirement.

To our Chief Justice Langa and our Deputy Chief Justice Moseneke: Sirs, a
very warm and heartfelt welcome to both of you. May your stay in our
judiciary be a pleasant one, and we pray that you both enjoy whatever you
do. We further pray that the good Lord guides your judgments and that they
always be fair and justified at all times. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Speaker, hon President of the Republic of South
Africa, hon retired Chief Justice Arthur Chaskalson, hon incoming Chief
Justice Pius Langa and your deputy, hon Dikgang Moseneke, other hon judges
and members of Parliament, on behalf of Azapo, I am honoured to bid
farewell to a distinguished lawyer, a human rights activist and, indeed,
one of the founding members of our constitutional dispensation.

Hon Chaskalson, in Azapo we know you as one of those who were there during
the many trials that characterised our people’s struggle. Those of us, hon
Chaskalson, who come from the liberation struggle know you as a person who
used his legal talents to defend all of us, as well as those who sought to
defeat the evil system of apartheid. Little did we know - and yourself, I
think – that you would, together with your legal colleagues, be the
champion of shaping the legal justice system of our democratic South
Africa.

Hon Chaskalson leaves behind a legacy of dedicated service to our country,
which will serve to inspire future generations to continue working for a
legal justice system that is accessible to the poor. Azapo wishes you well
in your retirement.

To the incoming hon Chief Justice Pius Langa and Deputy Chief Justice
Dikgang Moseneke, Azapo wishes to congratulate you on having been appointed
to the highest office within the judiciary. We are convinced that the hon
Chaskalson is leaving the judiciary in good hands. Your long and
distinguished legal careers and the fact that you spent your entire adult
lives in the service of the people bring to focus the fact that the
judiciary is, indeed, now in capable hands.

May the spirit of Albert Luthuli, Robert Sobukwe and Steven Bantu Biko give
you strength to transform the judiciary. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES: Madam Speaker, hon
President of the Republic of South Africa, Chairperson and Deputy
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Chief Justice Arthur
Chaskalson, our esteemed incoming Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice,
members of the judiciary, members of the diplomatic corps, members of
Parliament, distinguished guests and fellow comrades, all protocol
observed, one is humbled to take part in the momentous occasion of bidding
farewell to our esteemed Chief Justice Arthur Chaskalson, and welcoming of
the new leadership of our judiciary.

Let me assure you that I will not speak in Russian or Latin, lest - in the
words of Mr Van der Merwe - if the interpretation is not good, we may lose
a lot of sheep. [Laughter.] If my speech were a poem or an essay, the title
would be, “Why me?” This is because at the beginning of May 2004, members
of the NCOP, including myself, were sworn in by this honourable son of the
soil, Chief Justice Chaskalson. Coincidentally, at the end of May this
year, he retired.

We are aware of and thankful for the role that Chief Justice Chaskalson has
played in the transformation of the judiciary, not only in South Africa,
but also in the whole of Southern Africa. He is one of those who associated
themselves with the just treatment of all South Africans for a very long
time, including, as previous speakers have indicated, his involvement as a
representative of our leaders in political trials, which included the then
landmark Rivonia Trial.

As the National Council of Provinces is charged with bringing all spheres
of government together in the spirit of co-operative government, it can
compare itself to the unselfish contribution that the hon Chief Justice
Chaskalson has made to bring all the people of South Africa together.

During his days as a legal practitioner, he represented many political
activists because he wanted to see justice prevail. He did this because he
believed in the basis of the struggle of those activists, which was
achieving equality for all and for all people to be treated as human beings
with human rights.

During those days it was lawyers such as Mr Chaskalson who were used as
protectors of political activists against the evil system of apartheid. It
was people like him who kept government on its toes to ensure that it did
not abuse its power. Here we are talking of the apartheid government,
which, to the contrary, unleashed its machinery and abused the power of the
state to the extreme. But he would not be deterred.

There is no doubt that he is the father of the Constitutional Court. He is
areal son of South Africa and the epitome of the people’s justice. Today
our democracy is strong because of institutions such as the Constitutional
Court, which he headed for just over a decade of our democratic order;
presiding as he did at a critical stage in the history of our country.

Chinua Achebe once said, I quote, “Things fall apart; the centre cannot
hold.” Today things do not fall apart, because the centre, such as the
Constitutional Court, does hold. Though he has retired from the
Constitutional Court, we are confident in our belief that he will not
retire from fighting for justice for all and making sure that our democracy
grows stronger, and stronger, and stronger.

He has indeed left an indelible mark on the constitutional democracy of
this country and he will be sorely missed. He has left the judiciary while
it is grappling with the important issue of transformation. We believe that
the new leadership will play a critical role in advancing transformation,
not only in the judiciary, but also of our society in its entirety.

During his tenure as Chief Justice, we have seen some progress, especially
with regard to the representation of women judges on the Bench. He was also
in favour of the change of names of the various jurisdictions of High
Courts. Many of the High Courts still carry the names of the pre-1994
jurisdiction. As a champion of justice and human rights, he took many cases
without remuneration. This was a sign of solidarity with the poor, the
downtrodden and oppressed masses of our country.

He wanted justice to be a winner. It is the prevailing of justice over
injustice that has placed our country where it is today. I hope that as he
retires, Chief Justice Chaskalson is happy to have contributed to our
liberation in the way he did. He was one of those brave people in the legal
fraternity who believed in justice and lived it through their actions -
people such as the late Abraham Fischer.

The smooth change of government in 1994 was one of the most outstanding
achievements of liberation struggles this century. We now have the
Constitution and its various institutions, which provide the framework
within which individuals should exercise their democratic rights.

We salute you. We will hold up your example to the youth of this country as
an ultimate temple for those who intend understanding the road to justice.
God bless you. [Applause.]

The OUTGOING CHIEF JUSTICE ARTHUR CHASKALSON: Madam Speaker, Chair of the
National Council of Provinces, Mr President, Chief Justice, Deputy Chief
Justice, members of Parliament and members of the judiciary, distinguished
guests, it is an exceptional honour to be invited to speak at a Joint
Sitting of the two Houses of Parliament.

I would like to begin by acknowledging that and by expressing my
appreciation to the President and to Parliament for convening this Joint
Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces to
wish me well, and to welcome the new leaders of the judiciary, Chief
Justice Langa and Deputy Chief Justice Moseneke.

It is a special day for me and my family. Kind and generous words have been
spoken about me by the President, by Parliament and by representatives of
all the parties in this Chamber, and I thank you all for that.

I am overwhelmed by what has been said, particularly, I think, by Comrade
Koos van der Merwe. [Laughter.] In those days to be called “a Communist”
was a badge of honour. It showed that you were on the right side.
[Laughter.]

Reflecting on what has been said, I want to repeat what I said last week in
the Constitutional Court. It is my wife who has constantly, throughout all
the years, made me understand what sort of a society we live in.
[Applause.] She made me understand what needed to be done and she ensured
that whatever I did, I did because it was necessary to do, and I thank her
for that. [Applause.]

Madam Speaker, today’s ceremony, as you, the President and other speakers
have said, serves an important symbolic purpose. As members have pointed
out, it acknowledges the relationship between the three arms of government:
the legislature, the executive and the judiciary. That inter-relationship
is recognised by our Constitution in different ways. The President appoints
the Chief Justice. The Chief Justice administers the Oath of Office to the
President. The Chief Justice administers an Oath of Office to members of
Parliament, who make the laws. The executive administers the laws thus
made. Where disputes arise in relationship to these laws, the judiciary
decides what the requirements of the Constitution are and whether they have
been complied with.

So each arm of government operates in its own field. All of us are bound by
the Constitution. All of us are required to give effect to its values and
all of us, I believe, in everything that we have done over the past 11
years, have done our best to do so.

There is another important symbolism attached to this ceremony. It
acknowledges that a change in leadership is taking place, and that, too, is
important, for in a democracy such changes are essential. All who exercise
power as leaders do so for a limited time and one of the strengths of the
system is that such changes should take place. It is crucial for democracy.

And when this happens, it is appropriate that change should be recognised
and celebrated. The change in the leadership of the judiciary today is of
particular importance. It brings to the head of the judiciary two
outstanding judges who know from their own life experience what it means to
have been denied human dignity, equality and freedom. [Applause.] Those are
now the founding values of our Constitution. They are values that Chief
Justice Langa and Deputy Chief Justice Moseneke cherish and which will
inform everything they do as leaders of the judiciary.

This change is also symbolically important as it marks another significant
stage in the process of the transformation of the judiciary. The present
leaders of the judiciary, the Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief Justice, the
President of the Supreme Court of Appeal and the Judges President - most of
whom are in this House today – have all been appointed to their positions
of leadership under our new constitutional order. All of them are committed
to the transformation that the Constitution demands.

When I mention this, I would also like to mention Chief Justice Corbett,
who held the judiciary together during a very difficult time between the
adoption of the interim Constitution and the adoption of our final
Constitution. He was a fine judge; a man committed to the values of our
Constitution, and he did our nation a great service in those years.
[Applause.]

I would also like to mention Chief Justice Mahomed, whose sad and untimely
death deprived this country of a judge of great intellect and unrivalled
ability. His legacy remains in the law reports, in those who have worked
with him and in his contribution to bringing the courts together again at a
very difficult time. [Applause.]

I have talked about transformation. I believe that in attitudes to our
Constitution and to the law, the judiciary as an institution is totally
committed to transformation. However, more needs to be done in regard to
the composition of the judiciary, particularly as far as gender is
concerned, to complete the transformation that the Constitution requires.
But the foundations have been laid and I am confident that the process will
be completed expeditiously as the Constitution requires.

When we adopted and embraced, I should say, democracy some 11 years ago, we
committed ourselves to constitutionalism. All constitutions provide a
framework for government. They define the institutions of the state, the
powers vested in them and the way in which such powers must be exercised.
Constitutionalism is more than that.

Constitutionalism recognises that sovereignty resides in the people of the
country and that power must be exercised in their interests. These
interests are protected in a constitutional state by well-established
principles of democracy. They are the principles that have been mentioned
by almost all of the speakers today: the separation of powers between the
different arms of government, the constitutional guarantees of fundamental
rights and freedoms, the rule of law, and an independent judiciary.

In fact, the period since the end of World War II has been an era of
constitutionalism, precipitated initially by the ravages of that war and
also by the establishment of the UN, its commitment in its charter to
reaffirm the faith in human rights and in the dignity of people, and in the
equal rights of men and women.

This commitment to human rights and dignity is repeated in all the
important declarations and covenants of the UN and has, over the past 50
years or so, been adopted by nations around the world.

Looking back, we see that a driving force for this has been the suffering
of people, who have been the subject of authoritarian and unjust regimes,
who, having shaken off the oppressor, have been determined to ensure that
this does not happen again. This is what happened in Germany, Italy and
Japan after World War II. It happened in Spain and Portugal after the
collapse of fascism. It has happened in South America and in Eastern Europe
after the collapse of authoritarian regimes. It has happened in Africa - in
Namibia, Malawi, Uganda - and elsewhere, and most importantly, it is the
choice we made 11 years ago.

Constitutionalism calls for co-operation between the different arms of
government; that is a requirement of our Constitution. And yet at the same
time there must be a separation; that too is a requirement of our
Constitution.

And so the legislature, the executive and the judiciary move forward
together with the same goals: those enshrined in our Constitution, and
separately, each arm of government having its own role to play in the joint
endeavour to achieve these roles.

Our Constitution offers a vision of the future: it is of a society in which
there will be social justice, a society in which the basic needs of all the
people of our country will be met, a society in which we show respect and
concern for one another. Those are the principles that guide our joint and
separate endeavours.

Eleven years is a brief period in the history of a nation. However, looking
back over the past 11 years, I believe that we have made considerable
progress: we have put down the roots of democracy; we have respected the
Constitution and the Bill of Rights; we have given effect to the separation
of powers; we have an independent judiciary; we have a new jurisprudence,
which is being developed to give effect to the values of our Constitution.
The foundations have been laid. The framework is still being built.

Madam Speaker, we have still much to do in building our institutions, in
addressing poverty and in achieving the constitutional goal of social
justice, but I have great confidence in the future. I believe that we have
the will and the capacity to realise the goals of our Constitution.

It has been a great privilege for me to be part of this joint endeavour. It
has been a great privilege for me to be the Chief Justice of South Africa
and to be the first President of our first Constitutional Court. I
appreciate that and I thank you all for the honour you have bestowed on me
today. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, after I have adjourned the Joint Sitting,
members and guests should please remain at their places until the
processions have left the Chamber. The first procession to leave the
Chamber will be that of the judiciary, led by Chief Justice Langa. The
second procession will consist of the presiding officers, the President and
the former Chief Justice, Justice Chaskalson.

The Joint Sitting rose at 12:40.


