---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 14 December 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: DECEMBER
month_slug: Dec
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-12-14
---

WEDNESDAY, 14 DECEMBER 2005
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 10:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.




                     CONSTITUTION TWELFTH AMENDMENT BILL


                  CROSS-BOUNDARY MUNICIPAL LAWS REPEAL BILL

               (Consideration of Bills and of Reports thereon)

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, esteemed
delegates and hon members, in 1994 the World Bank produced a discussion
paper which, amongst other things, observed that South Africa’s urban
sector accounts for about 60% of the country’s population and over 80% of
its GDP.

The discussion document further observed that, and I quote:

  Without a fiscal base and an effective governance structure, the black
  townships, in stark contrast to the adjacent cities, have a low level of
  infrastructure and basic services.

May I hasten to point out, Chairperson, that what the World Bank had to say
about black townships is actually a softer version of the situation that
prevails in the predominantly rural provinces. The demographic and economic
concentration decried by the World Bank gave rise to a tendency towards
underdevelopment and stagnation. It effectively redlined millions of South
Africans from the national economy in a kind of cynical geography of
exclusion.

Today service delivery and infrastructure backlogs are a function of that
distinctive historical geography. The cross-boundary municipalities, with
their less than optimal effects on the quality of life of our people, have
indeed proved to be an embodiment and source of underdevelopment, rather
than its solution.

We see the electoral cycle as presenting us with the opportunity
periodically to probe and roll back such barriers to sound governance and
sustainable development. It is for that reason that the work that the NCOP
has set for itself today must indeed be commended as an important step
taking us in the direction of solving this problem. The decision that the
NCOP will take, hopefully will pave the way for introducing a local
government architecture that promises to help extricate some of our people
out of their collective condition of indigence.

As we speak, the Department of Provincial and Local Government is working
very closely with the affected provinces and municipalities to design a
process of managing the transition of disestablished cross-boundary
municipalities. The necessary resources, both human and material, for the
facilitation of the transition are also being mobilised.

Government has also taken note of the concerns raised by affected residents
in the course of their interactions with the relevant provincial select
committees. Appropriate steps are taken to ensure that the geographical
reordering of provincial and local spaces does not result in further
impoverishment of our people. On the contrary, it must result in the
betterment of our people’s conditions of life.

For all these things to happen, government will need the continuing co-
operation of the NCOP, the National Assembly, provincial legislatures and
the local government leadership, amongst others. We owe it to our people
and our country to work together for the realisation of this goal - and
work together we must.
In conclusion, Chairperson, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to
you, hon members and delegates, for kindly interrupting your holidays in
order to bring to a close the legislative aspect of the work preparatory to
the March 2006 local government elections.

A special word of thanks goes to all residents from the various
communities, who participated in the consultation processes germane to this
issue. They contributed insights whose usefulness goes beyond the immediate
assignment of redrawing provincial boundaries. They will enrich the ongoing
work of the municipalities as well as the interventions to be made by
provinces and national government in support of municipalities.

In any case, the last word on the configuration of municipalities and
provinces has not been said yet. Future processes in this regard will also
benefit from the contributions that were made in this round. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon
Chairperson, hon Minister Mufamadi, members, delegates, comrades and
friends, ladies and gentlemen, may I first apologise for not being here
when the House began. I am not sure how the misunderstanding took place,
but we were informed that there would first be motions and that we would
start 15 to 20 minutes after the start of the House. So I am not too sure
how this mistake occurred, but I apologise for that.
Let me start with the Bill. We have had four years of operating our new
local government system and as a government it is our firm belief that it
is time to remove some of the constraints to optimal service delivery. To
do this, we need to create a better legal and administrative framework that
will improve the performance of local government – as outlined by the
Minister.

The legal and administrative framework of local government has undergone
notable changes that have benefited citizens of this country. However,
there are still significant problems, even loopholes that require an
ongoing process of review and improvement. A profile of municipal
performance conducted by the Department of Provincial and Local Government
has found that among those municipalities that are discharging less than a
third of their assigned powers and functions are cross-boundary
municipalities.

The proposed changes in the local government framework must therefore be
seen against the background of a government committed to ensuring a better
life for all through efficient government institutions at local level.

Provincial boundary changes are not meant to disrupt the lives of those who
reside and do business in the affected areas. The proposed changes should
be approached on the basis of the need to improve service delivery rather
than sentimental considerations and perceptions of effective and efficient
service delivery by one province in relation to another.

Our ultimate objective is, therefore, to ensure that local government
fulfils its constitutional mandate to service provision, development and
poverty alleviation. Therefore the benefits to communities of ensuring
municipalities fall under a single provincial government include that
budgets and service delivery programmes will come from one source, that of
provincial government. This will, therefore, ensure that service delivery
should be faster and of a better quality.

The present nine provinces of the Republic were established by means of the
SA Constitution, out of the former white South Africa, the various
Bantustans and the so-called self-governing territories. While the
Constitution brought about these new entities that were to become an
integral part of what constitutes this country today, the area of the
respective provinces were defined primarily by reference to specific
magisterial districts created in terms of the Magistrates Court Act of
1944. This status quo was retained when adopted its final Constitution in
1996, which provides, and I quote, that: “The boundaries of the provinces
are those that existed when the Constitution took effect.”

During the demarcation process of the local government boundaries cross-
boundary municipalities were established in some areas to ensure viable,
integrated and effective local government, without a shift in the existing
provincial boundaries. In terms of the relevant statutory provisions, 16
cross-border municipalities were created, for example, Ekhurhuleni,
Tshwane, Bushbuckridge and Kgalakgadi.

These cross-boundary municipalities affect five provinces, namely Gauteng,
Limpopo, Mpumalanga, the Northern Cape and North West. However, in the past
five years experience has shown that cross-boundary municipalities present
legal and administrative challenges. Cross-boundary municipalities make it
difficult for government to provide services to communities in an equitable
and sustainable manner, to promote integrated social and economic
development and to ensure effective local government.

The co-ordination and integration of programmes and budgets of two
different provinces into a single development programme have been found to
be extremely difficult, where priorities differ from provinces with joint
administrative responsibilities over a cross-boundary municipality.

The main reason for the below-par service delivery in these municipalities
is that many provinces have different pieces of legislation for similar
functions such as health, housing, traffic and ambulance services. If laws
of more than one province need to be administered, it is also very
confusing and costly. Therefore the President’s Co-ordinating Council (PCC)
recommended that the notion of cross-boundary municipalities should be
abolished so that all municipalities in the country fall entirely in one
province or the other.

The PCC also recommended that the provincial boundaries be revised
accordingly, and that investigations and consultations be undertaken to
decide how to adjust these boundaries to ensure effective delivery,
development and accountability. The decision of the PCC was influenced by
the challenges experienced in these joint-administration municipalities.

In order to give effect to the resolution of the PCC, the Constitution
Twelfth Amendment Bill before you today redetermines the geographical areas
of the provinces to avoid municipal boundaries stretching over to
provinces. This is done by using municipalities as building blocks to
define the geographical areas of provinces, instead of using magisterial
districts to define those areas, as is presently the case.

In addition, the Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related
Matters Bill of 2005, which was dealt with by the NA yesterday, repeals all
laws providing for cross-boundary municipalities and deals with certain
consequential arrangements to ensure a smooth transition from the cross-
boundary municipality dispensation to the new dispensation where
municipalities are located in one province.

Let me now briefly explain the provisions of the Bill. Clause 1 amends
section 103 of the Constitution, to list the respective provinces in
alphabetical order and to provide that the geographical areas of the
respective provinces comprise the sum total of the indicated geographical
areas reflected in the various maps referred to in the notice listed in
schedule 1(a) of the amended Bill.

Provision is further made that whenever the geographical area of a province
is redetermined by an amendment to the Constitution, an ordinary Act of
Parliament may provide for transitional measures to regulate the legal,
practical and any other consequences of the redetermination. As already
mentioned, such transitional measures are provided for in the Cross-
boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill and will regulate matters such as
the transfer of provincial functions, assets, rights, obligations, duties,
liabilities and so forth.

Clauses 2 and 3 repeal section 155(6a) and 157(4)(b) of the Constitution,
which deal with cross-boundary municipalities and therefore remove,
finally, from our Constitution the principle of cross-boundary
municipalities. The enactment into law of the exact new municipal
boundaries under review is dealt with in the Cross-boundary Municipalities
Laws Repeal Bill and not in the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill.

Clause 4 inserts a new schedule 1(a) in the Constitution, which defines the
areas of the provinces with reference to their geographical areas that are
reflected in municipal demarcation maps that are contained in official
notices published by the Municipal Demarcation Board.

Although there are no cross-boundary municipalities on the provincial
boundary between the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, the challenges
relating to that boundary are also being addressed in the Bill debated here
through proposed demarcations of municipalities. In so far as those
proposed demarcations impact on district municipalities, such proposals are
reflected in the proposed new schedule 1(a) to be inserted in the
Constitution.

It is important to emphasise the vital role that the Constitution gives to
provincial legislatures to play in the passing of amendments to the
Constitution that affect provinces. In terms of section 74(3) of the
Constitution, a Bill amending the Constitution must also be passed by the
NCOP with the supporting vote of at least six provinces, if the amendment,
inter alia, changes or alters provincial boundaries, powers, functions or
institutions.

Provision is further made in section 74(8) that if such a Bill, or any
other part of such a Bill, concerns only a specific province or specific
provinces, as is the case in these amendments, the NCOP may not pass the
Bill or the relevant part unless it has been approved by the legislature or
legislatures of the province or provinces concerned.

In order to comply with these constitutional requirements, the Bill was
referred to all the affected provincial legislatures shortly after the NA
approved it. From the negotiating mandates that the affected provinces gave
to their delegations, it is clear that all the affected provincial
legislatures or committees of those legislatures, with the exception of
KwaZulu-Natal and North West, conducted public hearings on the Bill to
obtain the views of affected communities.

It needs to be mentioned that government will do everything in its power to
ensure that the standard of service delivery to these affected communities
that they receive at present will remain the same and even be improved when
the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill takes effect and those communities
are relocated to their new provinces. For that purpose, interprovincial co-
ordinating committees have been established in all the affected provinces
to ensure that a smooth transfer of functions, powers, assets, and so forth
takes place.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the chairpersons and the members of
the Select Committees on Security and Constitutional Affairs and of the
Local Government and Administration, as well as the Speakers and the
members of the affected provincial legislatures for the time and effort
that they have put into finalising this technical but, because of the
subject matter, sensitive Constitution Amendment Bill within the short
timeframe given. I thank you. [Applause.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, colleagues and hon members,
we are engaging in this debate fully aware of the contribution and concerns
raised by communities directly or indirectly affected by changes made in
these two Bills.

Members will remember how provincial boundaries were drawn or determined.
Members will also recall how municipal boundaries were redetermined. Let me
be frank and indicate that even then, other sections of our communities
were not happy with some of the changes, as they are even now. But let us
acknowledge here that some concerns that were raised then were genuine.
There are instances, though, where proposals made by those communities were
accommodated while others were not.

The message that I want to convey to this Council and to our people is that
whatever changes are proposed in this Bill are not aimed at frustrating or
harming any person, or putting people’s lives at risk, or trying to
disorientate, punish or even disadvantage them in terms of service delivery
or otherwise to disregard the integrity or intelligence of people.

At the same time, we are aware that it is not possible to accommodate or
satisfy everybody. When we proposed these changes, the sole purpose was to
level the playing field so as to enable service delivery to be effected
with ease or speed.

Maybe the following question needs to be raised. By proposing these changes
in these two Bills, are we empowering provinces? The answer is “no”. We are
empowering those local communities to fast-track service delivery. In this
day and age, can we be seen to be promoting provincialism? The answer is
“no”. Instead, the Bill seeks to promote strong local government.

Does it matter really where one is located in terms of provinces? The
answer, again, is “no”. I believe that what matters, is for people to get
the necessary services that are provided by the state, especially at local
municipality level.

Who will benefit when these changes are made? Is it the releasing province
or the receiving province? The answer is “none”. Only the local communities
that are affected will benefit because there won’t be any ambiguity as to
who must provide services to those particular communities. That is a fact.
What is going to happen to the budget that used to service those
communities that are going to be affected by these changes? Is it going to
be discontinued? The answer is “no”. Your budget will follow you.
Furthermore, there is an undertaking by our government that there will be
no disruptions in terms of service delivery to those communities that are
affected.

I want to look at the bigger picture. As a committee we understood the
concerns raised by the affected communities. We seriously looked at them
and resolved as follows: that the NCOP will make sure that all matters that
are contained in the transitional arrangement in this Bill are implemented.
We are going to make sure that all those structures that are expected to
implement the decisions taken by the executive or the interprovincial co-
ordinating committees do so.

Let me assure all our people who stay in those affected areas that those
who were getting salaries from the state will continue to get those
salaries; that those who were receiving child support grants will continue
to get them; that those who were receiving old age pensions will continue
to get them; that those who got tenders from either that particular
province or any municipality will be allowed to continue to service those
projects, regardless of which province they belong to; that those who got
trading or whatever licence will continue to trade.

These are but just a few examples of things that will not be affected by
these changes. My colleagues will deal effectively with this subject.

I want to call upon all those receiving provinces to make sure that all
those affected communities continue to get the same services that they were
getting, or even get more. As the NCOP or all the relevant committees in
this Council, we will leave no stone unturned in making sure that our
communities are not adversely affected by these changes. So you are not
alone.

However, we all agree that we should look at the bigger picture. All these
things are done to make sure that service delivery is properly co-ordinated
and fast-tracked. People might not see it now, but should understand that,
as we say in Sepedi: Montshepetša bošego ke mo leboga bosele. [The hand
that rocks the cradle is the hand that rules the world.]

The officials who work for the departments of Justice and Constitutional
Development and of Provincial and Local Government, including our state law
advisers, have displayed, once more, that we, as Parliament, can rely on
their good and honest advice, which enables us to carry out our legislative
mandate and oversight function. Keep up the good work.

To my colleagues, committee members, you are always equal to the task. You
are always ready and prepared to go the extra mile. I am not ashamed to say
that in you I have dedicated leaders; in you I have committed cadres; in
you I have unselfish cadres; in you I have magnificent revolutionaries.
This committee is not for the faint-hearted.

I don’t have enough words to express my appreciation to you, colleagues. It
is true: you are made of sterner stuff. As I have said before: No matter
how deep the bottle is, the cream will always be on top. Chairperson, I am
talking about the Mokoena detachment. [Laughter.]

The two Bills are now before the Council. Let us do the right thing: let us
say “yes” to these two Bills. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr A L J MOSEKI: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, Salga
representatives, colleagues and our distinguished guests, we need to say
that we are assembled this morning in this august House to debate the two
Bills: the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill and the Cross-boundary
Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Bill. The debate that we are
engaged in seeks to pass the two Bills to allow for the smooth running of
the country at the three spheres of governance.

We are mindful of the fact that there are concerns that have been raised.
But I think it’s important that whilst those important concerns are raised,
there should be an understanding that South Africa is a united country, as
the Freedom Charter proclaims. South Africa is a nonracial and not a
federal country. It is a nonsexist state.

The process of building this country began in 1994. In 2003 the
overwhelming majority of the citizens of this country again voted the ANC
into power. Before that the ANC went to the people of this country and
said: “We want to speed up the changes, and the agenda is transformation.”
To that end, I think it should be understood in context that the phasing
out of the cross-boundary municipalities is part of that agenda of
transformation, nothing else.

Chapter 2 of the Constitution of this country talks about the rights of all
the citizens, that is equal rights. Equal rights in this context means that
people will get quality services and laws will be applied equally to all
the citizens of this country. The citizens of this country will enjoy the
same rights. Therefore we want to urge communities, especially those
affected by this process, to have that contextual understanding of this
process.

I agree with the chairperson of the committee that we were given a
responsibility by this House, as select committees, to oversee the work of
the executive. As the Deputy Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development has said, there are structures that have been put in place to
ensure that service is delivered. We want to assure the citizens of this
country that the select committee will ensure that that really does take
place as expected.

Having said all that, we want to say, as a select committee and also as
representatives of the ANC, that we support these two Bills
unconditionally. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, hon Ministers present here, when wall-to-wall
municipalities were introduced in 2000, some 16 municipal areas fell within
the territory of adjoining provinces. These are the so-called cross-
boundary municipalities. This resulted in practical difficulties,
particularly in respect of service delivery. It is commonly accepted that
cross-boundary municipalities should be replaced by municipalities that
fall within one province.

The Bill attempts to ensure that, amongst other things, all licences,
permits, authorisations and appointments made in terms of the releasing
province continue to have the force of law where the particular area is
relocated to another province. Any function exercised or service delivered
by the releasing province must be exercised or delivered by the provincial
government of the receiving province. This applies also with regard to any
assets, be they movable or immovable; any rights, obligations, duties or
liabilities.
There are financial implications attached to this Bill, as an adjustment to
the provincial equitable share allocations, based on the provincial shift
in population, will have to be effected.

Whilst this Bill further seeks to allow the MEC for local government and
the electoral commission to take steps to prepare for the elections of all
municipal councils that reflect the new composition or location in a
particular province, voters will have to reregister in these particular
areas, all this before 1 March 2006.

The Presidential Co-ordinating Council had already resolved in November
2002 that cross-boundary municipalities be done away with. It must be
ensured in future that Bills of this nature are not rushed through with
undue haste and that full consultation with everyone in the provinces
concerned takes place. In certain instances it is clear whether the
community wished to be incorporated into another province. In others, it
would appear this is being done against the will of the people residing in
such areas.

Many concerns have been raised by the various communities in the affected
provinces. The people of Merafong would rather stay in Gauteng than be
included in the North West province. The people from Marble Hall and
Groblersdal would rather stay in Mpumalanga than be incorporated into
Limpopo. The people of Matatiele would rather stay in KwaZulu-Natal than be
included in the Eastern Cape. Such people affected perceive that services
such as health, housing, social services and transport, to name just a few,
are better in the more efficient provinces than in others and are naturally
not happy about being relocated to what is perceived as a disorganised or
less functional province.

While certain amendments to the Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal
and Related Matters Bill allow the National Council of Provinces to assist
the provincial governments concerned in any manner necessary, it remains to
be seen whether the persons redemarcated to other provinces and
municipalities will receive enhanced service delivery and administration.

Capacity constraints and a lack of appropriate skills remain a major
problem in many municipalities across South Africa, and not only in the so-
called cross-boundary municipalities. It is on this level of local
government that service and delivery must take place to ensure a better
life for all. I thank you.

Mr V W MBATHA (Gauteng): Hon Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Minister
present, delegates from the respective provinces and members of the
National Council of Provinces, I rise on behalf of Gauteng in support of
the Bill, from the point of view of continuation with the consolidation of
this sphere of local government. During these final stages we are
concluding the foundation on which our democracy is built and the
legitimate institutions of democratic participation and decision-making
that our democracy provides.

The intention of the Bill is clearly spelt out in its objectives. Noting
this complex subject, we, as a movement of the people of South Africa,
black and white, represented in different legislatures and the National
Assembly, seem to be following through on the commitment we undertook to
transform this country. We continue to assess, review and dynamically alter
the transformation programme to achieve quantitative quality elements of
our national democratic revolution.

Our transition to democracy has been characterised by the challenges of
developing a system of government that is people-centred, people-driven and
responsive to the socioeconomic imperatives of a society that is mobile in
transitional mode, in order to build integrated, nonracial and economically
sustainable communities.

At the democratic breakthrough of 1994, we inherited a legacy of a country
that was administratively fragmented into former Bantustans and tribal
homelands. These evolved into colonial reserves of cheap and unskilled
labour of African people in particular, and divided the South African
nation racially. This arrangement was designed to foster quasi-autonomous
so-called black rule, which entrenched the principle of apartheid rule of
division by colour, gender and less development of African and Coloured
communities.

These artificially skewed racial, ethnic and tribal boundaries called
homelands and Bantustans were so structured as to dehumanise African lives
and were meant to confine the lives of ordinary people, denying them
proper, acceptable human fulfilment and growth.

The then regime appropriated land and siphoned natural resources such as
diamonds, gold and platinum to fund this exclusive policy of white
development. The management of the country was highly centralised and
driven by a narrow ideology of white supremacy. Information gathering and
data usage was strictly for predilection of surveillance information and
propaganda purposes.

The information that the then apartheid state used to gather was primarily
used to manage threats and to spy on the lives of civil bodies or
organisations that were protesting this exclusive and unviable system of
local government. The task, therefore, of the black local authorities was
to disperse patronage and report on the acts of civil disobedience and
popular protest struggles contesting white minority rule.

The different municipalities became an extension of apartheid machinery and
were meant to foster fear and conformist attitudes among the historically
disadvantaged black communities in general. These communities’
municipalities had unbalanced autonomy, without any monitoring of their
budgets. Never were there communities involved in the process of governance
as the administration serviced a relatively small homogenous white
population.

Without any hint of a possibility of the future, the apartheid state left a
desert of underserved portions of land that commanded human habitation for
decades, without any reinforcement prior to development. These dolomitic
portions of land were allocated to or designated for some of the townships
or black residential areas. There was never a shared sense of long-term
implications for a country that would later on have to grapple with
development.

With the above being the challenges that confronted the ANC when it
ascended to power, hard choices had to be made with regard to
sustainability of these councils. Having made significant strides since the
preinterim phase of integrating municipalities, with some reconfigured into
metros, districts and local councils, cross-boundary municipalities remain
a challenge.

A point that we need to steadfastly communicate is that this Bill is not
basically intended to ignore the fact that even from the point of view of
the negotiated settlement, there was still unfinished business from the
constitution-drafting process, that later on, as a country premised on the
current Constitution, democratic and legitimate institutions of governance,
we will have to deal with.

The current exercise of realigning cross-boundary municipalities needs to
be understood within the broad context of transforming the country and the
state into a developmental trajectory. The challenge pertaining to
relocation in a manner that sustains them autonomously has remained a
complex and emotive fact. But when we are faced with the task of clarifying
their identity for purposes of administration and compatibility with
national legislation, a narrow and sectarian approach seems to dominate and
cloud the objectives of continuing to rationalise this sphere of government
in a way that ensures optimal usage of minimal resources that we command as
a movement, as a country and as a state.

Allegations have, unfortunately, emerged of us dumping people into
historically disadvantaged administrations of the old TBVC states and the
Transvaal administration by some among these particular poor communities
and provinces. Without any proof of scientific evidence, the allegations of
poor capacity of respective provincial administrations have fast become an
issue, which works against harnessing the capacity of municipalities and
provincial administration to be better equipped to deliver services.

The issue of imaginary boundaries motivated as borders confronts us in a
manner that defocuses us from the primary intention of building a unitary,
single country that is responsive to the needs of the poor, historically
underdeveloped communities.

To us the Reconstruction and Development Programme, which has served as a
prescriptive document to reflect practically on the Freedom Charter,
challenges us as government and legislatures to ensure that on completion
of rationalisation, managed sizes of numbers of municipalities will have to
come into effect.

The demarcation of boundaries of local authorities should ensure that
informal settlements on the outskirts of towns, cities and urban
settlements and displaced behind homeland boundaries are incorporated into
the jurisdictions of new local authorities.

Amongst the things we should do is to structure these municipalities in
such a manner that they are also reconfigured in the context of urban edge,
bringing services and job opportunities closer to our people.

The unfortunate challenge that faces us as a movement is to respond
scientifically to these concerns that the people of the affected
municipalities have raised. These range from housing delivery, health
services, public works, planning and development, road traffic regulation
and management, vehicle licensing and provision of water and sanitation.
These, in our opinion as the ANC, are national obligations.

Whether you are in Gauteng, North West, Mpumalanga or Eastern Cape, we
would still be obliged as government to have to perform these particular
functions. There are questions to ask, noting the report from Treasury with
regard to the expenditure of the different provincial governments,
including those that are perceived to be better in terms of service
delivery and capital expenditure: One, is it not perhaps a challenge on the
part of our responsibility to raise the bar in relation to our oversight
obligation; two, is the challenge confronting us the task of building and
developing the necessary human capital that is seized with the task of
quantifying, together with us, and trying to build a sustainable human
livelihood?

Roads and rail infrastructure are the key priority challenges that can
enhance the economic viability of the country rather than these respective
municipalities. This is an area in which we have together not fared well
with regard to implementation and spending.

The need to rapidly integrate rural urban development must find concrete
meaning and expression in the programme that government implements in a
manner that addresses immigration into urban centres, hence congestion and
urban densification posing to be a challenge.

The country would be best poised if a package delivery scenario was to
define the function and work of these particular municipalities and
provinces to avoid competition. We have a challenge: a chance to resolve
the elements of the sunset clauses that characterise the negotiated
settlement that ushered us into a democratic dispensation in 1994. This is
a challenge we cannot avoid and have never sought to avoid.

Our revolutionary struggle so far has taken cognisance of the fact that
transformation will never be easy. We have to continue to engage both
business and the affected communities pursuant to this Bill to realise the
long-term benefits of engagement. Engagement has always proven to be the
best method of seeking solutions to our country’s challenges. We should,
therefore, say that we’ll continue to work together to build a better South
Africa.

We should continue to call on our people that whilst they have a right to
be listened to, to influence and to be influenced, to cherish and to love
the country and to use the little or minimal resources that we have been
able to build over time in the affected areas, they should exercise
discipline.

Together we have to start grappling with the design of our government and
the different spheres we have established. This we have to do from the
point of view of developing a shared understanding of the role of each
sphere, its powers and functions, the intergovernmental relations exercise
that fosters the economic viability of these municipalities in order to
appreciate or achieve proper human fulfilment. Knowing that the task that
will follow will be sustained, communication and engagement with the
affected communities will continue. We wish to support the Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon members,
comrades and friends, ladies and gentlemen, since the establishment of the
cross-boundary municipalities there have been practical difficulties in
terms of administering such municipalities. This is a challenge that delays
the provision and delivery of services to the communities that reside in
cross-boundary municipal areas.

Today we debate the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill, a Bill which
purports to respond to and address the problems and challenges of service
delivery presented by cross-boundary municipalities.

This is the context within which all South Africans, including the affected
communities in cross-boundary municipal areas, should understand and
appreciate proposals reflected in the Bill we are debating today. With this
and the other related Bill, government seeks to achieve maximum service
delivery and to remove any obstacles and hindrances that stand in the way
of service delivery.

There are some in our society who have deliberately created confusion in
the minds of certain affected communities about the possible consequences
of this Bill. The fact of the matter is that the ANC government is a caring
government. Certain mechanisms have already been put in place to deal with
any negative consequences that may result from the passing of this Bill.

For instance, the ANC government has set up a special transitional fund to
assist all areas that will be shifted to other provinces. With this, the
ANC government seeks to ensure that the projects that are currently
underway or had been running are not interrupted. Once this and another
Bill have been by passed by Parliament into law, the ANC government will
conduct several briefings with the affected communities to communicate
these arrangements.

There is a tendency among some of us to confuse boundaries with borders. In
clarifying this unnecessary confusion, the government spokesperson, Joel
Netshitenzhe, said, and I quote:

   We are talking about boundaries and not borders. If you are getting a
   social grant, you will not lose that social grant because you are now in
   a perceived poorer province. People who used to go to a clinic in a
   particular area would not be prevented from going to it because they now
   belong to another province.

Uhulumeni oholwa u-ANC awusoze wabaholela ophathe abantu obaholayo.
Siyabona ukuthi ziningi izinhlaka uhulumeni azakhile ukuze zisize abantu
baseNingizimu Afrika njenge-Presidential Co-ordinating Council, lapho
kuhlangana khona uMongameli noNdunankulu ukuze bakwazi ukuphathwa kwezwe
lonkana.
Siyabona ukuthi kukhona iProject Consolidate okuyiyona esiza labo masipala
okubonakalayo ukuthi bayaxega noma abamile kahle. Okunye okufanele
sikukhumbule yilokho kokuthi iNingizimu Afrika ine-National Treasury eyodwa
lapho kuphuma khona imali. Ngakho-ke asikho isidingo sokuthi kusatshwe
ukuthi, “Manje laba ngeke besazithola kahle izinsiza”, ngoba imali iphuma
kuhulumeni kaZwelonke.
Futhi siyazi ukuthi kukhona izivumelwano phakathi kwezifundazwe lezi
ezithentekayo. Kusho ukuthi uma abantu bebuyela kulesi esinye isifundazwe
uMthethosisekelo uthi labo hulumeni bobabili abahlangane baxoxe ukuthi
kuzoqhubeka kanjani ukulethwa kwezinsiza kuleyo miphakathi ethintekayo.

Okunye okufanele sikhumbuzane khona ukuthi kungumsebenzi wethu
njengamalungu e-NCOP ukuthi siye kohlola kulezo zindawo esibonayo ukuthi
mhlawumbe akuhambi kahle khona ukuze kulungiseke futhi kusebenzeke kahle.

Ngimzwile u-Darryl Worth  lapha  ekhuluma  ngabantu  abangajabulile.  Ngithi
kuwe  Darryl  Worth,  abantu  bakhetha  u-ANC  ukuthi   abahole.   Ngakho-ke
basemethemba futhi. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC government will never mislead people.  We  are  grateful  that  the
government has created many programmes to help the people of  South  Africa.
We have the Presidential Co-ordinating Council, where  the  President  meets
Premiers in order to lead the country.

We are grateful that we have Project Consolidate, whose primary  aim  is  to
capacitate municipalities that are not stable. What we  must  also  remember
is that there is  one  National  Treasury  that  provides  money  for  South
Africa. Therefore, there is no need to be afraid that local government  will
not get services because the money comes from the national government.

We also know that there are  agreements  between  the  provinces  concerned.
This means that if people are incorporated into the other province, the  two
provinces must meet  and  discuss  how  are  they  going  to  bring  service
delivery to the affected communities, as stated in the Constitution.

We must also remember that our job as NCOP members is to visit  and  inspect
those areas that are in crisis in order to help them to function better.

I heard Darryl Worth saying that there are people who are not happy.  Darryl
Worth, I want to tell you this, people chose the  ANC  to  lead  them.  They
still have hope.]

In conclusion, let me emphasise that whatever happened to the boundaries,
the wellbeing of the affected communities, such as the Khutsong community,
will not be adversely affected merely because the community now belongs to
a different province.

The ANC supports the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill and the Cross-
boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr S KWELITA (Eastern Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy
Minister, hon members, I stand here to support the constitutional amendment
and the cross-boundary Bill. I do so because we believe that in the past,
especially during the process of the consolidation of the homelands, there
were towns that were taken away from various communities.

In our province, during the period of the independence of Ciskei, a town
that is in the middle of that area, King William’s Town, was taken away.
Also, during the period of the independence of Transkei we saw various
towns, including the town of Matatiele, being taken away from what was then
perceived as an independent homeland. We believe that this Bill corrects
some of those weaknesses.

But, also of most importance, as pointed out by previous speakers, this
Bill ensures that there is proper service delivery in our country.
Therefore it is not intended to take away the rights that people enjoyed
under any of the areas to which they belonged previously. We therefore want
to emphasise the point that this is about the correction of the boundaries
that were designated incorrectly at the time of the coming in of the new
Constitution.

Also, we want to say that although limited in terms of time, we believe
that the participation that communities were afforded was sufficient. We
did see participation through the submissions that people made through the
Demarcation Board. We did see that the Demarcation Board did listen to
those submissions.

Secondly, we did have a process in which legislators in various provinces
visited those affected communities. We therefore want to express here,
today, the feeling that communities were given an opportunity to
participate in the process and their views were expressed. As far as our
province is concerned, we believe that the decision that you are taking
here today, you take with the full support of the majority of the people
that come from the affected areas.

Thirdly, we would like to make a last point, which point has been made here
before, that South Africa belongs to all who live in it. We believe that
there is no reason to fear that because you happen to fall under a
particular province, you will not get the services that you used to get,
because South Africa belongs to all those who live in it. We believe that
we have sufficient systems and mechanisms to ensure that people do receive
the services that they are supposed to be receiving in the country.
Members here have highlighted the weaknesses that have been identified by
government and the steps that have been taken to correct those weaknesses
through Project Consolidate. This project is to ensure that people do get
the services that they should be getting.

I therefore want to say that we support the Bill on cross-boundaries, as
well as the one on constitutional amendments. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M M A NYAMA (Limpopo): Chairperson, I would like to salute everybody in
this House; all protocol observed.

We need not forget that prior to 1993 we were put in pockets of land for
reasons that were not good for us. We would be in homelands, or anywhere
else, because those areas happened to be in what we used to call the “rain
shadow” - and therefore we did not have rain when other areas had rain.
Thus food for us was something that we would get with difficulty.

When boundaries were determined in 1993 for the interim Constitution, those
homelands were used to describe our provinces. When we talk of Limpopo
province, for example, we will see that it is made up of former Lebowa,
former Gazankulu, former Venda and the adjacent magisterial areas. But
areas such as Marble Hall and Groblersdal, which were rich in agriculture
and were adjacent to former Lebowa, were not included in the homelands.

These former homelands excluded Burgersfort and Steelpoort, which were rich
in minerals. Therefore, when this Bill came to our legislature we welcomed
it because, firstly, it provided one way for us to stop describing
ourselves in terms of those homelands that we never loved. Secondly, it was
one way of ensuring that people are not separated from areas in which they
work, especially because when we tried to rectify that with cross-boundary
municipalities, they brought along the challenges that have already been
mentioned by other speakers before me.

As a province we went out to conduct public hearings. I would like to say,
in front of this House, that when we went to Sekhukhuneland, where people
from Groblersdal and Marble Hall were free to attend, we did not have a
single dissenting voice. All the people who made both verbal and written
submissions were all agreed that you cannot have Groblersdal without
Motetema; you cannot have Marble Hall without Leeuwfontein; you cannot have
Steelpoort without Ga-Kgoshi Phasha; and you cannot have Burgersfort
without Ga-Mashamaite. Because everybody agreed, they therefore all agreed
that Sekhukhuneland should fall into Limpopo.

There was confusing information on the ground about the disintegration of
Sekhukhune and that two municipalities in Sekhukhune were going to join
Capricorn and the other municipalities being incorporated into Mpumalanga.
The people of Sekhukhuneland are “a people” and would like to be regarded
as such. They made it categorically clear that they cannot be separated
like they were in the past, where indunas would just be promoted to the
level of a king and everybody would be called “chiefs”, so that the
strength of a tribe could be reduced. So there was that agreement that the
whole of Sekhukhune would fall into Limpopo as part of that province.

We are, through this Bill, going to make sure that people come together. We
are going to make sure that people are able to stay where they work.
Pockets of races will, therefore, stop to exist.

I would like to appeal to this House that we should be careful with our
usage of terminology and for us to be consistent in this regard. We keep on
talking about “relocation of people”. People start thinking that there are
going to be forced removals and that they are going to be forced to move
from their homes to other places. We should, therefore, avoid the word
“relocation” because nobody is going to be relocated. We should stop using
the word “borders” because we do not have borders and border posts, but we
just have soft boundaries, and we should regard them as such.

We had our public hearings. We had three sessions in Sekhukhune. Because of
numbers, we had to separate traditional leaders, businesspeople and general
people. All political parties agreed with the Bill. We went to
Bushbuckridge, to Maruleng – these are the affected areas - and we went to
Polokwane, where any other person could come from any other unaffected
area. There was a general agreement in Limpopo that we should agree to the
Bill and that we would vote for the Bill. Therefore, we would like to
express in front of this House that as Limpopo, we support this Bill. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, it happens from time to time that the FF
Plus realises that certain constitutional amendments need to be made. It is
inevitable that a country would reach a stage where this is really
necessary.

Unfortunately, however, this Bill creates the impression and perception
that from time to time government changes the Constitution as it may deem
it fit.

It might be, and I think to a certain extent it is a wrong perception, but
the FF Plus trusts that it is a wrong perception. Perceptions, like
expectations, are easy to create and difficult to kill. I am afraid that in
this situation it is difficult to remove the perception.

The situation arises in Parliament from time to time that a political party
speaks against a Bill, but in the end vote for the Bill. There is also
another situation in Parliament where a political party may speak in favour
of a Bill, but vote against it. These are some of the peculiarities of the
parliamentary situation. There are examples that one can quote in this
regard, but it’s not necessary to use the time for that.

The FF Plus is against this Bill because it can be used, or misused, or
abused in future to amend certain boundaries for a political party’s own
benefit. In the olden days the NP - and I was part of that - changed
boundaries when the CP became a threat in certain constituencies. We did
change the boundaries to cut them out. [Interjections.] I am talking from
experience, and that is why we from the FF Plus are against this because we
know that it can be abused or misused by the government. Therefore the FF
Plus, unfortunately, will not be in a position to support this Bill.

Seeing that I still have another two minutes . . .

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, your time has expired.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mr Chairperson, can I just mention to you that this
timer is cheating me. It says “time expired” and then “another two
minutes”. Thank you, Chairperson.

The PREMIER OF THE NORTH WEST (Ms E Molewa): Hon Chairperson, the National
Council of Provinces, hon Minister, Deputy Minister . . . I realise that if
I do go on with the greetings, my time will soon be gone. It’s a great
lesson indeed.

With each day that dawns in South Africa and elsewhere, particularly for us
in South Africa, the goal of a better life for all our people looks very
firmly within reach. Today more than ever before, we can state with a
measure of confidence and satisfaction that as a nation and as a people, we
are indeed reaping the rewards of hard-earned freedom and democracy.
Indeed, we are able to state without fear of contradiction that our battle
to banish poverty, ignorance and general want is being won continuously.

The new local government dispensation, which emerged in 2000, sought to
replace a system that was not geared towards meeting the developmental
challenges of the new democratic society. Convinced that this system was
not only immoral, but was also structurally deficient, we set for ourselves
the goal of transforming our local government system. We did this because
we wanted to position local government as the real front desk of service
delivery, and not provincial government. Let me emphasise this: local
government as a front desk of service delivery.

Today marks one of the most critical milestones in our new democracy, and
more importantly in our system of local government as we bear witness to
the successful conclusion of this important process of doing away with
cross-boundary municipalities. We do so confident that this will lead to
better-functioning municipalities, with an enhanced capacity to discharge
their obligations.

The new local government dispensation brought with it a few challenges,
some of which were occasioned by cross-boundary dynamics. The cross-
boundary arrangement poses both political and administrative challenges,
which at times impacted negatively on service delivery in the affected
areas.

Despite the vocal voices of protest from some of the quarters that we heard
in the North West province and many other areas, of people who are
dissatisfied, we have also followed on the processes and the report that
was given by a local committee of the legislature in the North West
province. Indeed, having looked at it, we believe that the challenges are
not so insurmountable. They are challenges that we ourselves can work on to
improve the service delivery. We are, therefore, satisfied that this
reconfiguration of the municipal boundaries is in the best interest of all
our people.

The abolition of cross-boundary municipalities will eliminate uncertainties
and confusion among affected communities regarding accountability for
service delivery. It will further contribute towards improving integrated
planning and accountability for service delivery.

Through integrated planning and co-ordination, we will be able to ensure
that our municipalities will continue to give or provide a helping hand in
the national effort to roll back the frontiers of poverty.
We are firmly of the view that the communication gap and probably lack of
understanding in some instances have given space to this climate of
uncertainty as we also heard in this House this morning when Mr Worth used
words such as “relocation”. I agree with hon member Nyama that indeed we
need to do away with such words.

We are ready and determined to welcome all our people of Merafong as part
of the platinum province. Listen, we are not relocating them, we are just
welcoming them as part of the platinum province. We also understand that
the areas of Tshwane metro, Francis Baard and Kgalagadi will be part of
Gauteng and Northern Cape respectively. We are satisfied with that
agreement. I am confident that acting together, we will succeed in our
national programme of rebuilding our country.

I wish to inform the people of our country that together with our sister
provinces, we have done everything and we continue to do so every day to
ensure that service delivery in all these affected areas is sustained and
indeed improved. This joint effort was informed by our conviction that
there is only one single South Africa.

Proceeding from that premise, we believe that the central message that must
be driven home to all our people is that provinces of our country are not
in competition with one another, and that there is no province that is
better than all the other eight.

On the contrary, we are collectively engaged in a national project to build
a better South Africa and a better country for all our people, without
exception. Each one of us as provinces has our unique challenges and
internal dynamics.

Whether people fall into one or other province should not really be a
critical matter. What is important is that they belong to one South Africa,
where all our people are guaranteed their rights and services, irrespective
of where they live.

Consistent with this understanding, resources will continue to be deployed
equitably for the development of all citizens, irrespective of provincial
boundaries. That is why these are called boundaries and not borders.

However, it must be acknowledged that the new boundaries will not be a
panacea for all the problems and challenges that confront our
municipalities. More needs to be done to ensure that municipalities have
adequate administrative capacity, effective political leadership and that
they are also appropriately resourced and have a well-functioning system of
local democratic participation.

In this regard, we really would like to ask the hon Minister, through his
good office, the hon Minister of Finance and the national government, in
general really to take another look at the current Financial and Fiscal
Commission, FFC, formula that is used to allocate resources to both
provinces and municipalities with an objective to funding on a long-term
basis the most needy provinces and municipalities in particular. If we do
not reconsider this, the rural provinces and municipalities will continue
to struggle, while the rich provinces continue to thrive.

We firmly believe that this consideration we are asking for is in line with
the exercise of local government transformation, which we are discussing
here today, and is also in line with our resolve to become a truly
developmental state.

We therefore support the passing of these two Bills, and thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister, agb Adjunkminister en
kollegas, ek dink dié debat is so papperig dat ek maar die kolegooiery sal
moet doen.

Dit strek ons almal tot eer dat die Grondwet as die hoogste gesag
gerespekteer en eerbiedig word. Dit is dus verstommend dat ons nou die
twaalfde wysiging van ons Grondwet so oorhaastig en onder soveel tydsdruk
moet goedkeur. Die verandering van provinsiale grense sal noodwendig
reaksie ontlok en almal wat direk geraak word, sal op die een of ander
manier reageer. Met die hewige reaksie wat ons tans in baie dele van ons
land ervaar, is dit duidelik dat die konsultasieproses onvolledig en
onsuksesvol was. Dit is mos so dat die meerderheid van Matatiele se
inwoners eerder in KwaZulu-Natal wil wees. Merafong se mense wil beslis in
Gauteng wees. Die Noord-Kaap kry duisende mense van die Kgalagadi-
munisipaliteit by wat eerder in Noordwes behoort te wees. Dit wil voorkom
dat dit ’n suiwer politieke besluit was om die toekoms van hierdie
gemeenskappe te bepaal.

Die ANC-kollegas word kwaad en ek wil aansluit by dr Frik – hulle word baie
kwaad as ons sê hulle is net soos die ou NP. Ek kan u die versekering gee -
en ek praat van jare se ondervinding – dat die ou NP presies gedoen het wat
die ANC nou ook doen. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die wil van die kiesers word slegs
erken as dit die ANC polities pas, net soos die geval met die ou NP was.
Aangesien die Grondwet die fondament is waarop ons samelewing gebou word,
moet daar altyd met groot omsigtigheid wysigings aangebring word. In die
geval van die twaalfde wysiging het dit duidelik nie gebeur nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr J W LE ROUX: Hon Chairman, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister and
colleagues, I think that this debate is so feeble that I will have to be
the one to give it some substance.

It is a credit to all of us that the Constitution is respected and revered
as the highest authority. It is therefore astounding that we must now adopt
the twelfth amendment of  our Constitution so over-hastily and under such
pressure of time. The change of provincial borders will necessarily elicit
reaction and everyone who is directly affected by it will react in some way
or another. With the strong reaction that we are currently experiencing in
many parts of our country, it is clear that the consultation process was
incomplete and unsuccessful. It is indeed so that the majority of
Matatiele's inhabitants would rather be in KwaZulu-Natal. Merafong's people
definitely wish to be in Gauteng. The Northern Cape is getting thousands of
people from the Kgalagadi Municipality, who should rather be in North West.
It appears to have been a purely political decision that determined the
future of these communities.

The ANC colleagues get angry - and I want to concur with Dr Frik - they get
very angry when we say that they are just like the old NP. I can give you
the assurance - and I am talking from years of experience - the old NP did
exactly the same that the ANC is doing now. [Interjections.] The wishes of
the voters are only acknowledged if it suits the ANC politically. This was
also the case with the erstwhile NP. As the Constitution is the foundation
on which our community rests, amendments should always be made with great
circumspection. In the case of the twelfth amendment this was clearly not
the case.]

I am sure that the unforeseen consequences, as a result of the flawed
process of consultation, will still haunt us in future. Three years ago the
Presidential Co-ordinating Council passed a resolution to do away with
cross-boundary municipalities. After government dragged its feet for three
years, we are now pressurised into amending the Constitution with undue
haste. Section 78 of the Constitution determines that when a Bill concerns
a province, it must also be approved by the legislature of such a province
before the NCOP can pass it.

Gauteng had serious misgivings, and as late as last weekend deals were made
between the Premier of Gauteng and the Premier of the North West province
to avoid a constitutional crisis . . .

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, your speaking time has expired.

Mr J W LE ROUX: I would just like to close by saying . . .
. . .“die DA ondersteun nie die wysigingswetsontwerp nie.” [. . .the DA
does not support the amending Bill.]

Mr J MTHEMBU (Mpumalanga): Chair, we stand here as Mpumalanga province in
full support of these two Bills. We find it very strange, Chairperson, hon
Ministers, Deputy Ministers and our Premier, that some people come here and
basically mislead this House because, indeed, as Mpumalanga, we have had
public hearings in Globlersdal and in Marble Hall. The sentiments that have
been expressed here by Mr Worth were not expressed in those meetings. In
fact the DA wasn’t there.

The other matter that we would like to raise, indeed, concerns these
perceptions that some provinces are not be able to deliver certain services
to our people. In our own view, we think that those perceptions are
unfounded. In fact there is no empirical evidence that suggests that any of
our provinces are unable to roll out school facilities, roll out health
facilities and indeed to provide all those necessary things that our people
need.

Therefore this notion that Mr Worth and the DA . . . Perhaps they should
concentrate on what they do best: laying panties. [Applause.]
[Interjections.] I thought that they were a pontificating party, now they
are a “pantificating” party. Maybe they should just leave Parliament and
concentrate on the business of panties. [Laughter.]

We agree with colleagues who say that in the period after the passage of
these of Bills we shall have a lot of work to do, particularly as
provincial legislatures. The comrades from Gauteng said that we needed to
raise the bar in terms of our oversight function, and we agree with that.
We must see to it that indeed all these transitional arrangements that are
made in terms of these Bills are followed through in letter and in spirit.
If they are not – I nearly used an Afrikaans phrase, which would not have
been parliamentary - we would be in trouble. [Laughter.]

I would like to make a case regarding the challenges that confront our
province. We are obviously taking over Bushbuckridge and indeed our
colleagues have been welcomed. Here is Kgoshi Mokoena, he can attest to
that. They have been warmly welcomed to Mpumalanga province in South
Africa. In fact, he has not relocated. He is still where he is, and his
traditional kraal is there as well.

We have agreed in this forum that Globlersdal and Marble Hall should go to
Limpopo. Indeed, we also agree in this forum that Ekungwini should go to
Gauteng . . . [Interjections.] . . . It should be part of Gauteng, “not go
to Gauteng”. Thank you, Premier, for the correction.

We must, therefore, deal with the challenges that Mpumalanga will face
because of these decisions, Minister. These decisions, which we really
accept in terms of our national obligation and in terms of pursuing the
national agenda of transformation, will then mean that perhaps we should
also do and support what the Premier of North West has said: to see how
best, at national level, we can then literally give support to Mpumalanga
regarding this particular matter.

Madam . . . Chairperson . . . You know, we have Madam Speaker in
Mpumalanga, so I nearly addressed you as “Madam Speaker”. But you are also
so handsome that you can fit that description. [Laughter.]

The other important matter is that we need to engage with our communities
so that we can also get to know what it is that informs this perception
that some ANC provinces can’t deliver, as opposed to others. We fully agree
that we need to engage so that we prove this to be a fallacy because,
indeed, there is no truth in it.

Regarding the FF Plus, I am not surprised that they no longer have a seat
in the Mpumalanga legislature, because their thinking is just warped. They
say that we are changing these boundaries for political expediency. Now,
that can’t be any far from lying. I’m saying this guardedly, because the
objects of these two Bills are well-stated. There is no political
expediency from what I have read.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, on a point of order, the hon member
referred to me as if I said that these amendments are for party-political
purposes and that I am lying. This is not correct, and I object.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No,no, he didn’t say: “You are lying.” He
said: “It’s not far from lying.” [Interjections.] Continue, hon member.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, I do not dispute your ruling, but I heard
the word “lie”; I heard the words, “it is a lie.”

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Take your seat, Dr Van Heerden. Continue, hon
member.

Mr J MTHEMBU (Mpumalanga): Chair, I think that again we will say what we
have said before, that’s why in the Mpumalanga legislature you no longer
have any representation for the FF Plus.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, continue with the debate; don’t
repeat what you have said.
Mr J MTHEMBU (Mpumalanga): Chair, other people – the DA, again - are saying
that we have undermined the will of the electorate. I don’t know which
English they understand, because we have continuously said that we have had
public hearings in Mpumalanga. I don’t know how many we have had, but they
are more than four.

In those affected areas, people have raised their issues – they have. These
are the issues on which we say we must engage with them. But they never
said that indeed they no longer want to be part of any of the provinces of
this country. They never said that. Therefore to say that we have just
rushed this Bill through and that we have not had consultations with our
people is really not true. We have had consultations with our people. That
hon member knows that very well. He knows very well that we have had
consultation with our people. Therefore there is no reason whatsoever to
come here and mislead this House.

Chairperson, thank you very much. We support the Bills. [Applause.]

Cllr H JENKINS (Salga): Chairperson, hon Minister for Provincial and Local
Government, hon Deputy Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development,
Premier, hon members, fellow South Africans, it is indeed an honour for
Salga to have been involved in the legislative processes, both at national
and provincial legislature level, with regard to the Constitutional Twelfth
Amendment Bill and the Cross-Boundary Municipal Laws Repeal Bill.
It must be emphasised that the two Bills are separate, but cannot be seen
in isolation from each other. The Constitution provides in section
155(6)(a) for the establishment, through the implementation of the
Municipal Structures Act, of municipalities extending across provincial
boundaries. These statutory provisions gave rise to the establishment of 16
cross-boundary municipalities, affecting five provinces.

We are all aware that at the time of this demarcation cross-boundary
municipalities were set up in some areas to ensure viable, integrated and
effective local government without shifting the existing provincial
boundaries, which were very much based on magisterial districts. However,
in the past five years we witnessed the practical difficulties,
particularly in respect of service delivery and administering these
municipalities.

The existence of cross-boundary municipalities made it difficult for
government across the three spheres to promote integrated social and
economic development, and it makes it difficult to ensure effective local
governance.

We have had four years of operating our new local government system and the
experiences learnt during the process created the need for a better
framework to improve the service delivery at local government level. This
is because many provinces have different pieces of legislation for similar
functions. If laws of more than one province need to be administered in a
cross-boundary municipality, it is confusing, duplicative and costly.

A cross-boundary municipality needs both provinces to approve its
Integrated Development Plans (IDPs). The co-ordination and integration of
programmes and budgets of two different provinces into a single IDP may be
extremely difficult where priorities for and progress with IDPs differ from
province to province. This is an administrative nightmare and it leads to
service delivery being compromised.

It is the practical service delivery challenges that were experienced by
both municipalities as well as provincial administrations that prompted the
Presidential Co-ordinating Council, the PCC, on 1 November 2002 to resolve
that cross-boundary municipalities should be done away with and provincial
boundaries be reviewed so that all municipalities fall within one province
or another. The PCC must be commended for taking such a bold decision,
which was singularly based on improving service delivery to our people.

The implications of implementing this decision gave rise to the need for
the matter to be addressed through the amendment of the necessary
legislation, being the Constitutional Twelfth Amendment Bill, which
redetermines the geographical areas of the provinces and the Cross-Boundary
Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill, which is to repeal all the cross-boundary
municipality laws.

From a local government point of view, it should be emphasised that the
introduction of the Bills into the parliamentary process to give effect to
the PCC decision was met with fierce protest from affected communities. It
is municipalities that are at the coalface of service delivery that found
themselves targets of the protests. In particular, the protest within the
Merafong Local Municipality should be singled out, where municipal offices
were damaged by disgruntled members of the community.

It is critical to consider the process of redetermining both the provincial
and municipal boundaries. Parliament, through the constitutional
amendments, redetermines the provincial boundaries whereas the Municipal
Demarcation Board is empowered by legislation to redetermine municipal
boundaries. It is ironical that municipalities that do not determine their
own boundaries or the provincial boundaries find themselves the first
target of disgruntled communities.

It is best to express the view that the PCC decision was made in the
national interest of improving service delivery and as such Salga supports
the Bills and what they are intended to achieve. But we must emphasise that
the real work is yet to start by, firstly, properly communicating decisions
to our people and, secondly, implementing the transitional arrangements
that have been put in place.

It would be appropriate to conclude with a challenge not only to our
municipalities to improve service delivery within their respective
communities, but also to provincial government, through the Premiers, to
ensure that proper conditions are created at a local level to improve
service delivery.

As the voice of local government, Salga wants to communicate a clear
message to our people that in the process service delivery will not be
compromised. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr S E BYNEVELDT (Western Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister, hon Premier, hon MECs and colleagues, I lead a delegation from
the Western Cape, and I do so with a deep level of pride and gratitude. We
represent a mandate, and I’m happy to be part of the process of
representing that mandate, a mandate put together by all of the members and
political parties in the Western Cape provincial legislature, including the
UIF, the DA, the ACDP and the ID.

I therefore feel empowered standing here today, knowing that in the Western
Cape province we are all in support of this Bill. In developing this
mandate, the temptation was there for the province to say that we don’t
have boundaries of this nature in the Western Cape so we should just
support this Bill because it doesn’t affect us. But we opted differently.
We said that if we are going to support these Bills, we must understand why
we are doing so.
When we consider these Bills we gather, first and foremost, as South
Africans; we convene as a people; we gather as a province that is part of
one whole and we would certainly not pursue the cause of a country within a
country; we will not Balkanise. We will not be federal. We will continue to
contribute to the process of one whole.

We said that we would not forget our history – a history of having been
divided along racial lines; a history of the majority having been excluded;
a history of benefit to a few and hardship to many. So, when we organise
this mandate we will remember all of these things; we will certainly not
forget our history.

If we are to be genuine representatives of the people, then we need to
understand some of the issues of history that need to be addressed as we
move forward. So, I’m proud to say that a people that prosper together and
a people united is what we would want. A society that is nonsexist, non-
racial; a South Africa that is unitary is what we would want.

Certainly, our mandate says that we should be able to find all of these
good things in these Bills. So, I proudly represent the mandate of the
province and all of its political parties that have contributed to this
effort.

Local government cannot be outside of the processes of transforming,
changing and bringing about change. This is a logical step. That is what
the province has concluded in terms of ensuring that we deliver a local
government that is more effective; a local government that can drive the
processes of change – be they economic, social, cultural etc. And you will
have a geographical impact if you are committed to all of those things,
given our particular history. The days of disparity in service delivery
need to be buried six feet under, and so should administrative challenges
where two provinces have different responsibilities, and so forth.

The issue of the mandate to deliver is a constitutional duty. So, it’s not
being politically expedient when you deal with these kinds of issues. In
fact, you are rising to the challenge of having to respond to
constitutional duty and the constitutional mandate. For example, two
provinces from two different IDPs would have different priorities. That is
related to the demands of the IDPs. Their inability to deal with these
demands has to do with the arrangements of the past. What does political
expediency have to do with this? If anything, it is really about fulfilling
our role as public representatives.

We‘ve had a process of advertising for public comment, and so forth. We
have not had views opposing these Bills. We certainly believe that even the
people of Western Cape, broadly speaking, are in full support of these
pieces of legislation. Yes, let’s ensure that the outcomes of the intended
legislation that we implement are realised smoothly and that people remain
united; that we have an undivided country and the South Africa that grows
and prospers together.

Ter afsluiting wil ek van die geleentheid gebruik maak om te sê ‘n
verenigde Weskaap wens almal van julle ‘n goeie feestyd toe. Baie dankie.
[Applous.] [In conclusion, I would like to use this opportunity to say that
a united Western Cape wishes all of you a happy festive season. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]]

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson of the Council, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister, hon Deputy Chairperson of the Council, hon Premier, hon MECs from
the Eastern Cape, the North West and Limpopo, Salga delegates and
colleagues, it was very interesting to see the two parties, the FF Plus and
DA going back to the laager, where they came from – namely the NP – by
saying that they were redrawing boundaries and doing what is called
“gerrymandering” to further their political interests.

Of course, the DA tried to go to Merafong, but was chased away by the
people there. When there was a problem in Delmas the DA tried to go there,
but was also chased away. The DA will never represent the majority of our
people, let alone the FF Plus. No amount of opportunism will ever win the
support of our people. You remain white parties in form and content, which
compete with each other with regard to rightwing policies.

The ANC, as a revolutionary movement, stands for the improvement of the
quality of lives of our people, particularly the poorest of the poor.
Therefore, it can’t be true that the ANC-led government developed policies
and laws aimed at impoverishing our people.

In taking these steps, the ANC is advancing along the course it set itself
- to lead our people and to be able to see things coming, that is, a
visionary movement.

The ANC is like a giraffe. As we know, a giraffe is the tallest animal in
the forest. It sees far, where other animals can’t see. Therefore, the
other animals won’t be on the same wavelength as to what is happening in
the surroundings. Even the people who today are disagreeing with our views
will be able in the future . . . [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, give the member a hearing,
please. Continue, hon member. [Interjections.]

Mr S SHICEKA: There are lessons we have learnt in this process, because
this is the first time in the history of our democracy that this process
has ever been conducted. One of the lessons that came to the fore is that
we must begin to look at the current situation and review the form and
content of our provinces, as they currently stand. We must learn that
lesson against the backdrop of building a united, democratic and prosperous
South Africa with diverse cultures. The second lesson is that government
has to intensify the Batho Pele principles, particularly the war cry that
goes: “We serve, and we care!”

We should also learn the best practices in other spheres of government,
that is provinces, both horizontally and vertically, so that we are able to
ensure that the study tours are conducted internally because we have
developed some best practices in the past 11 years.

We must learn from these practices so that we can ensure that we advance
and we move forward. We should not only make sure that we go on study tours
outside our borders, but we should also be a learning nation.

The ANC supports this giant step aimed at achieving strategic objectives.
This developmental state will not shy away from its responsibility of
removing any obstacle standing in the way of achieving a better life for
all our people.

I want to thank the Ministries and departments for their co-operation and
guidance, and the provinces for building partnerships with us. To them I
say: You have never failed us. I also wish to thank members of the
committee for their dedication and commitment, their ability to go the
extra mile, their incisive input at committee meetings and for making the
NCOP a buzzing place that you all look forward to be in.

I say to the detachment: Go and recharge your batteries; next year the
challenges are still great. I would also like to thank the staff members,
without whom we would not have been able to move; the Chairperson of the
Council, the Deputy Chairperson and the Chief Whip of the Council for their
support, guidance and their availability at all times.

Parliament today has concluded the processes on this Bill. The Bill has
been passed by all the people who were eligible to vote, with the exception
of the hon member from the FF Plus. The member of the FF Plus is not even
part of the committee. Therefore, what he talked about was remote,
uninformed and just wishful thinking. In that regard we want to thank you
very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MUNISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon
Chairperson and hon members, firstly, I would like to thank everyone for
their contribution. I think that a few of the inputs we received today were
actually of a very high calibre and showed good political debate and a good
grasp of the legal and political issues in the best traditions we know.

There were a few low points, but I don’t think we should harp on them.
However, I do want to say that for those of you who are new in Parliament,
hon Watson and others would know, should follow the example of the hon
Colin Eglin. You know, Colin Eglin, when he was in Parliament - the
apartheid Parliament as well in the democratic parliament – played an
enormously vital role. He impacted very hugely on developments in
Parliament.

Why are DA opposition party members unable to do that? It is because he
always engaged issues by remaining intellectually honest. Even if he
approached matters from different angles, he always did so intellectually
and honestly. He never ever tried to be opportunistic. He did not
generalise. He never twisted the facts. He made no bones about the fact
that he approached matters from a certain direction, and people respected
that.

You can engage someone intellectually, even if she or he is different from
you and has a different point of view. And Colin, in the process, achieved
enormously in this Parliament, including during the democratic government.

I think that that is the lesson that needs to be learnt. No one is saying
that the opposition has to agree with everything government does. They need
to raise their points. But the manner in which they do it and the manner in
which they strive to be effective and to be taken seriously is very
important.

It is of no use . . . We are all grown-ups here. I am not a fool, and most
of the people are not fools. We are not going to sit here and listen to a
lot of gibberish, generalisations, distortions, people telling stories
about the history of this country when they weren’t even born . . .
[Laughter.] . . . people telling us about what our people on the ground
know and don’t know and what they say when we know that they don’t go to
them.

Tackle us on the issues, and this debate is a prime example of that not
happening. I showed that in the National Assembly. Show me one of the
people that have opposed this Bill on a matter of principle. Even the
opposition party – the DA in the other House – said they have no objections
to getting rid of cross-boundary municipalities. They accept the principle.
There is, therefore, no objection to the matter on the basis of principle.

So, what is the objection? I mean if you are not opposing something in
principle and if your party has a policy that it thinks that cross-boundary
municipalities must go, then what are you opposing? [Interjections.] No,
no, the problem is opportunism. The problem with opportunism is that it
actually makes ordinary people think that ordinary people are idiots. They
think that if you suddenly take up the cudgels on behalf of ordinary
people, because you think you are now on their side, those people will be
stupid enough to fall for that.

People are not idiots. People know who they can listen to and what they
debate. People know when people are using their leadership
opportunistically for political gain. That is what this is about. No one is
denying that, of course, anyone may have a point of view.

People anywhere can burn tyres and demonstrate - and they have a good right
to do so – and may have a particular point of view about their actions.
However, whether they are right is another issue. Every demonstration is
not right. Every opposition is not right. Therefore, it brings us to the
issue of consultation. You know, I just laugh at these things, because the
way these issues are put across, it’s as if they were debated just
yesterday. It’s as if yesterday we woke up and said: Oh, there is an
election coming; so let’s quickly amend the boundaries. In these debates
you should use more of your intellect, and less of your mouth. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

These debates have been going on for many years. The President . . .

Ms H LAMOELA: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Don’t shout
at me. You are a leader. You should behave yourself. Do you want to use
your intellect to engage me? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon Deputy Minister, continue with your
reply to the debate. Hon Lamoela, could you please behave yourself. You are
spoiling this whole good debate. Continue, hon Minister.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: The issue
of consultation is a thread that runs through the Constitution at all
levels. But one must not confuse consultation with agreement. The
Constitution doesn’t say that if you consult someone then you must rubber-
stamp what he or she says. It says that you consult with people; you listen
to them and then you disagree or you agree with them.

The whole basis of discretion in law is listening and then exercising a
decision. It can’t be right that we keep hearing that our institutions are
not relevant, simply because we made decisions you didn’t accept. That’s
not democracy. Democracy is your right to express whatever opinions you
have. And it is the right of those that have been given that right by the
majority of the people in this country to make decisions on the basis of
those consultations and other information they have available. You can’t
confuse the two. How do you keep on confusing the two? To say that
consultation means “agree with me or else it’s a useless exercise” it just
can’t be right.

I have listened to a lot of young people, watching them on TV shouting at
us about the Constitution and what the Constitution and the law say. There
is clearly a fundamental misunderstanding of what local government
comprises, legally and constitutionally. Go and look at Chapter 3 of the
Constitution. It clearly says that there are three spheres of government,
which are separate, independent, but also interrelated. The Constitution
says so and gives a whole chapter explaining co-operative government.

Now, how on earth can someone then say that by having a local government in
one province or the other is going to make a difference? Does local
government have original powers and stature in the Constitution? No
province is going to and can exercise that power for them. Only the
municipality – the municipal council in that area – can run the government
in that area because the Constitution only gives them the power.
[Interjection.]

An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: That is a
stupid question. Please! [Laughter.] I mean, why does anything fail? It’s
because it doesn’t work. It doesn’t mean that it has nothing to do with
power. Power is a structure that is independent and can only be exercised
by designated people.

Provinces only have the powers that are spelt out in the Constitution. The
Constitution says that provinces can make laws here and there. Most of
those laws are of a monitoring or a conduit character. Provinces have no
substantive powers in local government. Even the finances of local
government are spelt out in section 214 and elsewhere in a part of the
Constitution that says that the finances don’t come from provinces, but
from national government.

Go and study local government in our country and you will see that all the
major pieces of legislation – the systems, Bills and so on –are part of
national legislation, and not provincial legislation. Forget the politics.
How on earth, legally and constitutionally, can anyone suggest that being
here or there makes a difference to the powers that you have and what you
are able to do as a local government?

It is not just legally and constitutionally wrong; it just makes no sense.
It’s not logical. There is no rationality to that kind of argument. It
doesn’t matter where your local government is – it can be on the moon for
that matter. [Laughter.]

The power of a local government is derived from the Constitution, and not
from the province. Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I thought
that you were going to give the hon Deputy Minister the benefit of some
injury time, given the hard tackle he received from the hon member.
[Laughter.]

Allow me to acknowledge the presence of the chairperson of the Municipal
Demarcation Board in the public gallery and thank the Municipal Demarcation
Board, through him, along with the chairpersons and members of the two
select committees that played such an important role in facilitating the
two Bills to a point that they are now before the NCOP.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank all the hon members who took
part in this debate – an interesting debate indeed. It was one in which the
hon Dr Van Heerden made a curious choice of words. He talked of, I quote:
“a perception that government changes the Constitution for political
expediency.” I am paraphrasing and quoting you in order for your statement
to make more sense. [Laughter.]

For a moment I wondered as to whose brain it is that is so susceptible to
such an uncalled for perception. He solved my problem when he said that he
was actually transposing his undemocratic experience to a democratic
situation. [Laughter.] Needless to say, his fears are misplaced because he
confuses a democratic government for the one he used to be part of.
The two hon members, Mr Worth and Mr Le Roux, decided to treat this House
to a diatribe of which the central point is the charge that the two Bills
were, I quote: “. . . hastily rushed through Parliament, without
consultation.” Hon Deputy Minister, perhaps the two members woke up to the
reality of ongoing consultations too late. [Laughter.] You need to give
them watches as Christmas presents.

Reference was also made to so-called perceptions about the so-called
dysfunctional provinces. Talking about perceptions is the best refuge of
political cowards. They are so noncommittal that they do not take us into
their confidence as to their own views on the matter. So, they choose to
talk about perceptions.

Members of the NCOP, with an elective base that brought them here, cannot
talk like independent observers. If there are problems of underperformance
in any one of our nine provinces, what is the responsibility of an NCOP
member? Your duty as a member of the NCOP is not to use this House as a
platform for vote-catching posturing. You are here to contribute to the
search for the best possible practical solution to problems, such as the
one that was brought before the House this morning.

Otherwise, to one and all, including you, merry Christmas and a prosperous
New Year. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That concludes the debate. I shall now put the
question in respect of the first order. The question is that the Bill be
agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all the
delegation heads present? Yes, present.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declaration of vote, if they so wish. Is there any province
that wishes to do so? None.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do so in
alphabetical order, per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour, against or abstain. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Thina siyiMpuma Koloni siyayixhasa yonke le nkqubo
ibiqhubeka apha. [The Eastern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Vrystaat steun.[Free State supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr V W MBATHA: Siyavuma, Sihlalo. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: IKwaZulu-Natal ithi elethu.[KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms M NKOANA-MASHABANE: Limpopo e a e thekga. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Mr J MTHEMBU: eMpumalanga empela e yaoxhasa lomthetho. [Mpumalanga
supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Kapa-Bokone re a dumelana.  [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Ms E MOLEWA (Premier of North West): We support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All provinces have voted in favour of the
Bill. I therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution. [Applause.]

Order! I shall now put the question in respect of the second order. The
question is that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall
first allow political parties an opportunity to make declarations of vote,
if they so wish. This is a section 75 Bill. Is there any party that wishes
to do so?

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: I am now forced to make a
declaration because of the speech by the Deputy Minister. He made a
statement that was not true. I will not refer to him in the same sense as
he referred to me, as “being stupid”. I want to make the . . .

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Chairperson, that is not a point of order.
The member wants to masquerade his intention to reopen and to respond to
the debate or the speech of the Deputy Minister through a declaration. He
has consciously said so in his preface. [Interjections.]

I am chairing, Mr Watson. You are making a declaration in terms of Rule 63,
with regard to the Bill that we are debating. Please refer to the Bill.

Declarations of vote:

Mr A WATSON: I am referring to the Bill, hon Chairperson. If I’m not
allowed to refer to a wrong statement that was made from the podium, let me
then put it right, in my own words.

The DA supports the cross-boundary Bill. We have never said that we don’t
support it. You know that as far back as 1994-95, when we wrote this piece
of legislation, I was then against the institution of cross-boundary
municipalities. We therefore support this Bill unreservedly. We are against
the twelfth amendment because of a principle of nonconsultation. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, the member is in order as long
as he speaks on the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill, but he
can’t be in order when he makes reference to an order that has been voted
on a long time ago in terms of provincial delegations. It is not a party
vote when we deal with the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill. In the
light of that, he is out of order.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Let us not waste our time. Let me just remind
you all about Rule 63, for future reference purposes. When a question to be
decided on by individual votes of members has been put, the officer
presiding may allow each political party, in a speech not exceeding three
minutes, through a Council member belonging to it, to state the reasons why
the party is in favour or against the question. Bear this in mind in the
future. Don’t refer to other debates.
Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I had a mandate from the IFP, but I was
waiting for my turn. When it was said that only provinces had to make a
declaration I decided to keep quiet. My party says “no” the Constitution
Twelfth Amendment Bill.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, we have voted on that Bill. You cannot
pronounce yourself on that. You can only pronounce yourself on the second
Order. [Interjections.] We are dealing with the second Order. We have voted
on the first order. That order was dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, and provinces were given an opportunity to make their
declarations of vote. We are now dealing with the second order, which is
section 75 of the Constitution, and parties are allowed to make their
declarations of vote.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: I am speaking on the Cross-boundary Municipal Laws Repeal
Bill. No, we support that. [Applause.] But on the first one, we say, no.
[Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Order! Hon members, you must study your
Rules very carefully. Order! It’s very embarrassing when members of this
House don’t know their Rules. All of us are expected to study the Rules and
know the Rules. Are there any further declarations of vote? None.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
            AFFAIRS ON PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION OF MR I W O MORAKE



 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
       AFFAIRS ON PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MR K SULLIMAN

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, hon members, hon Premier, hon MECs, hon Speaker
from the Western Cape, special delegates, officials from the department,
ladies and gentlemen, in considering issues of judicial misconduct and
incompetence South Africa must be guided by the principle of the rule of
law, which requires laws to be administered fairly, impartially, rationally
and without fear of prejudice.

It is a preservation of the rule of law, which is the basic reason for
establishing mechanisms for dealing with judicial misconduct, where it
takes the form of sexual harassment, corruption or less serious forms of
misbehaviour.

In giving effect to the fundamental principle of equality before the law,
which is firmly entrenched in our Constitution, our state institutions,
including Parliament, must communicate an unequivocal message that judges
and magistrates, like everyone else in our society, are subject to the law.

Guided by the principle of the Freedom Charter that South Africa belongs to
all those who live in it, black and white, we must recommit ourselves to
building a caring society that truly belongs to all our citizens, including
the most vulnerable sections of our society – women and children.

This objective derives its content from our Constitution, which not only
provides that everyone in our society has inherent dignity, but also that
all citizens, including women and children, have a right to be free from
any form of violence and abuse from public and private sources.

Given the reality of rife and endemic abuse and violence against women and
children in South Africa, the continent and the world, we must re-emphasise
that national and social emancipation would never be complete without the
freedom of our society from the scourge of violence against women and
children.

This scourge of violence manifests itself in various spheres and corners of
our society, including corridors of public institutions, which institutions
are supposed to be centres of the fight against abuse of women and
children.

In our efforts and campaigns aimed at condemning and eliminating women
abuse and violence against women in our society, the ANC will continue to
pride itself on being a leading political force dedicated to genuine
emancipation of women.

In the same vein, as we build a morally-grounded society, we will continue
to abhor any behaviour which deviates from the formal duties of a public
role, for such behaviour constitutes corruption. Because corruption
constitutes an obstacle to societal development, in dealing with issues of
corruption we must heed President Thabo Mbeki’s call to unite against
corruption in all spheres of our society, including the magistracy and
judiciary.

In whatever we do as South Africans, we must continue to promote leadership
in all sectors of our society, a leadership that is committed to the
creation of a culture of integrity and restoration of public confidence in
the fight against corruption and immorality.

However, while the ANC recommits itself to building a society grounded on
fundamental, moral and ethical values that reject any vestiges of sexual
harassment, bribery and corruption, it continues to observe constitutional
values such as presumption of innocence until proven otherwise. Presumption
of innocence is essential in a society that is committed to fairness and
social justice. In essence, the presumption of innocence until proven
otherwise  confirms our faith in humankind and reflects our belief that
individual human beings are the decent and law-abiding in our communities.
I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! I shall now
put the question in respect of the third Order. The question is that the
report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all the delegation heads
are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all the
delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish.
We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order, per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour, or against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr V W MBATHA : Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga votes in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Steun. [Supports.]

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Ms E MOLEWA (Premier of North West): We support.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

Report accordingly agreed adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All nine provinces
have voted in favour of the report. I therefore declare the report adopted.

Order! I shall now put the question in respect of the fourth Order. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all the delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their
provinces’ votes. Are all the delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow the provinces an
opportunity to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. None.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order, per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Re a e thekga. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLADA-MAGUBANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Siyaxhasa. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga.

Ms M P THEMBA:  Ha yi seketela. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

The PREMIER OF THE NORTH WEST: We support.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Western Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All nine provinces
have voted in favour of the report. I therefore declare the report adopted.

Debate concluded.

Report accordingly agreed in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON MATTERS RELATING TO THE
                        ABAQULUSI LOCAL MUNICIPALITY


Mnu Z C NTULI: Sekela Sihlalo, malungu ahloniphekile, abafowethu
nodadewethu, emva kokuba uNgqongqoshe wezoHulumeni baseKhaya KwaZulu-
Natali, u-Mike Mabuyakhulu, efike lapha ePhalamende ezosibikela
ngezehlakalo esenzeke kumasipala wabaQulusi, siyikomidi loMkhandlu
kaZwelonke weziFundazwe sibe sesinikela khona siyozizwela ngokwethu. Sifike-
ke lapha sacela izinhlangano ezahlukehlukene ukuba zisinike izimvo zazo.
Abantu esifike sacela ukubonana nabo kube amakhansela asechithiwe,
amakomidi amawadi, osomabhizinisi, izinhlangano zomphakathi nezinhlangano
ezingekho ngaphansi kukahulumeni, abaphathi bakamasipala kanye
nezinhlangano zabasebenzi zombili i-Matu ne-Samwu.

Sibheme sakholwa ngesikhathi besikhinindela ngomasipala wabo. Kuye  kwagqama
ukuthi  amakhansela   achithiwe   akhala   esikaNandi   ngezikhundla   zawo,
ikakhulukazi  awe-IFP.  Lezi  ezinye  izinhlangano   bezihambisana   nokuthi
uhulumeni wesifunda angenelele. Bebesho futhi  bengananazi  ukuthi  uphuzile
ukungenelela.  Njengekomidi,  sibe  sesithatha  isincomo  sokuthi  uHulumeni
wesiFunda  waKwaZulu-Natali  angenelele  ekutakuleni  umasipala   wabaQulusi
kulolu  bishi  obese  ungene  kulona.  (Translation  of  isiZulu  paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr Z C NTULI: Deputy Chairperson, hon members, brothers and sisters,  after
the visit of  the  KwaZulu-Natal  MEC  for  Housing,  Local  Government  and
Traditional Affairs, Mike Mabuyakhulu, to Parliament  to  report  about  the
drama that took place in the AbaQulusi Municipality,  the  National  Council
of Provinces committee decided  to  visit  the  municipality.  We  requested
different organisations to give us their views. We also  requested  meetings
with  dismissed  councillors,  ward  committees,  business  people,   public
organisations,  non-governmental  organisations,  municipal   managers   and
labour unions Matu and Samwu.

We were astonished when they told us about their municipality. It  was  also
clear that dismissed councillors, especially  IFP  councillors,  are  crying
unceasingly about  their  positions.  Other  organisations  agree  that  the
provincial government must intervene. They also said that  the  intervention
by the government was long overdue. As a committee, we made  recommendations
that the provincial government of KwaZulu-Natal must  intervene  to  salvage
AbaQulusi Municipality from this dilemma.]

As the committee, we have recommended to the provincial government and the
administrator of Abaqulusi Municipality that the following issues, in the
form of recommendations, need to be addressed: One, the development of
human resource policies which can build the municipality; two, the
establishment of structures envisaged by the Municipal Finance Management
Act; three, the recovery of moneys that were unduly paid to councillors and
for damage done on official vehicles; four, the development of programmes
for service delivery; five, the establishment of a programme to develop
ward committees that should be unleashed after the election in all wards;
six, the development of systems to ensure that the IDPs get full community
participation when being drawn up; seven, the establishment of a properly
constituted local labour forum; eight, in the absence of ward committees,
the administrator should brief the community through ward representatives
or alternative means; and nine, the Administrator and the MEC should report
to the NCOP on progress on these issues on a bimonthly basis.

Mphathisihlalo, bengicela ukuthi iNdlu yamukele lo mbiko. [Chairperson, I
request the House to adopt this report.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! I shall now
put the question in respect of the fifth Order. The question is that the
report be adopted. As this decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all the
delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow the provinces an
opportunity to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. None.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order, per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyayamkela. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Siyavuma. [We support]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Ke ya rona. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Ms E MOLEWA (Premier of the North West): North West supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All nine provinces
have voted in favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in accordance
with section 65 of the Constitution. [Applause.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                              FAREWELL SPEECHES

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, hon colleagues, last year when we stood here
there was one exception to all the good wishes extended. You will recall
that the hon Sinclair, at the time suspended between the New NP and the
ANC, tried so hard to build his nest in the ANC that he wished everyone
well for 2005 except the DA. Well, we are at the end of 2005 and the DA is
doing just fine. But unfortunately, there is no one telling us how Mr
Sinclair is doing. It may pay him in future to heed the old truth: What
goes round comes round.

It is that time of the goodwill and I do, once again, most sincerely want
to pay tribute to the Chairperson of the NCOP, hon M J Mahlangu, for his
outstanding leadership, and also to thank . . . [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! Hon members,
let us allow the hon Watson a chance to present his speech.

Mr A WATSON: I would like to thank him and the presidium for their
dedication to their tasks. It’s no secret that we often disagreed with some
rulings, and we will continue to do so until they get them right.
I also wish to thank the Secretary of the NCOP, Adv Lulama Matyolo, and her
staff for their work and dedication throughout the past year.

However, whilst wishing you all well for the season that lies ahead and all
the best for 2006, I believe that this is also a time for reflecting on our
achievements and our interrelations.

Ek glo die agb Voorsitter en sy span sal goed moet kyk na die mandaat van
ons kiesers, sodat ons na hulle belange sal omsien en nie na die belange
van die meerderheidsparty nie. Elkeen van ons het die reg om gehoor te word
en om daardie mandaat uit te voer. Wat ons egter ervaar, is die groeiende
drang van die meerderheidsparty om ons te beheer asof ons hier is op hul
genade. Ons is hier om ons partye te dien en ons sal aanhou solank dit ons
behaag. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I believe that the hon Chairman and his team will have to take a good look
at the mandate of our voters, so that we will attend to their interests and
not to the interests of the majority party. Each one of us has the right to
be heard and to execute that mandate. However, what we are experiencing is
the increasing urge of the majority party to control us as if we were at
their mercy here. We are here to serve our parties and we shall continue to
do so for as long as we please.]

May I wish you all a wonderful Christmas! May the message of Christmas find
its way into all your hearts and your homes! And, may you have a wonderful
2006!

Niphumule kahle! Nikhonze emakhaya! Ningalahleki endleleni! [Have a good
rest! Best wishes! Don’t get lost on the way!]

May I conclude by just using a few seconds of this opportunity to also wish
the Whip of the DA, Ms Terblanche, a wonderful birthday; it is her birthday
today. So, be nice for a change, Mr M C Goeieman.

I conclude by saying, once again, that may you all have a wonderful
Christmas.

Sepelang gabotse. Le se lahlege tseleng. Kgotso e be le lena. Ke a leboga.
[Go well. Don’t get lost on the way. Peace be with you. Thank you.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, to all my colleagues and my seniors from all
provinces, let me say that we have been blessed in the year 2005. Many
things happened throughout the year. Some were good, and some were bad; but
all the same we survived. So, we have been blessed in the year 2005.

Let us go back to our families with joy and peace of mind, and rest as much
as possible. Enjoy the festive season to the best optimal level. We hope
that we shall meet again in the new year - 2006.

Have a merry Christmas and a prosperous New Year. May God bless you all!
Ndlelanhle! Adios! [Go well!] [Goodbye!] [Applause.]

Nkskz A N D QIKANI: Mphathisihlalo, baphathiswa abakhoyo namalungu onke ale
Ndlu, sibulela kakhulu siyi-UDM kuyo le Ndlu ngendlela esithe saqhuba ngayo
kwade kwaphela unyaka. Sibulela kakhulu kuSihlalo wale Ndlu neSekela lakhe
ngokusiphatha ngokulinganayo sonke, kungekho ungcono kunomnye.
Sininqwenelela imihla emide ezele ngamathamsanqa nempumelelo.

Ndithi mandibulele kakhulu kuMbhexeshi oyiNtloko kunye nakowephondo leMpuma
Koloni nabathi ngexesha lokreqelo lwamalungu kwamanye amaqela bamane
besikhangela thina maqela mancinci. Sithi: Maz’ enethole! Ndininqwenelela
nonke iKrisimesi emnandi nonyaka ozele amathamsanqa; sibuye sonke
siphelele. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Mrs A N D QIKANI: Chairperson, Ministers present here and all hon members
of this House, the UDM would like to convey its appreciation for the way we
conducted the business of this House until the end of the year. Chairperson
and Deputy Chairperson, thank you very much for the equal treatment you
dispensed. We wish you a long life full of blessings and prosperity.

Let me say thank you very much to the Chief Whip and the provincial NCOP
Whip of the Eastern Cape for the support they provided to all small parties
during the floor-crossing period. Your courtesy is appreciated. I wish you
all a happy Christmas and a prosperous New Year; we must all come back
alive. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Hon Chair, hon Premier and hon colleagues, we have lived
together here in peace and harmony, and we have established a loving
relationship among ourselves. Today we must take leave of one another and
say goodbye to people we have got accustomed to living with.

However, whilst we are looking forward to our homeward journeys to those
people that we love best, we cannot afford not to look back with a spirit
of loneliness and sore heart. In other words, we are spiritually torn
between two groups of people that we love dearly.

However, we are grateful that we are parting on a note of happiness,
friendship, love and confidence in one another. We shall miss one another,
but because we know that we are only parting temporarily, we shall be able
to bear the discomfort.

In conclusion, I need to say that we wish the leadership of this House, the
support staff and the hon colleagues a happy Christmas period and a
prosperous New Year. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Ministers, MECs and hon
members, success is not to be pursued; it is to be attracted by the person
you become.

Like our former President Nelson Mandela, who spent some 27 years in jail
for democracy, to be a leader you should always start with where people are
before you try to take them where you want them to go. You cannot change
your destination overnight, but you can change your direction overnight and
be part of our new democracy. Sharing makes you bigger than you are. The
more you pour out, the more life will be able to pour in.

Some are here by profession, others are chosen by the Almighty, for a
special purpose. Thanks to all who knew those who died and suffered; who
granted us the opportunity to be part of the new, growing democracy. I hope
that we will together ensure a strong nation.

Have a happy festive season. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEEREDEN: Voorsitter, baie dankie en van die VF Plus se kant af,
dankie aan die Voorsitter en almal wat van tyd tot tyd in die Stoel sit.
Ons moet partykeer die sweep ook maar ’n karwats noem. Die
ondersteuningspersoneel in die kantore soos die mense wat vir ons water
aandra – van ons kant af, baie dankie.

Kersfees en hierdie tyd van die jaar is ’n tyd van welwillendheid wanneer
mense en hul families bymekaar is en dit is ons beste wense dat almal die
tyd saam met hul families sal geniet in welwillendheid en in veiligheid.
Buitekant is daar baie mense wat min, indien enige verwagtinge het van
hierdie dae. Laat ons uitgaan met oop beursies en oop ore na mense
buitekant wat arm is en wat swaarkry. Laat ons mededeelsaam wees. Dit is
die wens van ons party en ek glo almal van ons het daardie wens, dat ons
mededeelsaam sal wees teenoor diegene wat nie het nie en met oop gemoed ook
daarna kyk. Die welwillendheid vir Kersfees moet ook deel word van ons
almal se feesvieringe en mag die verwagtinge van die nuwe jaar vir ons, en
waar dit enigsins moontlik is en haalbaar is, vir almal vervul word. Baie
dankie vir ’n baie aangename jaar in hierdie Huis. Ek sal dit onthou.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Chairperson, thank you very much and, on behalf of the FF Plus, thank you
to the Chairperson and all those who take the Chair from time to time. We
sometimes have to call the Whip not only that, but also “horsewhip”. The
support personnel at the offices, like those who bring us water – we say
thank you very much.

Christmas, and this time of the year, is a time of goodwill, when people
and their families get together and it is our best wishes that everybody
will be spending time with their families in a spirit of goodwill and in
safety. Outside there are many people who have few, if any, expectations of
this time. Let us go out with open wallets and open ears to people outside
who are poor and struggling. Let us be charitable. This is the wish of our
party and I believe all of us have the wish to be charitable towards those
who do not have and that everyone would also approach this with an open
mind. The goodwill of Christmas should also form part of the festivities of
all of us and may the expectations that we have of the New Year, where in
any way possible and attainable, come true for everyone. Thank you very
much for a very pleasant year in this House. I shall remember it!]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon House Chair, let me start off by saying
that as we come to the end of celebrations of the 50th anniversary of the
Freedom Charter in the year 2005, we would like to thank the leadership of
the NCOP, led by the able, humble giant, our very own hon M J Mahlangu,
working collectively with our Deputy Chairperson, the hon Hollander, and
assisted by our honoured House Chairs.

We also wish to thank the participation of our provinces, through special
delegates, and the active participation of our women Premiers, such as hon
Molewa. We want to express our profound thanks for that. The Chief Whip of
the Mpumalanga legislature is here, and the Chief Whip of the Northern Cape
legislature was here earlier on.

We would like to thank the improved participation of special delegates in
this House. Furthermore, we would also like to thank the improved
participation of Salga. I see Cllr Jenkins has moved out, but our Executive
Mayor from the mighty Ekhuruleni, Comrade Duma Nkosi, is here. We would
like to thank the leadership of Salga for their participation in this
House.

Furthermore, we also thank the constructive role played by most of our
parties in this House. But in the spirit of Christmas, we would like to
thank all the parties in this House – old and new ones.

We would also like to thank our staff, under the leadership of Adv Lulama
Matyolo. We know at times we had frustrations, but the year has been long,
so let’s all forget about whatever mishaps, challenges and weaknesses that
occurred during the year. Let’s take what was good and excellent in this
year forward to 2006.

I cannot make the mistake of not thanking our honoured chairpersons of the
various select committees in this House, and our Whips, especially the
programming Whip, the provincial Whips and our party Whips, for the great
role they played.

Hon Terblanche, as we go on Christmas vacation, and if we happen to come
across one another, whether on a beach or at a private game farm, don’t
rise on a point of order, just say cheers with a glass of champagne.

Thanks to all our committed members who are here. We also have to recognise
the Speakers who have been here, from the Western Cape and Limpopo. I wish
we could go back to Limpopo.

May I say, as we conclude, that we want to wish you a very joyous,
harmonious and peaceful festive season. Please have a rest. Don’t overdo
it; just do it over. And as we move towards the new year, we would like you
to come back here very refreshed. We wish you, individually and
collectively, a very progressive, prosperous and productive new year.

May I close by saying in Japanese: Arigato, which means thank you very
much. And further: “Sayonara”, which means “goodbye”. During this festive
season, please don’t call me; I will call you. [Laughter.] Thank you.
[Applause.]

The Council adjourned at 12:44.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 14 December 2005:


            i) Precious Metals Bill [B 30D – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
               75).
           ii) Independent Communications Authority of South Africa
               Amendment Bill [B 32D – 2005 (Reprint)] (National Assembly –
               sec 75).
          iii) Children’s Bill [B 70B and B 70C – 2003] (National Assembly –
               sec 75).
           iv) Nursing Bill [B 26D – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75).

     (2)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 14 December
         2005:


            i) Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B 33B – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 74).
           ii) Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
               Bill [B 36B - 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security
      a) Proclamation No R.51 published in Government Gazette No 28039 dated
         23 September 2005: Notification by President in respect of entities
         identified by the United Nations Security Council in terms of
         section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
         Terrorist and Related activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).

      b) Proclamation No R.57 published in Government Gazette No 28136 dated
         14 October 2005: Notification by President in respect of entities
         identified by the United Nations Security Council in terms of
         section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
         Terrorist and Related activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      a) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
         Mr M K Chauke, an additional magistrate at the Pretoria
         Magistrate’s Court.


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Council of Provinces


1. Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises on
  Oversight Visit to the Eastern Cape, dated 30 November 2005:

A.    Background

The Select Committees on Labour & Public Enterprises  and  on  Economic  and
Foreign Affairs undertook a joint oversight visit to the  Eastern  Cape  for
the period 5–7 September 2005. The programme for  the  Select  Committee  on
Economic Affairs was scheduled for 7 September 2005. This report will  cover
only  the  activities  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Labour   and   Public
Enterprises.

B.    Terms of Reference

On 5 September, the Committee met with the  Sector  Education  and  Training
Authority (Seta) of the Local Government,  the  Local  Government,  Water  &
Related Services (LGWSETA) in East London. The purpose  was  to  assess  the
effectiveness of the Seta in realizing the objectives of the  1st  phase  of
National Skills Development Strategy. On 7 September the Committee met  with
the National Ports Authority (NPA). The purpose was to assess progress  made
by the Port Elizabeth Port and the Coega Development Zone,  in  implementing
an economic  infrastructure  that  is  responsive  to  the  second  economy,
enterprise  development  and  poverty  alleviation  with  the  Eastern  Cape
Province.

   C. Delegation

The delegation consisted of the following persons:

Ms MP Themba (Chairperson) (ANC)
Ms ND Ntwanambi         (ANC)
Mr DG Mkono      (ANC)
Mr K Sinclair                 (NNP)
Mr DD Gamede            (ANC)

Ms P Mpoyiya (Committee Secretary)
Ms N Sihawu (Transcription Typist

D.    Findings

1.    Report on meeting with LGWSETA in East London

The mission of the National Skills Development Strategy is  to  equip  South
Africa  with  the  skills  to  succeed  in  the  global  market  and   offer
opportunities to individuals and communities for self-advancement to  enable
them to play a productive role in society.

The Committee received a presentation from Mr Nini, the Regional Manager  of
LGWSETA, in  Eastern  Cape.  The  focus  of  the  presentation  was  on  the
experiences of the Seta in implementing the 1st  phase  of  National  Skills
Development Strategy (SDS) until March 2005.

The mandate of the Seta is to identify gaps within  the  sector  and  design
education and training programmes for the betterment of those  involved  and
the community at large.

The Committee noted that the Seta  has  successfully  established  relations
with 40 municipalities in the Province, and also succeeded  in  facilitating
a number of learnership programmes in the Province.
The following programmes were noted:
     • 120 learners have completed training on water related learnerships;
     • in March 2005,  84  Learners  from  Nelson  Mandela  Metro,  District
       Municipality and local municipalities have started in the LED Officer
       learnership;
     • in September 15 learners from Lukhanji district will receive training
       on Basic Municipal Finance and Administration learnership; and
     • in the Nelson Mandela Metro 226 learners have completed 6 modules  on
       Sanitation Skills Programmes.


In order to improve its governance and in response to its mandate, the Seta
formed provincial committees to provide provincial and political guidance
within the province. Further capacity building workshops were arranged to
capacitate Provincial Committee members on Skills development issues so
that they can make well-informed decisions within the sector.

1.1   Sector Skills Plan

The Skilled Development Facilitators (SDF) has been identified to assist
the municipalities in promoting the NSDS agenda within the Province. In
2003, the SDF received training, through the University of Fort Hare. The
effectiveness of SDF can be realized with the Provincial Office within the
respective municipalities. To strengthen their capacity, an SDF Forum was
established and a Provincial Workshop was held in 2004. Further training
was provided in February 2005. Since 2003 the Seta has managed to train
1500 learners through the LGWSETA strategic ABET Project.

1.2   Challenges

Despite the noted achievements, there are a number of  factors  that  hinder
the  effective  performance  of  the  Seta.   The  following  concerns  were
identified:
    • The SDFs are located  in  the  Human  Resources  Department  with  the
      councils and this makes it difficult for the  tasks  to  be  realized.
      This  further  impacts  on  the  start  of  learnerships  and   skills
      programmes.
    • The SDFs are reduced to the level of training good have to report to
      many people. Yet the global requirement is that SDF should have skill
      and direct influence.
    • The use of private service providers to compile the  WSP  affects  the
      target of WSP submission. This leads  to  strained  relations  between
      labour and employer due to lack of consultation.
    • The Seta has no direct control of the Skills levy and  some  municipal
      managers tend to misuse the fund. It was reported that  R800  000  for
      training has been spent on related matters.
    • The learnership programmes are still to be approved by the  Department
      of Labour in terms of South African Qualifications Authority, SAQA.
    • The Seta is concerned  that  the  water  related  services  have  been
      removed form the Seta. These services are  at  the  core  of  training
      provided by the Seta.

The issue of administration fee for handling of learnership funds remains  a
challenge in some Municipalities, due to capacity  problems.  The  authority
that SDFs  have  in  some  Municipalities  undermines  their  commitment  to
function. The Provincial Manager and his secretary are responsible  for  all
the actitivites of the Seta in the Province. The shortage of  staff  hinders
makes it difficult for  the  Seta  to  handle  all  its  duties  within  the
province. The delay in the  payment  of  learnership  funds  by  LGWSETA  to
Municipalities has caused some problems that led to suspension of  some  and
drop out to others.  Those service providers who deal with  matters  outside
of its mandate mostly approach the LGWSETA and this creates problems.

1.3   Conclusion

The Select Committee noted that  despite  the  difficulties,  the  Seta  has
taken some  milestones  in  proceeding  in  line  with  NSDS  Strategy.  The
highlighted challenges with the municipalities however affected its  ability
to operate  effectively.  The  Setas  have  a  strategic  role  to  play  in
addressing problems associated with skills shortages in the country  and  it
is crucial that they  are  well  capacitated  to  perform  well.  The  Water
component of the Seta has been taken way yet  sanitation  is  still  at  the
center of the Local  Government  Sector  Education  and  Training  Authority
(Lgseta). The service providers who respond to the adverts are  mainly  from
outside the province in Johannesburg. They set  high  standards,  which  are
not responsive to those of the Province.  The  Committee  is  not  satisfied
with the fact the Seta experiences delays in payment to the municipalities.

   4. Recommendations

    • The Department of Labour should ensure that  Preferential  Procurement
      system benefits the people of the Province.
    • The Minister of Labour to explain why it is that until  now  only  one
      person is employed to service the Seta.
    • The Committee recommends that clear mechanisms should be developed  to
      ensure  that  capacity  of  the  office  is  increased  and  that  the
      challenges are dealt with effectively. This method should also  assist
      in addressing the noted delays in payments to local governments by the
      Seta.
    • The Minister of Labour to be invited to explain about the  removal  of
      water related matters from the Lgwseta.


2.    Report on meetings with National Ports Authority

2.1   Terms of Reference

The Committee undertook the visit to assess progress made by the Port
Elizabeth Port in implementing an economic infrastructure that is
responsive to the second economy, enterprise development and poverty
alleviation within the Eastern Cape Province.

2.2   (a)   National Ports Authority - Port Elizabeth


The Committee was briefed on the overview of services provided in the port
and plans in place to improve its deliveries.

The container terminal, mainly services the motor industry, it has  a  stack
capacity of 385 000 tons. There is a need to reduce the dwell  time  of  the
containers in  order  to  increase  capacity.  The  output  for  the  period
2004/2005 the terminal recorded 338 550 TEU’. This was higher  than  26%  up
on 03/04) the port has budget 05/06: 356 575 tons.

The Port Elizabeth Port has a car terminal which carries up to 59 486  units
(Imports  28  926  units,  Exports  30  559   units).   This   terminal   is
predominantly used by VWSA (export to Japan and Europe) and GMSA (import  to
Germany and US) respectively. GMSA export contract will  start  towards  end
of October 2006.This will mean that the actual dwell  time  for  these  cars
will have to be effectively managed, currently dwell time for imports  is  6
days while for exports is 10 days. In terms of output,  for  2004/05  period
the terminal recorded 59 485 units (Imports = 28 926 units,  Exp  =  30  559
units).

Another  section  is  reserved  for  bulk  terminal.  In  this  section  the
customers store different types  of  minerals  like  the  Assomang  55%  and
Samancor (BHP Billiton) 45%. The Manganese Ore is mined at  Hotazel  in  the
Northern Cape and then brought to Port Elizabeth by rail after which  it  is
exported to Japan and China. It is designed for  capacity  3  million  tons.
The section for Storage bins has a carrying capacity of up to 380  000  tons
of 40 different  grades.  In  terms  of  the  plans  it  is  considered  for
relocation to the Port of Ngqura.

Further the Port has a  section  for  Liquid  Bulk  Terminal.  The  NPA  has
reserved this section for Oil Companies. It is reserved  for  the  importing
of CW Processed Petroleum Products. The Liquid bulk terminal has a  capacity
of 2 500 000 tons. Currently there is limited storage  available.  In  terms
of 2004/05 report, there were 1 039 574 tons and, it  is  estimated  that  a
capacity for 1 057 200 tons will be made available.

The cold storage is reserved for fruit terminal and is outsourced to  a  BEE
Company for operation.  This  terminal  operates  65%  citrus  from  Sundays
River, and the  deciduous  fruits  from  Langkloof,  which  is  exported  to
Europe. This section is seasonal and operates over 7 months period. It  also
serves as major growth opportunity for the  province.  There  are  plans  to
have a dedicated terminal for  an  increase  capacity  for  a  cold  storage
facility.


In addition the Port has SAPO terminal operator. It operates two areas,  for
Importing of Wheat, Grain, Maize: 85 000 tons: Sasko  and  Fertilizer  about
25 000 tons. This section will  be  possibly  relocated  to  Ngura.  Another
section services 30 000 tons of steel rails operated by Spoornet.  The  area
also export 40 000 tons of steel by  the  Reclamation  Group.  In  order  to
control the freight and reduce the load, the National Port  Authority  plans
to redistribute the existing business of ore, bulk liquids and most  of  the
containers to the Port of Ngqura. This will allow  opportunity  to  increase
bay capacity car terminal, the fruit terminal and  also  create  more  space
for the fishing industry. The fruit terminal will be increased as well.

The Multipurpose will allow for further development for leisure tourism and
other activities. There are further plans for economic development, tank
farm and ore terminal including vacant land, with further opportunities for
housing development.

2.3   Conclusion

The Committee has observed that the port has been operating under immense
pressure and not able to control all the freight. The reports reflect that
in all the respective sections the Port has experienced problems of delays
and capacity. There are clear and well thought plans in response to the
Presidential plan to reduce the control of freight in the ports. The
Committee took note that the NPA has addressed the problem of increased
dwell time, which had negative impact for the delivery of the Port. The
planned redistribution of storage relocation magnesium, reduction in
container terminal; realignment in liquid terminal are indications that the
port has responded well to the Presidential call. The Committee is
satisfied with the plans to expand the port into tourism and housing
development. In addition to noted changes on services common to port
operations, the Port is considered for leisure and economic development.
These plans are at initial stages of extending the port to a waterfront.
This will create opportunity for further growth. The success of the plans
is depended on successful collaboration and joint planning with the Nelson
Mandela Metro Municipality (NMMM) and the Port of Ngqura.

           3. Report on meeting with Coega Project
Mr Zuko Mapoma from the Office of the Chief Executive officer (CEO) gave an
analytical update on the Coega Project and highlighted on some of the
critical investment projects.

In terms of infrastructure roll out plan, the following project have been
completed
    • Bulk connecting infrastructure
    • Marine works to phase 1 of harbour
    • Construction Village phase
    • RIC complete and operational
    • ITC and Operations structure in place

Currently, there are 75 potential investors across all sectors with
significant and economically viable projects. These being:
    • CAS – U$D 2 billion
    • Integrated Stainless Steel complex – USD 3 billion
    • U$D 80 billion over 30 to 40 years

Below are major projects having huge job opportunities.
    • Coega Aluminium Smelter
    • Integrated Stainless Steel Project
    • Manganese Re-location project
    • Oil Tank Farm Re-location
    • Ferro-Manganese Plants
    • Ferro Nickel and Ferro Chrome Plants
    • Logistics Hub
    • Ship repair Yard

Manganese Relocation Project from the Port Eilzabeth Port:
The project will bring in a number of spin-offs for the province. It
carries a R1, 5-billion concession opportunity, which will unlock re-
development of Port Elizabeth. It has the potential of R3.0bn revenue for
Port Elizabeth. It will further boost the export potential with
possibilities of doubling the current employment opportunities. There is
excitement because it carries significant contribution to GDP and
attraction for tourist in the city.

The success of the entire project is depended on sustainable use of power:
    • Ensure that Eskom’s Network Master plan is implemented
    • Equitable allocation of connection fees
    • Implementation of base load generation plan

4.    Report on meeting with Port on Ngqura

4.1   Background

The port of Ngqura was originally conceived as an Industrial Port to serve
the immediate surrounding areas. Its operations are closely aligned with
DTI’s Spatial Development Initiative and are being considered to be a key
success factor for the Coega IDZ.

4.2   Effect of Ngqura on Port of Port Elizabeth

Mr Chris Matchett gave a brief report the Port of Ngqura will allow for
permanent relocation of tank farm and manganese ore terminal.
In terms of the development plans, some of the container operations will be
moved from PE Port of Ngqura: These include the following: dry bulk, bulk
liquids and industrial feed stocks.

4.3   Economic Impact of Port of Ngura

    • The construction work in the Port construction has created a total of
      2 500 jobs and this also marked a boost for the local economy
    • Approximately 30% of the Capex spent (R2bn) has gone through the local
      economy.
    • About 25% of the Capex spent has been towards Black Economic
      Empowerment projects.
    • The ZLA, agreed between the Construction Industry and Unions, has
      benefited labour employed in the Coega IDZ and the Port of Ngqura.

The Committee is satisfied with the coordination and cooperation between
Transnet and the National Ports Authority as reflected in the programmes of
Port Elizabeth Port, Coega and Port of Ngqura.

5. Conclusion

The Committee is satisfied with the plans and joint coordination between
the NPA and Coega development. It is hopeful that these will go a long way
in addressing challenges of employment in the province. This will improve
the economic position of the province and will surely find a place in the
global economy.

2. Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises on Study
  Tour to Malaysia, dated 30 November 2005:

A.    BACKGROUND

The Select Committee undertook a  study  tour  visit  to  Malaysia  for  the
period 9-16 September 2005,  allowing  for  two  days  for  travelling.  The
report will focus on visits conducted from 12 to 16 September 2005.

B.    Terms of Reference

The purpose of the study tour was to  take  lessons  on  communications  and
labour related matters.
Concerning communications, the  Committee  needed  to  explore  the  applied
experience of convergence and the liberalisation of  the  telecommunications
industry in Malaysia. Further to look at the issue  of  regulation  and  the
tasks and challenges of regulators. Also  to  look  at  the  role  of  state
planning in regulation as well as deregulation issues (including  issues  of
competition and legislation in this regard).

The Committee had hoped to meet with  amongst  others:  The  Office  of  the
Prime  Minister,  the   Telecommunications   Regulators,   the   Competition
Authorities and some entities in Telecommunications industry.

Research has shown that, in the past 10 years Malaysia has  been  successful
in reducing unemployment and hard-core  poverty  to  acceptable  levels.  In
comparison to South Africa, the levels of unemployment and  skills  shortage
in  are  at  high  levels.  The  visit  would  further  assist  in   sharing
experiences on  strategies  and  programmes  developed  in  addressing  such
challenges. This could be  achieve  by  undertaking  possible  meetings  and
secure visits with: Parliamentary Labour Committee,  Department  of  Labour,
and Trade unions as well as Labour Centres.

C.    Delegation

Ms M P Themba (Chairperson) (ANC)
Mr K Sinclair          (NNP)
Mr D G Mkono     (ANC)
Mr ZL Kolweni    (ANC)
Ms JF Terblanche (DA)

Ms Phumza Mpoyiya ( Committee Secretary)

D.    Findings

The Committee managed to secure meetings  and  received  presentations  from
the Ministry of Energy, Water  and  Communication,  the  Communications  and
Multimedia Commission Act as well as Telkom Malaysia. It  was  not  possible
to meet with labour unions, as  these  are  not  effective  in  Malaysia  as
labour issues are not a matter of concern.. The Ministry of Labour  arranged
for a presentation on mechanisms used by the country  in  reducing  poverty.
It was noted that this was not relevant for the Committee. In order to  make
up with this challenge, the delegation  then  elected  to  visit  the  South
African students who are on programme with Telkom  Malaysia.  The  visit  to
was in form of a briefing from the Chancellor  of  the  institution  on  the
performance of the institution and allocated time with the students.

1.    Meeting with the Ministry of Energy, Water and Communication

1.1   Policy and the Regulatory Framework
The Communication and Multimedia Commission Act, 1998 was enacted  in  order
to regulate the converged industries. It was implemented in  November  1998.
It replaced the Telecommunications Act, 1950, the Broadcasting Act 1998  and
it came into effect in 1 April 1999. The purpose Convergence Legislation  is
to facilitate the operations of communications over the  electronic  medium.
It  objectives  are  to  promote  national  policy  objectives  related   to
communication and multimedia sector. To establish regulatory structure  that
will be responsible for operational licensing of the sector. To establish  a
new and autonomous statutory  body  to  regulate  the  sector  in  terms  of
procedures set in the Act.

The Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission (CMC)  therefore  was
set up as a body corporate of the government  that  acts  as  the  regulator
within the communications and the media sector. The focal areas of  the  CMC
are to encouraging  competition  amongst  the  industry  players,  encourage
technical neutrality, ensure that the industry becomes  self-regulatory  and
that universal obligations are observed. In order to ensure efficiency,  the
government has set regulatory framework for a  new  licensing  structure  to
facilitate the licensing process.
There are also different categories being set  up  for  individual  licensee
(with stringent rules to be adhered to) and the  class  licences  (in  these
category are relaxed). Further there are categories for  Network  Facilities
Provider  (NFP),  Network  Service  Provider  (NSP),  Applications   Service
Provider (ASP) and the Content Applications Service Provider  (CASP).  Those
making applications for individual  licenses  have  to  adhere  to  all  the
stipulated regulations. However for class  licensees  the  service  provider
may be required to meet a minimum standard of the set regulations.

The process of liberalisation  started  more  than  15  years  ago.  It  was
clearly outlined as follows:
 • 1986-    Corporatization and privatisation of Telkom
 • 1995-     Approval of 5 Telco Licenses
 • 1998-    Enactment of the Communications and the Multimedia Act
                 convergence and competition
 • 2000-    New Licensing Regime- vertical separation of communications
            licenses-  application  service,   network   service,   network
           facilities, content application
 • 2001-    Liberalisation of last mile- new network facility providers  for
   the
                 last mile infrastructure
 • 2005-    Abolition of ASP Individual license and the introduction of
                 CASP Class License

The Energy, Water and Communications Ministry have set  up  industry  forums
to  promote  industry  self-regulation  and  self-discipline.  The  CMC   is
required to provide for  the  establishment  of,  Access  forums,  Technical
Standard Forums, Content Forums and Consumer Forums.

The forums are set up in terms of set guidelines. Their primary task  is  to
prepare and develop voluntary Industry Codes.  The  CMC   has  to  designate
each Industry Forum  before  codes  can  be  registered.  The  role  of  the
Industry forum will be to monitor the implementation of codes and to  ensure
that there is high level of  compliance  within  the  industry.  The  Access
Forum is responsible for developing Access Codes that  are  to  be  sued  as
model  for  terms  and  conditions  of  compliance  with   standard   access
obligations. The  Technical  Standards  Forum  is  for  the  development  of
technical standards, which determine for access obligations. There  is  also
a Content Forum, which is responsible for the development of  Content  Code,
which  shall  model  procedures  for  dealing  with  offensive  or  indecent
content.  Another is the Consumer Forum is set up to develop  Consumer  code
which will include procedures for protection of consumer interests.

The Universal Service Provision (USP) was set up in terms of the  provisions
in the Communications and Multimedia Ac, 1998 and  was  implemented  in  the
beginning of 2002.
The 8th Malaysia Plan (2001-2005) sets the government’s contribution to  the
USP at US$  250  million.  This  contribution  is  contribution  to  provide
communication infrastructure  to  schools  and  other  critical  public  and
community facilities in underserved areas. The Industry is also expected  to
make a contribution in terms of USP Policy, which was approved in 2001.  All
licensees except the CASP are required to  make  a  contribution  of  6%  of
their weighed income to the Universal Service Fund. The funds from  Industry
players,  within  the  sector  will  be  used   mainly   for   communication
infrastructure development.

The success of the performance of USP is evident in noted  implications  for
bridging  the  digital  divide.  There  is  an  increase  accessibility  and
connectivity in rural and underserved areas through  the  implementation  of
the Universal Service Provision program (i.e.  government  contribution  and
the Universal Services Fund). There  is  widening  awareness  on  ICT  usage
through the proliferation of Rural  Internet  Centres  and  the  E-Community
Projects.  IT education has been enhanced through smart  school  initiatives
in rural and underserved areas (linking schools to the national  and  global
networks), Net School programmes. It has also encouraged  distance  learning
through rural Internet  Centres.  Malaysia  is  becoming  a  knowledge-based
society, by reducing disparities are reduced by ICT.  The  e-culturalisation
is becoming an as the integral part of daily life.

2.    An overview of the Communications and Multimedia Industry in
      Malaysia

2.1   Presentation by the Monitoring and Enforcement Division

Malaysian  Communications  and  Multimedia  Commission  is   a   convergence
Regulator which was established under the Communications and Multimedia  Act
of 1998, the Digital Signatures Act 1997 and Postal Services Act  1991.  The
Commission is responsible for  the  telecoms,  broadcasters  and  ISPS,  the
postal and courier services and digital certification authorities.

The Commission: is made of seven Board Members  who  are  appointed  by  the
Minister and the Chairmen who also act as the CEO. The role of the Board  is
to advise, decide and implement the legislation.

The Commission works through a consultative process with the  relevant  role
players, and consumers proposes regulation and makes recommendations to  the
Minister who introduce these through to Cabinet  and  later  to  Parliament.
There is considerations for appeal through the Tribunal court for  instances
where the industry may not be satisfied with a particular  regulation.  This
option has however not yet been put in place.

The  move  or  change  towards  convergence  was  a  process  that  involved
legislative changes. These  were  fundamental  in  facilitating  the  change
towards convergence. The Malaysian Communications,  1998  replaced  all  the
Sectoral Acts, i.e. the telecommunications Act 1950,  the  Broadcasting  Act
1998; the Postal Services Act, 1991 and the  Digital  signature  Act,  1997.
The same was for the Sectoral Regulators, i.e.  the  Postal  Department  and
licensing, the division became the responsibility of the  Commission.  On  1
November 1998, the functions of the Ministry of  Energy,  Telecommunications
and Post were changed to Ministry of Energy,  Communications  &  Multimedia.
The Malaysia Communications Act 1998 came into force and the  Communications
Multimedia Commission was formed.

Concerning licensing processes, the old licenses that were issued  based  on
specific   technologies   and   specific   services,   like   licenses   for
broadcasting, telecommunications, VAN, and ISP licenses  were  shifted  into
licenses for specific needs for new technologies which required neutral  and
service neutral licenses. There were two types of licenses that  which  were
issues  for  class  and  individual  categories.   The   Commission   awards
individual  licenses  to  those  services  (content,  applications   network
services  and  network  facilities)  with  significant  economic  or  social
impact. In April 2005, it began to  consider  awarding  of  license  to  ASP
category, which require only class license in order to operate.

The Committee noted that it is imperative  that  all  relevant  legislations
are carefully considered prior to convergence. The Minister should  have  an
important role to  play  in  order  to  have  effective  regulation  of  the
industry.

2.2   Market Liberalisation process in Malaysia

The Malaysian communications structure has gradually progressed  from  being
focused on a fixed line in  1980  into  to  cellular,  Internet  access  and
broadcasting in 2000. It s envisaged that by  2010  the  industry  would  be
fully competitive  and  become  a  converged  market  for  Multi  media  and
Communications.

Licences issued as at August 2005
|Type   |Individua|Class  |Total |Percentage in relation |
|       |l        |       |      |to foreign equity      |
|NFP    |50       |27     |77    |30%                    |
|NSP    |54       |30     |84    |49%                    |
|ASP    |-        |249    |249   |49%                    |
|CASP   |20       |-      |20    |30%                    |
|Total  |124      |306    |430   |                       |

In order to ensure that economic benefits are realized. The  Commission  has
set up a number of regulatory measures that have to be adhered  to  by  each
industry player:

    • In order to discourage domineering and to  lessen  competition  within
      the industry, CMC has  established  a  competition  regulation,  which
      prohibits price fixing, tying and linking. The Access regulation  unit
      ensures that Mandatory standards on Accessing are  observed  and  that
      the Mandatory Standard on Access pricing is contained.


    • The Access Forum focuses on retail rate aspects of the industry,  both
      in the regulated services (i.e. local and STD call to PST) and the Non-
      regulated services i.e. mobile, VoIP.

    • Assessment of Dominant Position: An impact  assessment  study  on  the
      performance of the market is being considered. The market under  study
      will focus on:  Fixed  line  access  to  the  PSTN;  Mobile  Telephony
      services; Upstream  Network  Facilities  (NFP);  Interconnected  (SP);
      Leased Line services (retail) (NFP); Broadband retail services  (ASP);
      and Analogue terrestrial TV broadcasting transmission services (NFP)

The study will be  conducted  to  measure  the  dominance  of  the  licensee
against set threshold levels. These would be measured against set fixtures:
Firm’s Market share               Inference
Above 54%                    Presumption of dominance
25-45%                       No presumption (grey area)
Below 25%                    Presumption that the firm is not dominant.
In instances where the findings may  reveal  dominant  impact  but  with  no
immediate impact, no action will be taken. However if the dominant  licensee
engages in a conduct, which has or may have impact on  SLC,  the  Commission
will apply the provision of Section 39 of MCM Act.

3.     Visit to Telkom Malaysia (TM)
The Company believes n the philosophy of a world where change  is  the  only
constant. In response to  that,  TM  has  transformed  from  being  a  local
telephony  institution  into  one  with  global  presence   and   multimedia
strength. It  continues  to  constantly  reinvent  to  keep  pace  with  the
accelerated changes in the industry and the  global  marketplace.  This  has
been achieved by reshaping its portfolio of business and its  philosophy  of
managing the business so as to prosper in this competitive environment.
Its mission is to approach the new millennium, with enthusiasm  and  embrace
the changes and also identify the new opportunities to  provide  more  value
to our customers. TM is to remain committed not only in meeting the  demands
of our customers but also in anticipating them. We  would  like  to  be  the
telecommunications company of choice when we say "Weíre Here For You".
The Committee believes that the success of Malaysia is due to a  combination
of issues, the close  relations  between  the  government  and  the  private
sector as well adoption and determination by both parties in  realising  set
goals in placing the country in the global market.
4.    Visit to the Multimedia University
The visit was characterized by briefings on the programmes  offered  in  the
different faculties in the institution. This was followed by  a  brief  tour
to  laboratories  for:  e-Gallery,  Nokia  Wireless  Communications,   Intel
Microelectronics,  Telecommunications  and  to  the   Electromagnetic   (EM)
Laboratory. The Committee further arranged for  a  meeting  with  the  South
African students. This proved to be very fruitful,  as  the  young  students
expressed gratefulness to the delegation.  The  experiences  learnt  by  the
students will place the country in an advantageous position. The  delegation
is however concerned that those students were the last intake, as Telkom  SA
will not be sponsoring the scholarship.

5.    Conclusion

The delegation is humbled by the progress made by Malaysia in following  the
liberalization process. The government and the industry  are  all  ready  in
pursuing the objective of convergence system. The CMC  of  Malaysia  can  be
similar  to  ICASA  in  South  Africa.  There  is  a  need  for  legislative
amendments to be effected, which could pave way to effective  management  of
the communications industry sector in South Africa. The Committee has  noted
with great  interest  the  process  and  legislative  changes  introduce  by
Malaysian  prior  to  confirmation  of  convergence  to  have   such   power
legislative changes need to be made  in  Broadcasting,  ICASA  Act  and  the
Postal  Services  Act.  These  would  assist  ICASA  in  ensuring  that  the
objectives of convergence are realised.
The Committee would like to encourage Telkom and government to find  way  of
continuing the support of students who study in Malaysia.

6.    Comparative Analysis

It has taken Malaysia 20 years to  liberalize  the  communications  industry
and move towards convergence. Industry  players  and  academic  institutions
were involved in the process. It is noted that  convergence  is  a  process;
the relevant structures need to be informed all the time.
South Africa may have taken the move towards converge too soon,  given  that
the process only started in  2003.  The  delegation  is  excited  about  the
observations but concerned that South Africa may have to pass  on  a  number
of huddles once the convergence bill is finished. The country may  not  have
enough  capacity  to  deal  with  the  constant   technological   regulatory
mechanisms that come with convergence.
Convergence in Malaysia is not without its challenges:  Though  the  country
is ahead in  terms  of  convergence,  it  still  has  a  challenge  of  non-
availability of data and records to  measure  its  performance.  The  faster
changes  in  technology  require  equal  change  in  regulations.  It  is  a
challenge to regulate content with the content of new media of  convergence.
There is  a  gap  between  telecom  centric  incumbents  and  new  entrants.
Commission has to conduct investigation  on  anti-corruption  behaviors  eg.
Price fixing. Lastly the considered  understudy  to  be  undertaken  has  to
monitor the implementation of the Act.

It was noted that Malaysian government might not be  able  to  have  control
over the content provided by the industry.  This is something that needs  to
be addressed in South Africa, as there could be a lot  of  movement  without
proper control measures in place.

7.    Word of appreciation

As the Committee would like to extend appreciation to support received  from
the High Commissioner and his office during our study visit.


3. Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on an
  Oversight Visit to the Eastern Cape on 6 September 2005, dated 1 December
  2005:

Background


The Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs undertook the oversight  visit
to  the  Eastern  Cape  Province  to  investigate  challenges  for  economic
development, Black Economic Empowerment and  job  creation  on  6  September
2005.


Terms of Reference

The visit was arranged so  that  the  meeting  would  be  secured  with  the
relevant Standing Committee in order to strengthen the relationship  between
the two committees. Meetings were arranged with  the  Provincial  Department
of Economic & Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAET),  the  Eastern  Cape
Development Corporation (ECDC) and the Eastern Cape  Industrial  Development
Zone (ECIDZ).

C.    Delegation

The delegation consisted of the following persons:

Ms ND Ntwanambi (Chairperson)
Ms MP Themba
Mr DG Mkono
Mr K Sinclair
Mr DD Gamede
Ms P Mpoyiya (Committee Secretary)
Ms N Sihawu (Transcription Typist)


D.    Findings

Contextual background

The Eastern Cape Province has a population of 6.43 million (15,2%),  with  a
population growth  of  5,3%.   The  province  boasts  a  Growth  Development
Product (GDP) of 8.2% and 48% of the labour force. This is  in  contrast  to
37% of unemployment, with 63% of the people residing  in  rural  areas.  The
Province has a competitive advantage in terms of  climate,  cost  to  entry,
scope of opportunities, natural resources and educational facilities.  These
are however not effectively benefiting the province.

1.    Report on meeting with Department of Economic and Environmental
      Affairs and Tourism (DEAET)

      The Department gave a perspective on how  government  has  planned  to
      respond to economic development and job creation in the province.

      Mr Tandi Gcilitshana, the Director in the  Department,  gave  a  broad
      overview of the role played by the department  in  promoting  economic
      growth and development in the  Province.  This  is  done  through  the
      promotion of  trade  &  investment  promotions  of  the  province,  by
      facilitating business development and finance  support,  participation
      in  tourism  development  and  marketing;  as  well  as   in   spatial
      development initiatives support and support to Industrial  Development
      Zone.

      The Department has  set  up  strategic  systems  to  realize  economic
      development   objectives.   The   Provincial   Strategy   Development,
      Provincial Support Networks, and promotion  of  Empowerment  objective
      through public procurement are core programmes.

2.    Report on meeting with Eastern Cape Development Corporation (ECDC)

    Mr Kevin Wakeford, the CEO of the ECDC gave a perspective on  the  role
    played by the Corporation  in  response  to  economic  development  and
    employment needs in the Province.

    The ECDC plays an important  role  in  providing  support  for  project
    development, spatial and rural development, investment promotions,  and
    enterprise development services as well as exports promotion.  For  the
    period between April and August  2005,  ECDC  has  disbursed  loans  to
    contractors (0,6%), project development (7,6%) and  conventional  loans
    (12,6%).

    The ECDC has benefited a number of  projects  and  in  turn  jobs  were
    created, across district municipalities as follows: Alfred Nzo District
    4 685, Amatole district 5 843, Cacadu 6 088 and  OR  Tambo  District  8
    818.

    Despite  the  noted  job  opportunities,  the  ECDC  was  not   without
    challenges. There is concern that the procurement of these projects  is
    not benefiting the Province. The tenders are  most  awarded  to  people
    from outside and they are involved in the projects. These are  some  of
    the noted projects: the Value gain gaps; Moribund  Balance  sheet;  the
    Agrarian Reform; Spatial plan and resource allocation. There is also  a
    serious shortage of skills for people to  be  employed  because  people
    have moved away from the Province. This  is  further  impacted  in  the
    manner in which  local  government  delivers  its  programmes.  Another
    challenge is  that  the  Province  has  enough  resource  to  feed  its
    population, but most of  the  production  is  not  produced  for  local
    demand, but for  export  purposes.  Furthermore,  the  unresolved  land
    tenure problems impact on the success of some of the proposed projects.



3.    Report  on  meeting  with  East  London  Industrial  Development  Zone
    (ELIDZ)

    The Industrial Development Zone (IDZ) is a government  initiative  that
    is aimed at positioning South Africa within the global economy.  It  is
    aimed at encouraging economic growth through manufacturing  industries,
    creating jobs while  also  generating  sustainable  local  and  foreign
    direct investment. The ELIDZ is a private  company  that  is  owned  in
    collaboration with  business  and  government.  The  company  ownership
    structure is 74% ECDC and 26% Buffalo City Municipality (BCM). The  IDZ
    is funded by the Department of Trade & Industry, DEAET and BCM.

    Mr Simphiwe Kondlo, the CEO of ELIDZ, gave a contextual analysis of how
    the Zone realizes its mandate of stimulating economic  development  and
    job creation in the Province.  The vision of the zone  is  “  to  be  a
    catalyst of  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job  creation  through
    development  and  efficient  management  of  a   globally   competitive
    Industrial Development Zone that attracts and retains  selected  export
    orientated industries”.

    Since it’s beginning in May 2003, 19 projects were undertaken which are
    valued at R194 million. These have secured 1219 jobs through  the  bulk
    infrastructure development project, which was completed in August 2005.
    This project is currently at  its  final  stages.  The  next  phase  of
    development is the construction of estate buildings, which will proceed
    until August 2006. It is expected that 500 jobs will be created for the
    duration of the project.

    In terms of  spatial  development,  about  434  ha  of  land  has  been
    developed into prime industrial land, to  house  110  industrial  sites
    already serviced.  These carry the  potential  of  19  000  direct  and
    indirect industry related jobs.


    The ELIDZ is currently  in  a  transition  between  the  infrastructure
    development phase and the investment phase. There are three sectors for
    investment, these are: automotive, agro industries and  pharmaceutical.
    To date, three investors (Seatek, Milltrans and Universe Safety  Glass)
    have been successfully attracted with 380 job opportunities. It is also
    expected that another 40 potential investors  will  be  coming  to  the
    Zone. These would be in  the  sectors:  automotive,  agro-  industries,
    forestry & wood, logistics, pharmaceuticals, chemicals and textile.

    There are a number of factors that impact  on  the  IDZ  realizing  its
    mandate. The current and proposed revised IDZ programme falls short  of
    addressing some of the fundamental  problems  experienced  by  the  IDZ
    developers.   These   include:   Legislative   framework,   competitive
    incentives  for  IDZs,  which  is  a  clear   funding   mechanism   and
    institutional arrangements. The state of readiness  of  key  government
    partners is central to the  success  of  the  Zone.  The  ELIDZ  is  at
    advanced negotiations with potential investors and the government needs
    to be ready in terms of the following: customs regulations  and  rules:
    Investment appraisal and approval processes (DTI & SARS) and government
    expediting window.

    Another concern is about the government’s financial commitments and the
    degree of national/provincial funding collaboration  for  the  project.
    The National  programmes  have  a  clear  funding  model  for  the  IDZ
    programme for the multi-year development funding provisions as well  as
    funding of critical regional transportation  infrastructure.  The  main
    concern is that the ELIDZ is not receiving full financial collaboration
    and this affects the further developments of its projects.   .

4.    Visit to Siyakholwa Project in Keiskamahoek (kuQoboqobo)

    In addition to meeting with the respective stakeholders, the  Committee
    had requested to visit some of the projects that are supported  by  the
    Department. In terms of the  planned  programme,  three  projects  were
    identified. However due to time constraints the Committee was  able  to
    visit only one project.

    The Committee visited  the  Siyakholwa  project  in  Keiskamahoek.  The
    project is aimed at assisting farmers with their produce  and  enabling
    them to earn income from their produce. It was founded 8 years ago by a
    South African couple that was previously based in Johannesburg.

    This ECDC funded project is aimed at assisting farmers to improve their
    produce and their income.  These are some  of  the  projects  that  are
    available: Paprika project,  Maize  project,  rabbit  farming  and  the
    essential oil project. These are not met  without  challenges  and  the
    following concerns were raised:


     • The paprika project could not be extended due  to  lack  of  support
       from government.
     • The Department of Science & Technology initially gave an undertaking
       to fund the essential oil project but this has not been forthcoming.
     • There has been no support from local government within the district.
     • The maize project has been extended to 9 other villages in the area.
     • The rabbit project has started small but is not yet effective.

Other matters

In addition to the visits and secured meetings,  the  Select  Committee  had
requested to meet with the Standing Committee. However,  the  meeting  could
not take place because of other commitments.

Conclusion

The Committee is satisfied with the progress made by the ECDC and ELIDZ, in
improving the economic conditions in the province.

Committee Recommendations

The  Committee  recommends  that  government  should   address   the   noted
challenges for effective implementation  of  Independent  Development  Zones
throughout the country.

The Committee also recommends that the unused  buildings  in  King  Williams
Town could be used as training facilities.


