---
title: 'National Assembly - 09 November 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-11-09
---

WEDNESDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                          RESCHEDULING OF QUESTIONS





                               (Announcement)


The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to announce that, at the request of the
Deputy President, and by agreement amongst parties, questions to the Deputy
President have been rescheduled for Wednesday, 16 November 2005.


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY: The Minister





                             PEACE AND SECURITY


                                 (Cluster 1)

                       Racism in the legal profession


 128.  Mr  M  J  Malahlela  (ANC)  asked  the  Minister  for   Justice   and
      Constitutional Development:

      (1)   Whether she has found that the Chief Justice handled the
          allegations of racism in the Cape High Court satisfactorily; if
          not, why not; if so, what does she base her findings on;



      (2)   what will the extent of her or her department’s assistance be to
          the judiciary in dealing with or rooting out racism in the legal
          profession?                              N2294E

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker,
yes, I am satisfied with the manner in which the Chief Justice and judge
presidents have dealt with the matter raised by the hon member. It has
always been the government’s standpoint that the leadership within the
judiciary must confront the race row head-on, and act decisively on the
matter. I am of the opinion that the judiciary has done exactly that in
this regard.

I wish to bring to the attention of the hon member and the House at large
that the heads of courts recently adopted a report on racism and sexism.
The report raised issues of critical importance, and further confirmed the
stance of government on a need to retrain the judicial officers to change
their mindsets. The report stated, amongst other things, that:

  It is clear that the allegations of racism and sexism in the judiciary go
  to the heart of judicial responsibility and commitment to be faithful to
  the Republic of South Africa, to uphold and protect the Constitution and
  the human rights entrenched in it.

  Because of our history, racism and sexism are attitudes engraved in our
  society. The judiciary is part of that society. We accept that racism and
  sexism are also present within the judiciary and the legal profession.
  It, accordingly, makes sense for the entire judiciary to embrace the
  concept of judicial training, of which diversity training is a part, in
  order to correct the legacy of the past, and to fulfil the requirement of
  transformation.


Therefore, hon member, the department is committed to working with the
judiciary in promoting nonracism and nonsexism. We are studying the report
with the view of assisting as best we can. I thank you.

Mr M J MALAHLELA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the hon Minister. The
Chief Justice of the Republic of South Africa, together with the heads of
courts, has dealt with the problem of the Cape High Court. After the matter
had been dealt with, the judicial officer in question decided to take
refuge in a museum which had nothing to do with the separation of powers.
What would the Minister’s view be regarding the question of racism, not
necessarily in the judiciary per se but in the entire legal profession: the
general council of advocates, which is the Bar; the law societies of the
Republic of South Africa; practical legal training; universities? We must
begin with the seed that germinates racism, in its totality, within the
profession, as opposed to dealing with it in piecemeal fashion.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, do you have a question? You are now beyond your
one minute.

Mr M J MALAHLELA: Madam Speaker, as I have said, I would like to know: What
is the view of the Minister in regard to what I have just said? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, I
am trying to get to the heart of the question. [Laughter.] I just want to
say that I am aware that there has been very robust debate in the public
arena around issues relating to the Cape Bench and the legal profession in
this province, and that the debates take a divide in a certain direction. I
just want to assure the hon member that I am confident that the judiciary
is going to deal with this matter, and that the legal profession itself is
seized with this matter.

I had the privilege of being in Port Elizabeth recently to address a
meeting, and I am certain that all are seized with this particular
challenge of racism and sexism within the legal sector. I am confident
that, together, we will work at it. While transforming the legal sector,
broadly speaking, we will be engaging the matter very decisively in the
first half of next year.

As you know we were preparing to get into dialogue with the sector, broadly
speaking, around standards and norms, using the method that has become
traditional, and that is of considering a charter for the legal services.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, although there is currently silence from
the Cape High Court, no one can pretend that the problems there have yet
been solved by the Chief Justice, because the lawyers who made allegations
against Judge President Hlope have not withdrawn them. And, as the previous
questioner has said, the judge who feels aggrieved by Judge Hlope’s actions
has gone public and filed his papers with the archives.

The long-term solution for racism in the judiciary, as set out in the Chief
Justice’s report, is predicated on - and I quote from the report:

  ...the willingness on the part of government to make the necessary
  financial resources for education and training, including diversity
  training, available.

So, although the Minister has done the right thing by keeping out of the
row, because it is for the judiciary to resolve, she does have a role. She
could tell us, perhaps, in this House, whether she has costed the
implications of this, and what amount will be set aside by her department
for the purpose of training and education judges in the next financial
year. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker,
silence is golden. The hon member is aware that the very matter of judicial
training is new in the sense that it is a matter that we are seized with
now, in reality. In the past donor funding was relied on for training but
we, as government, are committed to look for and to put resources aside for
judicial training of all kinds. In fact, it is a matter that we are
discussing with the heads of courts. It is a matter that we discussed at
the last heads of court meeting prior to the Judicial Service Commission’s
sitting. So the report comes as the matter is being considered by the
judiciary and ourselves.

We have not costed the report. We are still studying the report, as I have
indicated. In due course we will make announcements about how much has been
set aside for judicial training.
Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, arising from the hon Minister’s response,
whilst the Chief Justice may have achieved a compromise in the one dispute
between senior lawyers and the Cape Judge President, there are clearly deep
divisions within the Cape High Court. They have been polarised over various
allegations of racism. As has been pointed out, the issue surrounding the
Mikro Primary School case has, to my knowledge, not been resolved, and has
resulted in the extraordinary step of the judge filing copies of
correspondence with the national archive, after purportedly not obtaining a
response from the Chief Justice.

Hon Minister, will the process of facilitation under the Land Claims Court
judge president, Judge President Bam, address this and other incidents, as
well as attempt to repair the division among colleagues on the Cape Bench
and Benches elsewhere? I thank you.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, the
member is actually raising a broader problem. I really think that, as South
Africans, we ought to know better. We have a legacy of racism and sexism in
our society, and we ought to address it holistically.

I am confident that institutions that have been set aside through our
constitutional dispensation to attend to those matters will be proactive
and prioritise the area. But, we also need to find ways in which we will
promote dialogue. We should really encourage our people not to be
denialists, and it was said that it is a problem that is part of our
legacy, but one that we are challenged to eradicate.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I want to find out from the Minister whether
the training will include magistrates too, because there have been
allegations of racism in other courts in the country as well. My concern
is: How are we going to maintain the separation of powers and observe the
independence of the judiciary when we deal with the transformation there? I
don’t think we must confuse transformation of the judiciary with their
independence. I am really worried and think that we should not have the
executive dictating too much to the judiciary on what needs to be done.
Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, I
hope I have understood the hon member well. It is a tribute to the late
Dullah Omar, the first Minister for Justice in the new dispensation, that
he took steps to, so to speak, emancipate the lower courts, the magistracy,
by laying the foundation of truly making the magistracy independent. I can
say that that process will be completed when this House passes the Superior
Courts Bill, because one of the purposes of the Superior Courts Bill is to
establish a single judiciary.

Coming to the question of training of the magistracy, it follows that if we
indeed are going to set aside finance for the training of the judiciary,
implied in that is the inclusion of the magistracy.

         Factors affecting the functioning of intelligence agencies

139.  Adv P S Swart (DA) asked the Minister for Intelligence:



      (1)   Whether the current legislation and regulations governing the
          functioning of the intelligence agencies have weaknesses that are
          open to abuse; if so, what weaknesses;




      (2)   whether he intends reviewing the definition of the political
          intelligence mandate of the National Intelligence Agency; if not,
          why not; if so, what steps will be taken in this regard;



      (3)   whether tensions within a certain political organisation (name
          furnished) could threaten the proper functioning of the
          intelligence agencies; if not, why not; if so, what steps will be
          taken in this regard?                         N2312E

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Madam Speaker, I have announced a review of
the legislation, internal regulations and operating procedures governing
the intelligence services with a view to determining whether there are any
gaps or ambiguities that need to be tightened up. This review is in fact
not new and forms part of a broader appraisal taking place in the
intelligence community, and is evaluating a wide range of matters so as to
ascertain whether the current policy, legislative and organisational
framework, still accords to our needs and priorities.

A team chaired by the national co-ordinator for intelligence has been
established for this purpose. Given the initial findings of the
investigation of the inspector-general, I have extended his mandate to
include a review of the internal policies of the services governing the
conduct of operations in particular, so as to ensure there are adequate
safeguards in respect of compliance with the constitutional and legislative
imperatives.

Secondly, any professional service must be in a position to forewarn the
policy-maker regarding any developments, be they in the political or any
other sphere, which would threaten the security and wellbeing of its
citizens. This mandate is not unique to our country. Intelligence services
world-wide are expected to provide information on such matters, and we must
ensure that our services are able to perform this function, obviously
within the bounds of the law.

The mandate, in respect of political intelligence, is sound. Issues that
would attract attention would include political intolerance, inter-or
intraparty conflict of a violent nature, or opposition to democratisation.
Intelligence services are required to provide insight into the conditions
giving rise to these threats, as well as recommendations to the policy-
makers on ways in which to deal with them in an effective manner so as to
prevent or minimise their potential disruptive effects.

Lest the hon member has a short memory, the importance of this political
intelligence mandate was reflected in the intelligence and security
services’ successful endeavours in bringing about stability in KwaZulu-
Natal in the early stages of our transition to democracy.

The answer to the third part of the question is that our political
landscape provides for and protects the rights of individuals and political
parties to voice their opinions without fear of prosecution, provided, of
course, that this is exercised within the framework of the law. Free
political activity can never be a threat to national security; in fact, it
serves to strengthen our democracy.

We have demonstrated our commitment to ensure that our intelligence
services never repeat the abuses of the apartheid past. To this end, they
are guided by the provisions in our Constitution, which defines them as
national assets that are concerned with the security of all our people.
Members are therefore expected to be politically nonpartisan, and may not
undermine or promote any political party, organisation or faction at the
expense of another. Measures designed to interfere with the legitimate
political processes are outlawed. Members who disregard these principles
and put their personal interests above that of the national interest will
be dealt with in a decisive manner.

Finally, in order to ensure that these principles are entrenched throughout
the intelligence services, I am in the process of developing a civic
education programme to educate all members as to what is expected. Thank
you.

Adv P S SWART: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for his swift
action and comprehensive answer. We have been engaged in this debate about
political intelligence for some time, and what we have recently seen may
best be described as the worst possible manifestation of your department’s
so-called political intelligence mandate. It is a mandate so vague and
wide, and I quote “ensuring political stability”. It is clearly an open
invitation to abuse. I accept the extension given to your task team to also
review the agencies in terms of the conducting of operations.

But, Minister, I want to ask you a very straight question. In tightening
this mandate and sorting these things out, at what level do you think
decisions on the gathering of political intelligence should be taken; and
what should be the very specific criteria? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: I would disagree that the political
intelligence mandate is as wide as the hon member claims. I have also
situated this in an international context, hon member. We are not unique
and we are not different. Political intelligence together with economic-
centred intelligence, intelligence related to society as a whole or the
international situation, must be a subject matter for any intelligence
service. But, one learns from experiences, and clearly aspects that we have
encountered recently need to be governed at the very highest level.

I do understand that – and every member of the House representing a
political party would themselves be personally interested in the answer –
up to now, there has been a great deal left at the director-general level.
The review that is being undertaken and, in fact, on my insistence as of
very recently, is that this has to be brought before the Minister. Now,
this has, in fact, been an understanding. Regarding anything of that kind
of sensitive nature, any Minister on the government benches, in terms of
running their departments, would expect anything that is strategic and
sensitive to the national interests to be presented to the Minister.

What I am seeking to do through looking at the regulations, and this will
be discussed with the Standing Committee on Intelligence, of which you are
a member, is precisely to ensure that there cannot be abuse. Therefore the
Minister must actually have that control. Thank you.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, firstly, I must thank the hon Minister for
his quick actions. Minister, I just want to know the following. You said
the mandate had been extended for the inspector-general in order to close
the gaps between the law that you have now and the new Bill that you want
to introduce. Minister, how long will that take before the inspector-
general comes back?

Secondly, Mr Minister, it seems as if there is an agreement between you and
Mr Njenje. Do you think that that agreement will not bounce back to you
politically if, maybe, Mr Njenje gives the information that he has to other
people and not exactly to the department but to other people outside the
categories or the agreement that you have with him? Will that not
jeopardise your position then?

Thirdly, Mr Minister, regarding the people who are being suspended, is
there anything that is being done to make sure that their suspension is cut
off somewhere? Are they are being fired or not, so that we know exactly
where we are? Thank you very much.

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: I just want to correct the hon member: the
inspector-general’s inquiry that I referred to is not the same one as the
inquiry into the overall policy framework and regulations of the national
co-ordinator for intelligence that I referred to. The inquiry by the
inspector-general relates to recent occurrences pertaining to surveillance
operation regarding a certain gentleman, and further inquiry into the
hoaxes – as I refer to them, e-mails which have been doing the rounds.

The time and date for this as well as for the broader enquiry into the
regulations will not be open-ended. But, firstly, the inspector-general’s
inquiry will depend on what is further unearthed in terms of his inquiry.
However, I should not expect it to go on for more than a month or so. The
other inquiry into the regulations will be sometime during the early part
of next year, because that will look at a very wide range of issues.

Regarding the question of agreement with Mr Njenje, in terms of that
agreement he is still assisting the inspector-general. So, that continues
and I believe that his assistance will be positive.

The final point, in relation to suspensions, is that I do not believe in
long-term suspensions, as you have already seen regarding Mr Njenje’s case.
Concerning the co-operation that we receive from the director-general and
the third member of the National Intelligence Agency who is under
suspension, a lot depends on their co-operation with the inspector-general.
That is why Mr Njenje’s case was able to be concluded so quickly. Thank
you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, members of the public want to be assured
that they have the intelligence agencies that are professional, efficient
and nonpartisan in their service of their country. They also want the
perceived weaknesses that are open to abuse to be corrected as a matter of
urgency, so that the agencies will enjoy the confidence of all our people.

Some security experts say the education and training given the operatives
must go beyond the techniques of the trade, and must include the ability to
rise above political affiliations. So, will the hon Minister inform the
House if the training of intelligence officers does include teaching them
how they should address matters of political affiliations when they deal
with conflicts within a party or parties within the contexts of national
security? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: In fact, in terms of the training programme,
this certainly has been covered. But I am not satisfied that it has been
covered sufficiently, which is why I have announced and already made
reference to some measures which are being taken. This particularly relates
to a programme that we will be working on, which I hope to introduce soon,
and that is what I term a “civic education programme for the services”.
That civic education programme would cover all the aspects that the hon
member has referred to.

I would certainly hope that the measures which have been taken and the
measures which we are taking, and the seriousness with which the services
have responded to the steps that I have taken, would serve to assure the
citizens of this country, the people of this country, irrespective of
political party and persuasion, that, in fact, we are working to overcome
weaknesses in order to strengthen our intelligence services and to make
them truly professional.

The SPEAKER: Hon Frolick?

Dr S C CWELE: Madam Speaker, Minister . . . [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: I didn’t know that the hon Chairperson of the Joint Standing
Committee on Intelligence had been renamed “Frolick”. [Laughter.] The name
Frolick appears here. However, hon member, you are at liberty to proceed.

Dr S C CWELE: We have crossed seats, Madam Speaker.

Minister, we all know that the democratic government, led by the ANC, have
ensured that the intelligence services function and operate in terms of the
Constitution and laws passed by this House. Review of policies and laws,
hence, is a normal process in any democratic dispensation.

The National Intelligence Agency in particular has a mandate to ensure
national stability and security. But NIA has no interests in the normal
party-political functioning or internal affairs of the parties, except
where such activities involve unconstitutional methods or unlawful
activities. Can the Minister assure this House that there is no threat to
our national security or our constitutional democracy? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Yes, I want to thank the “hon Frolick” and I
want to say “siyabonga” [thank you] to him. [Laughter.] I want not only to
assure him but, through him, assure all members of this House and our
country that there is no threat to our national security in terms of the
recent developments that I have been addressing. This is not a threat to
the stability of this country. It is not a question of civil war, as some
so-called experts have been claiming in the media that have been commenting
on such eventualities.

What we have seen happening is far less serious and critical than the kind
of problems in the intelligence community of United Kingdom and United
States of America that we have seen recently. So, again, we are not unique
in finding ourselves with a problem within our service or indeed regarding
some issues that affect the politics of a country. It is a great
exaggeration and crudification of what is taking place in our country to
try and claim that this is something that is inherently unstable. I
therefore agree with the hon Cwele, the chairperson of the standing
committee. I do, again, wish to reassure all that you can go to bed and
have a good night’s rest tonight – even Douglas Gibson, after a nice cup of
warm Milo, nothing else.


           Remuneration of soldiers deployed in foreign countries


137.  Mr V B Ndlovu (IFP) asked the Minister of Defence:

      Whether soldiers deployed in foreign countries are adequately
      remunerated in order to maintain a satisfactory living standard in the
      country of their deployment; if not, why not; if so, (a) what are the
      relevant details and (b) how is such remuneration calculated?
                                                         N2309E

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, South African soldiers deployed in
foreign countries are adequately catered for. Where soldiers are deployed
and their needs catered for in terms of accommodation and meals, they
qualify for additional allowances as follows.

Firstly, danger allowance amounts to R6,58 per day. Secondly, they also
qualify for special danger allowance, which amounts to R9,86 per day. They
also qualify for standby allowance in terms of which they have to be
available 24 hours a day, around the clock, and that amounts to R31,00 per
day. Fourthly, they qualify for a deprivation allowance – if members who
asked this question from the opposition would listen – where infrastructure
is lacking and that amounts to R71,13 per day. Fifthly, in terms of
international obligations, they also qualify for a special daily allowance,
which is for incidental expenditure. That really amounts to cost of living
determined from the financial manual issued by the Department of Public
Service and Administration for incidental expenses calculated at 30% of the
tariff.

Sixthly, a soldier deployed in the DRC or Burundi – in keeping with what
I’ve just said – where accommodation and meals are supplied, would be
compensated by an amount of R390,45 per day, or R11 713,50 per month, Mr
Meshoe. Where meals are not supplied in the above scenario, a meal
allowance at the equivalent of US$25 per day is provided. Over and above
this, the United Nations makes provision for the payment of a water
allowance of $1,28 per day, or supplies water, or both.

Where soldiers are deployed and are not supported in terms of accommodation
and meal needs, the full amount of their accommodation is covered by the
employer and the maximum amount payable, which is 100% for meals and
incidental expenses as determined in the financial manual of the Department
of the Public Service and Administration, is usually paid.

These tariffs are fully taxable after 42 days abroad, in terms of the
Income Tax Act, 1962, as amended. The payments made, for example, in the
DRC would then amount to R953,70 per day. This amount would excludes
deprivation allowance as a soldier would be excluded currently from this
dispensation as accommodation is usually supplied in hotels or the like and
the infrastructure is therefore not necessarily lacking. This amount does
not reflect the cost of their accommodation, which is covered additionally.
The income generated would be R28 611 per month, of which a maximum amount
of R10 875,12 would be required to cover taxation. A balance of R17 735,88
is left for the soldier to cover his or her costs for self-sustainment.

The amounts, as per the paragraph I’ve just read, vary from country to
country as the larger portion of the amounts paid relate to cost-of-
living–based tariffs to cover accommodation, meals and incidental expenses.
I thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Somlomo kanye neNdlu ehloniphekile, mhlonishwa ngiyathokoza
ngempendulo yakho. Umhlonishwa ukhulume ngokuthi okunye okwenziwa ngalezi
zimali azibalile eziningi ... engidida ngamabomu umhlonishwa ebala izimali
eziningi.

Uthe kodwa, maqondana noMnyango wezemiSebenzi kaHulumeni nezokuPhatha,
obuye ubale ezinye zalezi zimali, lokho kuphuma khona emgomweni wakhe. Bake
baya kodwa lapho kuhlala khona amasosha abezoMnyango wezemiSebenzi
kaHulumeni nezokuPhatha?

Okwesibili, bayayazi impilo yakhona njengoba bebala lo-30% okukhulunywa
ngawo? Ngiyezwa ngalezi ezinye izimali eziseceleni – ziyeke nje. Ngikhuluma
ngalena evela kuMnyango wezemiSebenzi kaHulumeni nezokuPhatha ngoba
kuyahlupha ukuthi omabhalane abahleli emahhovisi kube yibona ababala
izimali baze baqede ngabantu abasempini, futhi kube yibona ababala izimali
baqede ngabantu abathola ukuhlupheka okuyisimangaliso ngaphandle bengazange
baye nokuya khona.

Umbuzo-ke wami mhlonishwa engiwubhekise kuwena uthi: Ngoba uphethe abantu
abaphethe izibhamu laphaya, laba bantu ababala le mali bake baya yini
laphaya bafike babona ukuthi kufanele yini bayihole le mali laba bantu?
[Uhleko.] Ngikusho lokho-ke mhlonishwa ngoba mhlawumbe izikhalo ngeke
zifike kuwena ngoba wena uqhelelene nabo kodwa kulula kithina njengoba
thina siyaya kubona siye kobabheka nje. Babuye bayikhulume le ndaba.
Ngizoyixoxa nawe-ke mhlonishwa. Awungixoxele, bayakwenza lokhu?
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker and hon members of this august House, I am
pleased about the answer that has been given. The hon Minister spoke about
other things done with this money that he mentioned . . . the hon Minister
gave a lot of facts about money, confusing me deliberately.

Regarding the Department of Public Service and Administration, he also
mentioned some of these moneys; this was in terms of his policies. Has the
Department of Public Service and Administration been to the area where the
solders stay?

Secondly, are they aware of the life they are living there, as they are
referring to 30%? I understand about other moneys on the other side – let
us leave them out of this. I am referring to the moneys determined by the
Department of Public Service and Administration, because it is inconvenient
for the secretaries staying in offices to calculate the money up to the end
for people who are involved in the war, and they calculate the money up to
the end for the people who suffer a lot, apart from them going there.

My question to you, hon Minister, is: As a leader who leads people carrying
guns in your area, can you tell me whether these people who calculate this
money have ever been to that area to see whether they are supposed to earn
that money? [Laughter.] Hon Minister, I say this because the complaints
might not reach you, as you are very far from them, but it is easy for us
as we go and check on them. They sometimes talk about this matter. Hon
Minister, I will discuss it with you. Tell me, are they doing that?]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZOKUVIKELA: Somlomo, mangithi kumhlonishwa maqondana nombuso
lapha ekhaya, uma kuthunyelwa abantu ukuthi bayosebenza njengoba
bengamasotsha, kukhona izimali ezinqunywa yiNhlangano yeZizwe
yokubabhekelela labo bantu abakulesi simo. Okusho ukuthi-ke, ngokwamazinga
abekwe yiNhlangano yeZizwe, siphoqelekile ukuthi siwalandele. Emva kwalokho
kuvela isimo lapho kutholakala ukuthi kukhona ezinye izinto ezingaphezu
kwalokho ezifuna ukuthi sizisebenze thina sesilandela umthetho walapha
ekhaya.
Uma umthetho ungasiniki indlela yokuthi kufanele sihambe kanjani, kusho
ukuthi uma sinabashana lapho singabanika imali eningi nje ngokuthanda
kwethu. Yingakho-ke uMnyango wezemiSebenzi kaHulumeni nezokuPhatha usho
ukuthi uma umuntu ethunyelwe ezweni elingaphandle unelungelo lokukhokhelwa
inani elithile lemali. Leyo nto-ke yenza ukuthi-ke kungabi bikho ingxaki
yokuthi kube khona izimali ezilahlekayo noma sizisebenzise nje ngendlela
engekho emthethweni.

Ngisho ukuthi-ke nalezi zimali ebengizibala-ke ziyizimali zokwengezelela,
akuzona izimali eziyisisekelo sokuthi umuntu uzohlala kanjani lapho
ethunyelwe khona. Sanelisekile nje kulo mnyango ngokuthi nokho izimali lezi
njengoba zabiwe umbuso nje ziyasiza futhi zonke izimfuno zabantu siyakwazi
ukuzibhekelela. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, in response to the question by the
hon member, soldiers who are deployed on peacekeeping missions receive
certain allowances that are determined by the United Nations. Therefore, we
are obliged to comply with the standards set by the United Nations. In
addition to that, there are certain things that we need to do, and we do so
by following our domestic policies.

If the law did not provide how things should be done, it would mean that if
we had nephews and nieces we could just give them as big an amount of money
as we pleased. That is why the Department of Public Service and
Administration makes provision for a person deployed to another country to
receive a certain amount of money. That policy helps us not to have
problems in respect of moneys that have been used improperly.

What I am explaining is that these allowances that I have referred to are
additional allowances and are not meant for basic needs such as
accommodation for a person deployed in another country. Our department is
satisfied that the budget allocated to us by the state is really of help in
satisfying the needs of staff. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, Mr Minister, the ACPD is pleased with the way
you have reported now and in the way our men and women in uniform are
looked after. What I would like to know, Mr Minister, is how many South
African soldiers are currently deployed in other countries in the world,
and what is the possibility of this number increasing over the short term?
Thank you.

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZOKUVIKELA: Somlomo, angazi noma lo mbuzo uphuma kule
mpendulo ekade ngiyinikeza kodwa sengathi umbuzo omusha nje. [Uhleko.]
Nokho-ke, mangisho ukuthi amasosha onke angaphandle asendaweni yase-Great
Lakes angaphezulu kwe-6 300. Okusho ukuthi lapha ngaphakathi kunamasosha
angako futhi alinde ukuthi uma kubuya lawo angaphandle, lawa angaphakathi
akwazi ukuthatha indawo yalawo abengaphandle. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
Zulu paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether this
question is a follow-up question from the response that I have given, but
it sounds like a new question. [Laughter.] The number of soldiers deployed
in the Great Lakes is more than 6 300. This means that we also have the
same number of soldiers inside the country who will be deployed abroad when
those companies that are abroad come back. Thank you.]

Mr S B NTULI: Madam Speaker, Minister, thank you for an informative and
elaborative answer highlighting that the department and the SA National
Defence Force do have policies and standards governing the remuneration of
members of the SANDF deployed both inside and outside the country, with the
addition that those deployed outside the country are regulated by United
Nations policy guidelines.

Would the Minister indicate whether there are further incentives for those
deployed outside the country, so as to encourage and motivate them to take
further deployments when time calls? Thanks.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, the principal motivation for South
Africans serving international obligations of this nature must, of course,
be that these young men and women, inspired by the values of our
Constitution, are going out there because of their commitment to regional,
continental and world peace. Secondly, the conditions in which they serve
are conditions we take very seriously. We want to make those conditions
comfortable for them, and we want to inspire and motivate them to be able
to do their work to their maximum extent.

Of course, all these South Africans serving in these peace missions go into
the registers of the United Nations organisation. It is as they move on, in
years to come, that some of them will be recognised by the nations of the
world as people who have done service in this way. With the experience they
have, they will probably have the capacity to lead these missions in time
to come.

Back at home, we consider these men and women as having a crucial role of
leadership in our communities. We will always recommend them for
specialised further obligations to our nations. Some of them, especially
those who are more or less advanced in years - generals and so on - are now
being used as ambassadors in various countries. They are actually
graduating to do that. It is part of the experience that they have gained
there which qualifies them to play these kinds of roles.

Some of them, of course, will, in increasing numbers, be getting into the
United Nations Peacekeeping organisation in New York. We are going to send
some more and others are being seconded there. There are tremendous amounts
of opportunities that present themselves for those who serve in this way. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, it is
understandable that our peacekeepers are not expected to be housed in
luxurious hotels. However, it is important to ensure that at least minimum
hygiene and health standards are maintained. In some areas the conditions
are quite deplorable. For example, if you take Bunia, in the DRC, where our
battalion headquarters are located, the living conditions for the members
who are of the ranks of corporal and downwards leave much to be desired.
There are no proper shower facilities; toilets are not functional. In fact,
I have learnt that there are only 10 toilets for approximately 800 members.
They have to go without fresh, clean drinking water sometimes for up to two
weeks owing to a lack of chemicals for water purification. This must surely
affect the morale of our peacekeepers. Minister, what do you intend to do
in order to improve the living conditions, especially for the members of
the lower ranks? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Well, Madam Speaker, first of all, I have
supported and even provided transportation for the members of the committee
to travel to the DRC to see for themselves the conditions under which our
soldiers serve. I’m not sure which part of the DRC Mr Shah was at but if,
for instance, he was in Kinshasa, it is not possible for him to say what he
is saying. It’s absolutely fallacious to say that there are no showers, no
bedding, no toilets, no bread and other things for two weeks and things
like that. [Interjections.] Where? [Interjections.] I’m sorry, I do want to
hear what he’s saying.

The SPEAKER: Hon Minister, maybe the two of you could have a whole session
after this sitting.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, I cannot leave the House with a
completely fallacious assertion that there are conditions for SA National
Defence members serving in the DRC that are unacceptable. It’s absolutely
fallacious. There’s no foundation whatsoever for what he has said.

The SPEAKER: I think the hon Minister can only answer whatever you’ve
heard. The rest we will really . . .

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Madam Speaker, if you allow me, I’ll clarify.

The SPEAKER: You can clarify.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Thank you. Minister, I did not make a general
statement. I did not generalise. I agree that conditions in places such as
Kindu, Kinshasa and other places that I have visited are quite adequate. I
specified some areas and I gave you an example of one specific area where
for people ranked corporal and below, the situation is quite deplorable.
So, it’s the battalion headquarters in Bunia. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, may I say to the House without fear
of contradiction that in all of the conditions in which South African
soldiers are serving in the DRC, most of the communities living around them
are living in three times more horrible conditions than the soldiers
themselves. That is how ... [Interjections.] Just listen, please, listen.
That is how well our soldiers have been catered for. As a matter of fact,
communities depend on our deployments where they are situated – even for
water and medical supplies. To suggest that our soldiers are living in
deplorable conditions has no foundation whatsoever. [Applause.]

I will not build a five-star hotel in the DRC. Members of the National
Defence Force who go there must go there to serve the people. But that
story that he has just given has no foundation whatsoever. It does not.
[Applause.]


                   High vacancy rate in detective services


      129. Mr M S Booi (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:


      Whether, with reference to the Auditor-General’s report that a high
      vacancy rate exists in the detective services, there are any plans in
      place to address this issue in the (a) short term as well as (b) long
      term; if not, why not; if so, what plans in each case?
                                                   N2296E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, before responding to
this question, I would like to seek your indulgence on a matter that
requires your endorsement. It relates to two other questions, and I want to
explain because we would have to get your endorsement on that.

What has happened is that there are two questions, Question 138 and
Question 141, that have been asked by the hon members Ndlovu and Van Dyk. I
have had discussions with those members and they have acceded to my request
that the two questions stand down in the first instance, but secondly, that
the answers they require are provided by way of a written answer.

The SPEAKER: Let’s continue. That issue has been settled between you and
the members, as you have explained to us.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much, Speaker.

The question, with respect to the detective services, is being handled in
two ways. The first one is short term, where we have reviewed our employee
resource establishment plan to therefore accommodate a process where every
time we do recruitment, 30% of those so recruited will go into the
detective services. What we are going to do achieve that is to give a
bigger allocation to the detective services next year to ensure that,
indeed, we enlarge that division in the police.

The second one is, of course, long term and in this regard we are going to
be expanding our human resources in the police on an annual basis. As those
numbers swell, we are going to ensure that the detective services also
become larger than they are at the moment. That is how we are going to deal
with the matter of our detective services. Thank you.

Mr M S BOOI: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, thank you for the answer.
Minister, there is a growing trend in the Public Service or within the
detective services that whenever we train them, they go to the private
sector. They get recruited and get better salaries. So, we want to know
from you, Minister, do you have a retention plan for them so that whenever
you’ve trained them, and whenever they are ready to continue serving the
country, you will be able to continue retaining them for what you’ve
trained them? Do you have such potential or policy?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, it is true that across
our Public Service, including within the SA Police Service, there is a lot
of recruitment by the private sector concerning very capable people, who
are therefore part and parcel of this large Public Service. And, indeed,
within the Police Service, there are a number of our detectives and other
police members who get recruited as a consequence of this.

Indeed, this has to do with salaries and the pay packages they are offered
within the private sector. But I do wish to say that there are many of our
members who are patriotic, and who want to serve their country. Therefore
we always have an appropriate number of detectives who remain in the
service, in spite of the offers that they get. We don’t have a situation
where that division collapses as a consequence of people who are recruited
by other entities.

I am therefore certain that we will always have a good number of detectives
who are going to work as such within the SA Police Service. The conditions
of service in the police, generally, have improved greatly, and those
people who work there are defying such risks as personal injury, and even
death, to continue to serve within the SA Police Service.

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Madam Speaker, Minister, the certainty of detection
depends not only on an effective detective service, but also on forensic
support in the form of forensic laboratories. There are similar shortages
in the forensic laboratories as in the detective services. What is being
done to deal with the critical shortages here, given the fact that they
also supply services to other SADC countries?
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, I was responding to a question
on detective services, not the broader work that is done in the police to
include the forensic laboratories. But, nonetheless, let me say that,
indeed, there are many people that we recruit into our forensic science
laboratories who also get recruited by other entities. Even with respect to
that, we have many people who have remained within the SA Police Service to
do their work there. We continuously recruit and train people for those
laboratories, and they continue to provide the support that they have been
providing to the SA Police Service for many years now.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, I would just like to have more
information regarding the following. Although we know that employment is
swelling and people are coming in, it seems as if the detective service is
the burdened one, because some of the detectives usually have a family feud
and kill their wives and themselves owing to stress due to the job that
they do; and some of them carry around about 150 dockets.

How long, really, are we going to work on these to make sure that the
detectives end up with a maximum of 50 dockets each? It takes a long time
for a case to go to court if the detectives are going to carry around more
than 100 dockets.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: As the numbers of members of our
detective services continue to grow, the dockets that they handle are going
to grow smaller and smaller. Thus, by increasing our human resource
component of our detective services we will reduce the burden that they
have at present, relating to the many dockets that they carry.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, on 7 October, hon Minister, you responded in
detail to my question relating to improving the 23% detection rate of
perpetrators. Whilst the steps taken to improve the detection rate, as set
out in your reply, are impressive, clearly, the high case load per
detective remains a concern.

The attorney-general’s report also highlighted deficiencies in the case
docket and case administration system, which clearly affect the detective
services. It mentioned, for example, one province where the status of 18
000 dockets remained unchanged for more than five months.

Whilst we in the ACDP are very appreciative of the exceptionally good work
that the detective services provide, notwithstanding severe capacity and
personnel constraints, clearly ineffective monitoring and control of
dockets negatively impacts upon the detective services. What, hon Minister,
is being done to address these concerns again raised in the attorney-
general’s report?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, let me explain that, at
times, the dockets that detectives carry are not always live dockets. In
other words, they are not dockets that are being investigated because there
is a case they are investigating at that time. Let me tell you what
happens: Firstly, there are dockets that we have of people who are, for
instance, already in our Correctional Services detention centres, not as a
consequence of the investigations that are going on, but on the bases of
other crimes that they have committed.

There are dockets that we still hold of people, as we investigate the
matters, who die for one reason or another. And what is not happening, and
where the attorney-general is correct, is the fact that our case
management, as it relates to those dockets, is not good enough as yet to
pick up those anomalies. Therefore these are some of the matters that we
are addressing to ensure that we reduce this unnecessary load.

These are some of the matters that we are addressing to ensure that we
reduce this unnecessary load on the detectives, which, at times, is a
consequence of what I’ve indicated. Thank you.

             Theft of bags and luggage at international airports


 123. Rev K R J Meshoe (ACDP) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:


      (1)   Whether theft of bags, luggage or items from passengers’ bags is
           still a major problem at any of our international airports; if
           not, what is the position in this regard; if so, (a) which
           airport had the (i) highest and (ii) lowest number of reported
           cases of theft for the past five years for which information is
           available and (b) how many (i) arrests have been made so far in
           this regard and (ii) convictions resulted from such arrests;




      (2)   whether the SA Police Service is taking any steps to stop the
           theft of bags and luggage at our international airports; if not,
           why not; if so, what steps?       N2288E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Yes, hon K R J Meshoe ... Where is he?
OK. And where is your green? [Interjections] No, I mean colour. He has gold
and black; where is the green?

The answer is yes, the theft of bags and luggage items continues to occur,
and the airport where this mostly occurs is the Johannesburg International
Airport. Where there is a lower incident of this type of crime is in the
Pilanesberg International Airport.

Now, I am unable to provide you with details regarding the other part of
your question, because our systems do not isolate theft of the luggage. In
other words, we say theft with respect to property and we do not say “this
is luggage”. And therefore, I don’t have details that relate to what you
asked for.

Part (b) of your question relates to how many arrests have been made with
respect to luggage. When we arrest them, we say that this is theft; it is
robbery. And it is in court when we say it is a consequence of this or the
other thing. Our system does not carry that and we lifted this from our
system. But the other matters are as I have indicated.

The answer to the second part of the question on whether any steps are
taken to stop this is that, yes, among others, we are doing the following.
There are general crime prevention activities which include, for instance,
closed circuit televisions, monitoring and patrol duties; crime
intelligence activities that include observation, information gathering and
infiltration of some of these crime syndicates; regular crime-combating
operations, in other words surveillance, tracking down of wanted suspects,
and sting operations. And finally, in co-operation with the Airports
Company of South Africa and the airline contracted security, we monitor the
movement of luggage from check-in points until it is placed on board the
relevant aircraft. I thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Travellers are concerned that the growing trend of
luggage theft at our airports, particularly Johannesburg International
Airport, will tarnish South Africa’s image in the eyes of potential
tourists. There are some at the Johannesburg International Airport who say
the 1 200 security cameras the Airport Company of South Africa has around
the airport all appear to be operated by one individual. I would like to
find out if the Minister is aware of that and whether it is true.

There are others who also say the cameras are purely cosmetic in terms of
security, and are fixed on one spot, unlike the cameras in Johannesburg
central business district that are manned by a team of operators. Would the
Minister tell us why the airport does not have sufficient staff to operate
the security cameras, as it is being alleged, in order to help the police
with the investigation of thefts at the airport, because we believe that
only when there are sufficient convictions resulting from speedy arrests
will the theft of bags and luggage . . . [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Unfortunately, I don’t have that
information, particularly because it is not the police that supply those
closed circuit televisions; it is the Airports Company of South Africa
itself. So I don’t know why there are these weaknesses you have referred
to.

What I am going to do is . . . I am sure an arrangement will be made, even
if I drop you a letter, to indicate what the reality of the situation there
is. In other words, it will be regarding the number of the cameras they
have and the personnel that have been deployed for purposes of monitoring
this. I will supply that in a letter to you. Unfortunately, I don’t have
the information you are seeking. I thank you.

Mr R J KING: Agb Voorsitter, Minister, die effek van die berugte eerste-
ondervinding-verleentheid van die toeris wie se bagasie intransito gesteel
word, is bekend by ons en is, gesien saam met die negatiewe beeld wat ons
misdaadvlakke veroorsaak, slegte nuus vir ons toerismebedryf in die
algemeen. Wat dan is die probleem in kommunikasie tussen die polisie en die
lughawemaatskappye, wat so geneig is om deurlopend die vinger na mekaar te
wys, dat dié situasie nie opgelos kan word nie, en hoe beplan u om dit te
hanteer? Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr R J KING: Hon Chairperson, Minister, the effect of the notorious
initial-experience embarrassment of the tourist whose baggage was stolen in
transit is known to us and, in conjunction with the negative image caused
by our crime levels, is bad news for our tourist industry in general. What
is the problem in communication between the police and the airports
company, who continually tend to point a finger at one another, with the
result that this situation cannot be resolved, and how do you intend to
address it? Thank you very much.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: There ought not to be any problem, but
you will know that as people work, particularly structures that have been
deployed in the same plane, now and again they will collide into one
another in terms of the work that they must do.

What happens there is that the police are responsible for the outer
perimeter, so to speak, in terms of security at the airport, and the rest
of the security assignment is by ACSA who deal directly with inside
security there.

But it does not mean that we ought not to be talking, as you say, because
it is through consultation that in the end we will be able to be on top of
this particular problem. But, again, as the case was with the hon Meshoe, I
am going to get more information regarding this, which I will make
available to you. I thank you.

Mr F T MASERUMULE: Hon Chair, I think hon Meshoe should have been warned
that he is expected to behave like a taxidriver and go where everybody
goes, otherwise he is going to be late in heaven. [Laughter.]

Comrade Minister, the question here is that the theft of the luggage also
involves theft while the passenger is in possession of their luggage,
either while they are waiting to book in or as they arrive and leave the
terminal.

In this instance, can the Minister please indicate whether the SA Police
Service and the Airports Company of South Africa, ACSA, are looking at this
type of theft, and what the responsibilities of SAPS and ACSA are in this
regard, that is, the relationship that exists? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Yes, one of the things that we have
decided needed to happen – and quite clearly, it is not happening – is to
provide some form of education for people who use these airports, because
the problems that people experience do not just start and end with the
luggage within the airport building.

There are people who are lingering around the airports. And these people
will go to the taxi as it arrives, and will offer services to people who
are going to the airport. It is, at times, at that point where people are
mugged. They steal their luggage and they do other very silly things. And,
at times, it is when people have already alighted from the aircraft and are
leaving the airport building that these people will come and offer
assistance, saying: “We will take you to a taxi” or “We will take you to a
bus”, and people are mugged during that process.

We have been telling people that you must be very careful with respect to
this. The problem we have about those people who linger around there is
that many of them are people who used to work at the airport and who have
been retrenched. An arrangement was then made that those people can
continue to work around the airport in order for them to make money, just
to derive some income. And you don’t know, therefore, who among those
people are genuinely there and so on.

We have said that we must continuously have this education session in order
for our people to understand the risks that they enter when there are these
difficulties. Among other things, we have said that it is always better to
go to people who are in uniform - the police, the security guards who are
there and those who obviously will have proper identification as members
working for ACSA and ask for information from them and for their
assistance. This is not happening, as we would want it to. But, as I say,
it has to do with our ability to communicate all the time with people. I
thank you.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Minister, I want to thank you for your answer. My problem
is just that ACSA do not want to take responsibility. I have been a victim
myself. I locked my case, with the camera inside. When I opened it at night
in the hotel, the camera was missing. How they opened the lock and closed
it again, I don’t know. If you report to ACSA, they say: “Sorry, there is
nothing we can do about it. We are only prepared to give you confirmation
that you were on that flight.”

So, ACSA does not want to take responsibility, and now they are shifting it
to the police. And I really appreciate your intention to talk to ACSA and
bring them closer to the police to work together. But, you know, somebody
must take responsibility for the theft out of luggage.
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: The Minister of Transport has
submitted a very exhaustive proposal on how we are going to reorganise the
airport and that proposal is now serving before Cabinet. I am sure that if
we stick to the stipulations that are embodied there, we are going to
travel quite some distance in addressing problems like the one you have
referred to. In other words, I will keep on as I am doing, interfacing with
the Minister of Transport on this matter. I thank you.


   Decrease in number of prisoners, and the effect of this on overcrowding


127.  Ms W Ngwenya (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:



      (1)   Whether a decrease in the number of prisoners has been achieved;
           if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;



      (2)   whether conditions regarding overcrowding has now improved; if
           not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                        N2292E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I assume
that the hon member asked this question against the backdrop of the very
successful special remission of sentences that was awarded recently.
Although the special remission of sentences was not granted to alleviate
overcrowding in correctional centres, 31 865 sentenced offenders were
released from correctional centres during the period in question. This has
significantly brought down our offender population. As at 31 July 2005, our
population of offenders stood at 155 662.

I’m also happy to report that, as a result of a number
of initiatives by the Department of Correctional Services, in
conjunction with the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development as well as other stakeholders within the criminal justice
system, on 10 August 2005 the average number of awaiting-trial detainees
had decreased from 48 062 to 46 020.

Judging from the statistics above, there is a noticeable improvement
regarding the levels of overcrowding in our correctional centres. It will
be remembered that before the special remission of sentences, the offender
population in our country stood at 188 000, and 55 000 of these were
awaiting-trial detainees.

I am happy to say that the justice, correctional services, peace and
      security cluster system is beginning to work in a co-ordinated manner
      in the provinces and regions. I am also happy to say that, with the
      interventions that are being made by the various committees, including
      the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services, all role-players are
      beginning to make use of alternative methods of diversion away from
      correctional centres. I thank you.

Nk W NGWENYA: Somlomo, okokuqala, ngithanda ukubonga ukuthi ngithole leli
thuba lokuma phakathi kweNdlu yesishayamthetho okokuqala empilweni yami.
[Ihlombe.]

Siyabonga Ngqongqoshe ngempendulo ecace ngokwanele, futhi impendulo yakho
inika ithemba lokuthi impi esibhekene nayo yamajele aphuphumayo
sizoyinqoba.

Umbuzo wami olandelayo, Ngqongqoshe, uthi: Kunalabo ababoshiwe abasalinde
ukugwetshwa abanamabheyili asukela ku-R1 000 kuya phansi. Sebehleli
isikhathi eside kanti sebethi abafike enanini elingu-11 000 sebebonke
emajele ethu. UNgqongqoshe angake achaze ukuthi banalo yini isu lokubona
ukuthi isigaba 62(f) se-Criminal Procedure Act 51 ka-1977 siyenziwa
ngokubonakalayo emajele? Sikholwa ukuthi baningi abayiziboshwa abangaphuma
nabangagwetshwa uma lesi sigaba singasetshenziswa ngendlela enemiphumela
kuwo wonke amajele ethu. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Miss W NGWENYA: Speaker, firstly I would like to thank you for the
opportunity to be in the National Assembly for the first time in my life.
[Applause.]

Thank you, Minister, for your accurate response. Your response also gives
us hope that we are going to solve the problem of overcrowded jails.

My question, Minister, concerns those offenders who are awaiting trail and
those who have bail of R1 000 or less. They have been waiting for a long
time and there are 11 000 of them in total in prisons. Does the Minister
have any plans to see to it that section 62(f) of the Criminal Procedure
Act of 1977 is implemented? We believe that hundreds of prisoners could be
released or sentenced if this section could be implemented accordingly in
all prisons. Thank you.]

UMPHATHISWA WEENKONZO ZOLULEKO: Mandibulele kuQabane, udade wethu,
ndivuyisane naye ngokuthi abe uma okokuqala apha kwiNdlu yoWiso-mthetho,
nangokuba elilungu lekomiti yemicimbi yesebe. Ndiyavuyisana nawe ngoko.

Umcimbi wokuxinana kwamabanjwa ejele ngomnye wemicimbi esiyiphethe kakhulu
apha kwiSebe lezoLuleko. Asikho sodwa ekusebenzeni lo mcimbi, isebe
loMphathiswa uMabandla lezoBugcisa noPhuhliso loMgaqo-siseko, iSebe
lezoKhuselo noKhuseleko kwakunye nelezoPhuhliso loLuntu lincedisana kunye
nathi ukuze abo bantu bangekagwetywa, abasalinde ukuxoxwa kwamatyala abo,
axoxwe ngokukhawuleza amatyala abo.

Sisebenzisa kanye eli candelo loMthetho ulibizileyo, dad’ ethu, icandelo
62(f) le-Criminal Procedures Act, sincediswa ngabaphathi bazo zonke
iitolongo zethu, sizama ukuba bonke abo bathi banikwe ibheyile engaphantsi
kwe-R1 000 baphume.

Enye yeendawo osebenze kakuhle kuzo lo Mthetho - ndiyabona noSekela-
Mphathiswa uDe Lange undijongile phaya ngoba uyakwazi oko – kuseBhayi, apho
sinenkqubo entle kakhulu esebenza ngamabanjwa asalinde ukuxoxwa kwamatyala
awo.

Kwaye kule veki iphelileyo sithathe isigqibo singala masebe, sokuba siza
kundwendwela kuzo zonke ezi ngingqi zineetolongo ezinamabanjwa amaninzi
asalinde ukuxoxwa kwamatyala awo. Siza kungena kwitolongo nganye, sibize
noomantyi. Bendidibene ne-Law Society izolo, efuna ukusincedisa
ngamagqwetha ukuze aba bantu sibakhuphele ngaphandle, bangahlali
ezitolongweni. Amapolisa ayasincedisa ukuze kungabikho kubambezeleka
ekwenzeni uphando, kwaye kungabikho zithintelo ekuthini abantu bagoduke.
Sizimisele ke, dad’ ethu, ukuba yonke le nto yenzeke ngokukhawuleza.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Let me express my gratitude to the
comrade, our sister; let me join with her in celebrating her appearance for
the first time before the National Assembly, as well as the fact that she
is a member of the committee that deals with issues of the department. I am
therefore celebrating with you.
The fact of overpopulation of prisoners in jail is one of the issues being
addressed by the Department of Correctional Services. We are not alone in
addressing this fact. The department of Minister Mabandla, namely that of
Justice and Constitutional Development, is working hand in hand with us so
that those people who have not yet been sentenced, who are still awaiting
the hearing of their cases, may expect the speedy hearing of their cases.

We apply the section of law that you have quoted, my sister, section 62(f)
of the Criminal Procedure Act; we are being assisted by all those in charge
of our prisons, and we are striving to ensure that all those who happen to
be granted bail below R1 000 are released.

One of the places in which this law has been properly applied - and I can
see Deputy Minister De Lange looking at me because he also knows this - is
at Port Elizabeth, where we have a proper working system concerning
prisoners who are awaiting trial.

Also last week we took a decision regarding these departments, namely that
we would visit all these sections with prisons having many prisoners
awaiting trial of their cases. We are going to visit each and every prison,
and we are also going to invite a magistrate. Yesterday I met with the Law
Society, which wants to assist us with lawyers so that these prisoners
should not remain in custody. The police are assisting us so that there
should be no delays in conducting investigations, and so as to avoid
anything preventing people from being released to go home. We are therefore
committed, my sister, to having all of this applied with immediate effect.]

Mr J SELFE: Chair, the Minister is aware that we are opposed to the
wholesale release of prisoners by means of special remission of sentences
largely because of the message that this sends out to the victims of crime.
At the same time, we know that the prisons are grossly overcrowded. For
this reason, it is very disturbing to hear that the programme of the
construction of the four new-generation prisons has run into difficulties.

Can the Minister tell us what steps he has taken to ensure that the
building programme of those prisons gets on track? Moreover, can the
Minister tell us what steps, precisely, he is taking to ensure that
diversion and alternative sentencing are applied to first-time offenders
accused of petty and victimless crimes as part of the strategy to reduce
prison overcrowding?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Well, Chair, regarding the comment
that the member has made that they have opposed the remission of sentences
from the beginning, that really looks like them, exactly. So I have no
problem with that. Anything that is not opposed by them, surely, must have
a question mark against it, because they are opposers and they will be for
the rest of their lives.

Regarding the issue of new-generation prisons, I was worried when I heard
the hon Gibson’s name because I was going to ask: “What the hell does he
know about prisons?” [Laughter.] The issue of the building of new-
generation prisons, I think, is a question on its own. I wouldn’t even want
to go into it because it is a new question altogether.

Concerning the issue of diversion and alternative sentencing, the hon
member James Selfe knows very well that we are at the end of the conveyor
belt, as Correctional Services. Therefore that is why it is so important to
work with the magistracy, the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development, the police and Social Development, particularly regarding
children who are in trouble with the law. It is important to use all kinds
of methods to convince all of us that the best way is to divert people,
particularly first-time offenders and children who are in trouble with the
law.

The hon member knows very well. Time and again, I report progress with the
portfolio committee on where we are. Emanating from the visits of the
portfolio committee, the committee has already come out with their report
concerning some of the resolutions that we can take to attend to these
issues. So grandstanding about it here is not going to help because it is
not helping the situation. You visited some of the prisons. At least you
are much better than some people who just get up and speak about
Correctional Services when they have never entered a correctional centre in
their lives. At least, I give you credit for that. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chair, hon Minister, we particularly welcome the reference to
diversion and restorative justice principles. We would again implore you to
speak to your colleague, the hon Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development, as to when the Child Justice Bill will be brought to
conclusion. The Bill obviously enshrines the rights of restorative justice
and diversion.

I wanted to ask about section 62(f) concerning awaiting-trial prisoners,
but you have already dealt with that. Regarding section 63(a), which you
would recall allows the magistrate to review bail and which has been
helpful in dealing with prisoners awaiting trial who do not present a
danger to society, may I ask you: To what degree is that section which has
been very useful in the past in reducing awaiting-trial prisoner figures
also being used?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Hon member, the Department of Social
Development, about a week ago, in conjunction with the Department of Labour
and Umsobomvu Youth Fund, have trained a number of young unemployed people
to be assistant probationers who can deal with children in trouble with the
law. I do appreciate that because the correctional centres that I have do
not cater for children who are under 18 years of age.

One of the things that we are doing within this cluster is to convince the
magistrates that the best way of dealing with those children is to divert
them away from there. When I was in Umtata there was a group of eight 13
and 14 year-old girls who were involved in some programme. All of them had
been diverted and were in trouble with the law.

We appreciate that type of thing because when you see some of these
children in prison your heart goes out to them. You feel like opening the
doors and allowing them to go home, but know deep down that you don’t want
to undermine the criminal justice system of our country. So the issue of
diversion is uppermost in our minds.

The issue of restorative justice is going on within our prisons. Before we
do anything, even with these special remissions, we really work very hard
in making sure that victims of some of those people who will be released
get to know what is going on and get to talk about it so that they can find
it in their hearts to forgive them, and to make them understand that they
have made mistakes and need to be given a second chance. We have programmes
on restorative justice within our correctional centres.

Regarding the issue of 63(a), we do use it very much. We do take a number
of offenders back to the courts. We don’t even take them there physically,
we just list their offences, sentences or bail conditions. Each and every
head of a correctional centre or prison in this country knows that they
have to use that every week to plead with the magistrates to make sure that
this particular section of the law is used properly so that no more people
who are not a threat to society are kept with our correctional centres. So
we are busy doing that as well. Thank you very much.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. Mhlonishwa bengicela ukubuza.
Umhlonishwa ngizwe kancane ephendula umfowethu umhlonishwa uSwart ngendaba
yezingane. Bengicela ukubuza kumhlonishwa ukuthi kuzothatha isikhathi
esingakanani ukuthi izingane zehlukaniswe nabantu abadala? Ngisho emajele,
mhlonishwa, ukuze izingane zingahlali nezigelekeqe nazo ziphume
seziyizigelekeqe. Okokuqala lokho.

Okwesibili,  ngicela  ukubuza  ukuthi  umhlonishwa  uyadlelana   yini   noma
bayasebenzelana yini noMnyango ophethwe umhlonishwa uSkweyiya? Ngisho  ngoba
bekungaba ngcono ukuba mhlawumbe uMnyango kamhlonishwa uSkweyiya  kube  yiwo
owakha izindawo eziningi zokuthi izingane lezi  zikwazi  ukuhlala,  zigcinwe
abasebenzi  bezenhlalakahle  ngaso  sonke  isikhathi.  Ngicela   umhlonishwa
angisize nje lapho bese  engitshela-ke  ukuthi  lokhu  engikubuzayo  kungase
kuthathe   isikhathi   esingakanani   ukuthi   kwenzeke,   uma   kungenzeka.
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Chairperson. I heard the hon Minister  responding
to my colleague, hon Swart, concerning juveniles. I would like to  know  how
long it is going to take to separate young people  from  old  people.  I  am
talking about prisons, hon Minister, so  that  youngsters  won’t  stay  with
gangsters and come out as gangsters themselves. That is the first thing.

Secondly, I would like to know whether the hon Minister is working hand in
hand with the department of hon Skweyiya. I am saying that because it would
be better if the department of hon Skweyiya could be in charge of building
places where youngsters would be accommodated and looked after by social
workers. I would like the hon Minister to answer my questions and tell me
how long it is going to take for that to happen.]

UMPHATHISWA WEENKONZO ZOLULEKO: Sihlalo, manditsho kuBaw’ uNdlovu ukuba
kunzima ukwazi ukuba oku kuya kuthatha ixesha elingakanani na. Kambe
siliqela lamasebe ahlanganiswe ngokohlobo lomsebenzi awenzayo
siyasebenzisana ukuqinisekisa ukuba akubikho bantwana badityaniswa
nemigulukudu. Naxa sele bebanjiwe, siyayigxininisa into yokuba
mabangadityaniswa nabophuli-mthetho abangooncanyelweni, babe kwicandelo
labo bodwa. Nangona ndingabafuni nje ezitolongweni zam, ngelinye ixesha
abanye baba bantwana baye benze izenzo zobugebenga ezixhomisa amehlo. Kambe
abo sele begwetyiwe siye singabadibanisi kunye nooncanyelweni. Siye
sibakhuphele ecaleni.
Isebe likabawo uZola Sikweyiya, ngakumbi uSekela-Mphathiswa uJean Benjamin,
lisebenzisana kakhulu kunye nathi ukufumana iindawo zokhuseleko, apho aba
bantwana baza kutshintshelwa khona, bahlale khona bejongiwe bade babe
baphumile ezitolongweni.

Kambe tat’uVelaphi akukho nto ibaluleke,  njengosapho. Usapho lubaluleke
kakhulu. Aba bantwana kufuneka sibabuyisele kubazali babo ukwenzela ukuba
balulekwe ziintsapho abasuka kuzo kuqala, hayi sithi. Thina siza emva apha
ekubalulekeni. Ngelinye ixesha ufumana iintsapho ezithi sakuzitsalela
umnxeba sisithi: “Umntwana wenu ulapha, uza kugwetywa, ngoko ke mthatheni
abe kuni ukuze amane esiya nje enkundleni yamatyala.” Uve olo sapho
lusithi: “Ngconde, mgcine apho, asimfuni.” Ndinge ndingafumana imvubu,
ndiyiqabelise apha emqolo ndibethe umzali otshoyo, ngoba undinika nje
uxanduva endingaludingiyo. Ndidinga abantu abagwetyiweyo kuphela.

Nangona kunjalo, sileli qela lamasebe siyasebenzisana ukuzama ukunqanda
ukuba abantwana bangezi ezitolongweni, iintsapho zabo zibagcine, sifumane
la magosa angabancedisi bamakhankatha amabanjwa akhutshwe ngengqawule
bendithetha ngawo ukuze abajonge, abaluleke de lidlule ixesha lokubekwa
kwabo phantsi kweliso lala magosa.

Ndiyacela ke kubazali ukuba xa bebanjwe bebancinci, iintsapho zabo
zincedisane nathi ekubalulekeni. Umntu makangathi kuNgconde: ”Mgcine apho,
Ngconde, nam ndiyamoyika.” Ngowakho. Kutheni umnikezela kum nje ngoku?
Mjonge nawe, mzali, umluleke, sikuncedise ke nathi. Enkosi. (Translation of
Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, please allow me to
tell hon Ndlovu that it is difficult to estimate the time that this would
take. However, as the cluster, we are trying to ensure that juveniles are
separated from criminals. When they are arrested, we emphasise that they
should be placed in a separate section far away from hardcore criminals.
Even though I may not want them in my prisons, some need to be incarcerated
because of various serious crimes they commit. The ones who are sentenced
are not housed together with adult prisoners. We separate them.

The Deputy Minister, hon Jean Benjamin in Mr Zola Skweyiya’s department, in
particular, is giving us much support to ensure secure places of detention
to which child offenders can be relocated until they are released from
incarceration.

I would, however, like to emphasise the importance of a family, hon Velaphi
Ndlovu. The parents of these children should take the responsibility for
teaching them good behaviour and discipline, and not us. We come last.
Sometimes families are called and notified about their children who have
been arrested and are about to be sentenced, and they are requested to come
and bail them out. The parents say: “Ngconde, keep him inside there. We do
not want him.” In those instances I would wish to whip those people because
they are putting added responsibility on me, which I do not need. I only
deal with sentenced offenders.

Notwithstanding that, we work together very well as this cluster in trying
to ensure that families take responsibility and look after their children,
and we are committed to employing enough probation officers to monitor them
until they have served their juvenile probation period under supervision.

I would like to appeal to parents of juveniles to assist us in the attempts
to correct their behaviour. They should not say to me: “Keep him inside,
Ngconde, we are scared of him.” They are your children. Why do you want to
give them over to me now? Look after them as their parents. Teach them the
right things and we will assist you. Thank you.]

   Infighting and other factors pertaining to the security of the country

136.  Dr S E M Pheko (PAC) asked the Minister for Intelligence:



      (1)   To what extent the security of our country has been compromised
           following the infighting in the ruling party and the power
           struggle between the SA Police Service and the Scorpions;




      (2)   whether the telephones of citizens are bugged in South Africa;
           if so, under what circumstances; if not,




      (3)   whether citizens may sue his Ministry if they  find  that  their
           phones have been bugged; if not, why not; if so,  what  are  the
           relevant details?                                  N2308E

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Chairperson, as stated in the earlier
question, this country’s democracy is stable and there is nothing that
threatens or undermines the security of our state. Whatever differences may
or may not exist between individuals of the ANC points only to one thing:
that the ANC is a vibrant political party whose members have the freedom to
debate and engage openly with each other on different issues, and to
disagree, at times, which is quite natural and, in fact, healthy.

Regarding the question asked by the hon member whether or not the so-called
power struggle between the Scorpions and SA Police Service threatens
national security, I am not aware of the existence of any power struggle
between the SA Police Service and the Scorpions. The issue of the location
of the Directorate of Special Operations is the subject of the commission
chaired by a judge. The fact that different parties to the commission hold
different views on where the capacity of the Directorate of Special
Operations should be located certainly does not amount to the existence of
a power struggle. The gentleman on that bench should go back to a political
school and understand what power struggles are.

The response to the second part of the question regarding the interception
of communications, including telephone conversations in this democracy is
that – hon Gibson, you were asking me earlier on – this is governed by the
Regulation of Interception of Communications Act of 2002. Before any
security agency is able to intercept any telephone call or communication of
any kind, a learned judge, designated in terms of the legislation for that
purpose, must issue an order authorising this action. The Office of
Interception Centre, provided for in terms of the Act, is responsible for
implementing all such orders on request. In order for a judge to grant the
application, the agency requesting it needs to provide an affidavit which
gives the basis on which the application is sought. That is the regulation.

Are you listening in on your telephones? Please pay attention. With regard
to the third part of the question, the hon member has asked whether or not
members of the public can sue the Ministry if they discover that their
telephones are being bugged, as he puts it. I think it is important to
point out that citizens will have recourse only if any action by the
government intelligence services, or security organs, is unlawful.
Obviously, if the necessary authorisation has been obtained, citizens would
not be in a position to pursue any action against the Minister or service
concerned. But I have said publicly that I will attend to any public
complaints that are formally received.

I would like to emphasise that such complaints should not clog the phone
the line, but individuals should properly identify themselves and those
complaints should be formally submitted in writing. And any such complaint
received will be dealt with and, where necessary, action will be taken to
ensure that civilian agencies conduct themselves within the framework of
the Constitution and the law. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Minister, the security of our country is a concern for
all patriots, regardless of their politics. Security is a national issue.
I’m glad to hear the Minister’s assurance that the present open rumblings
in the media are not affecting our national security. However, what steps
has the Minister taken to ensure that this open warfare within these
sensitive state apparatus does not recur? And what would the Minister say
if he were to be told that some citizens in this country say their
telephones have been bugged?

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Chairperson, hon member, you talk about open
warfare within the state apparatus whilst your question relates to what you
call a power struggle between the police and the Scorpions. So, based on
the logic of the question, I would think that you are referring to that.
There is no open warfare, as I have pointed out. There are differences
about the location of the Directorate of Special Operations, DSO. Clearly,
there are those tensions.

If, on the other hand, you are referring to the suspensions within the
National Intelligence Agency, there is no open warfare there. The Minister
has taken certain steps against irregularities, which have been revealed
through the inspector-general’s inquiry. But there is certainly no open
warfare.

With regard to the question of what would I say to claims from the public
about the bugging of telephones, I have answered that in my response to
your question, hon member. But, let me repeat: We are a democracy, and we
intend to put the past behind us – the terrible apartheid legacy where,
certainly, Dr Pheko, I’m sure you were bugged and put under surveillance,
amongst other things. Those were all irregularities.

There are many members in this House, on all sides, who were put under
surveillance, who were bugged, who were imprisoned illegally and who were
tortured. This terrible past we put behind us through the rule of law,
through the Constitution, through ensuring that our security services
operate in a professional way.

Where there are infringements, the public must know. All the Ministers from
the security sector have made that clear. Bring it to the attention of
these Ministers and provide us with whatever details you can. That is why I
emphasise that you should do these in a regular formal manner, and we will
do everything to check on that complaint. Indeed, that has happened on
quite a number of occasions and we pledge ourselves to that. Our service is
to our people. Our service is to our national interest. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Dr S C CWELE: Chairperson, hon members, the civil liberties of all South
Africans are protected by the Constitution. There is no willy-nilly bugging
of every citizen in South Africa. There are laws, which we have passed to
ensure that the services do not infringe on those rights. Even if we limit
those rights, we have ensured, as a country, that the security agencies
have to submit an application to a judge. It’s only a judge who can limit
those liberties. Can the Minister indicate whether there has been any gross
abuse of these provisions by the services in general?

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Well, I didn’t hear the name “Frolick”.
Maybe that’s a name from the past, hon Siyabonga Cwele. He certainly must
have had his nom de guerre and his underground name.
I think that the hon member has made it very clear how our civil liberties
are safeguarded by our Constitution, by our laws, our Bill of Rights and by
this government. And we have a darn good record in relation to this, hon
members. Never before have our people been safeguarded in this way in the
entire history of South Africa since the advent of our democracy.

Regarding abuses, in these past 10 and going on towards 11 years, I’d like
to point out that there have been blessedly few. Where this has emerged
recently with a certain member of the public who laid a complaint to me, it
has been acted on. One doesn’t have the time to parade the record of
present Ministers of Safety and Security and Correctional Services or those
from the post-1994 period, including an hon member of the IFP sitting
opposite me there. There have been those principles and that particular
moral ethic.

To the hon Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence, one
can declare that we cannot refer to many abuses. The hon member might have
some which he could bring to the House’s attention but every year the
inspector-general provides a report. And that report has been extremely
positive in relation to the services, be they in the civilian services or
in defence, intelligence or crime intelligence.

Adv P S SWART: Chairperson, Minister, of course, in terms of interception,
we are talking about the illegal interceptions. It’s difficult, but we must
understand the furore outside because of the media. The public seems to
think at this stage that if it is so easy for a prominent person to come
under surveillance, or interception, whatever the case may be, it is even
easier for anybody else, hon Minister, and I think we must put this to bed
you have sufficient intimate knowledge of your department that you can
today give this House and the public at large the assurance that there are
no other illegal operations in respect of anybody in this country, be it
leaders of opposition parties, members of parties or other prominent South
Africans?

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Hon Chairperson, I think it would be a good
idea to define “intimate”. There are various ways of looking at “intimate”.
[Laughter.] And I wouldn’t like to get into the romantic aspects of the
said department. In terms of what we could maybe call “Little Swart” and
“Big Swart”, who were two Special Branch detectives in Durban in the old
days, I would say to the hon member that you have said “it’s so easy for a
prominent person to have been put under surveillance”, but it hasn’t been
easy. If we look at the way this democracy was able to intercede, it
clearly was not easy at all. It’s very difficult. It was very easy in the
bad old days.

The hon member raised a question: Can I assure hon members here and the
public that no such illegal operations may be repeated in future? I don’t
think that is a very fair question at all. And he is pointing right now. I
have acted, and we have inquiries under way. These are being carried out in
an energetic and robust manner. It’s not possible to give guarantees except
to say to this House, to all members on all sides and to the public, that
this government is acting decisively and with full intention at all levels.
That is the best guarantee that we can give, and we will not let up. The
intention is to ensure that we build, as we must, a young democracy through
11 very short years, a Public Service and security services that have a
high standard of professionalism.

We are dealing with human beings, we are dealing with members of such
services. And nobody anywhere in the world, even the oldest democracies, as
we have seen in recent years, can assure 100% of professionalism.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, Mr Minister, I want to assure you that when we
talk about the total commitment of the government and ourselves regarding
the security of the country, we are paramountly behind you. What I want to
ask might be impossible for you to answer, but I would like to have your
opinion on the matter. This division within political parties can cause
division within the security forces, no matter to which organisations they
belong, but if there are any divisions, those divisions are really going to
compromise the security of the country. Do you think that there is any way
of detecting that there are any divisions? If there are, is there any
policy to deal with those divisions in order to ensure, as you have just
said, that the country is safe? [Time expired.]

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Thank you very much, hon Ndlovu. I am very
gratified, and one would believe that the entire House is behind the
security of this country. That is actually a very important point, because
we do have to realise that when we are tested in this way, it is important
that we all are together as one. It’s not a question of political party
differences at all.

You have asked for my opinion and you made reference to divisions within
political parties. Quite frankly, looking around he House from my left
along the benches and along towards where the hon Gibson sits, there does
seem to be differences in every single party. We read about them all the
time - even in a party which has one person representing the party here in
Parliament. [Laughter.] So, there is nothing unusual about the idea that
there are differences in political parties, and it’s healthy. Good luck to
all of you! Debate your differences in a civil way, the way we are doing in
the ANC.

Regarding the reference that the member has made concerning the question of
what happens when this affects the security services, the Public Service,
whether it is in the Department of Health, whether it is the military,
whether it is intelligence and so on - obviously when it is within the
security intelligence community it is more serious than if you have some
differences in Housing or Health – within the Public Service and security
services in general, government does have to strive to create a new ethos,
a new culture and a new attitude where we have professionals from the
Department of Water Affairs to the Departments of Health, Defence,
Intelligence and where our public and security intelligence officers and
officials understand that they serve the Constitution, rule of law and the
government of the day. How do we achieve that? They are still striving to
do so in the so-called mature democracies. And we will follow that path as
well. [Time expired.]

       House arrest and occasional reporting as an option to alleviate
                            overcrowding prisons

122.  Ms S Rajbally (MF) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      Whether house detention and occasional reporting are being considered
      as alternatives in order to alleviate the overcrowding in prisons; if
      not, why not; if so, what calibre of criminal offenders will be
      considered for such detention?

                  N2287E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much, Ronnie;
intelligence and corrections go together. Chairperson, I thought he would
answer for me.

In terms of section 52 of the Correctional Services Act, Act 111 of 1998, a
court, correctional supervision and parole board, and the commissioner or
other body which has the statutory authority to do so, may subject a person
who is serving a sentence of correctional supervision or who has been
placed on parole on condition of house detention and occasional reporting.
In other words, house detention and reporting to a community corrections
officer is not a sentence in terms of the Criminal Procedure Act of 1977
and is therefore not an option that can be used to combat overcrowding, hon
Rajbally.

As stipulated in section 276(1)(h) of the Criminal Procedure Act of 1977,
courts have an option of using alternative sentences that will direct
offenders to serve their sentences under correctional supervision and not
incarceration. Thank you.

Nk S RAJBALLY: Sihlalo, Ngqongqoshe, imithwalo yakho inzima. Kodwa thwala
ndoda, uzogcina ngokufinyelela endaweni yakho. [Chairperson, hon Minister,
your task is very difficult. However, do persevere and you will succeed.]

Hon Minister, since you say that house detention will not alleviate
overcrowding, could you enlighten us whether the offender would be allowed
to work and earn a living if house detention is considered? Would you agree
that offenders who go back to their families would be further
rehabilitated? Thank you.

UMPHATHISWA WEENKONZO ZOLULEKO: Mama uRajbally, ndibulela kakhulu. Intlalo
yam inzima mpela kodwa ngemithandazo yakho, iza kuba ngcono. Ndicela ukuba
undithathe ndibe ngomnye woonyana bakho ukwenzela ukuba umana
undithandazela qho. [Kwahlekwa.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa
paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Ms Rajbally, thank you very much.
My life is very difficult, but through your prayers it is going to be
better. I plead with you to take me as one of your sons so that you will
keep on praying for me frequently.] [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Indeed, in terms of house detention and not the old apartheid way of doing
it, when parolees and probationers are allowed out of the correctional
centres, community corrections would check on them at certain times. But
one of the important things we want them to do is to get gainful
employment. That is very important. Once they get gainful employment and
are able to work, community corrections would then check the times at which
they report for work and when they are at home.

I know that sometimes correctional officials go overboard. Because of the
transport system in our country, some of our parolees and probationers do
not get home in time for the correctional officials to see them and they
then get taken back to prison. That is one practice I do not like.
One of the things that I want to do is to overhaul the whole system of
community corrections in order to be in tune with the focus and strategy of
the department, and to ensure that if a person breaks a rule in terms of
that house detention parole, one is not immediately dragged into prison
without being given a second chance.

We say that the family is the best seat of rehabilitation. That is why I
appeal to families time and again – I did that even yesterday – that when
they visit a relative who is an offender they should try to work on that
offender to change their ways. Hence we transfer them closer to their
families so that families could deal with them in the same way in which we
deal with them within prison. They must not deal with them in terms of
bringing in illegal substances and firearms, but assist them so that they
can become upright citizens of our country. Thank you very much.

Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, it is clear that community corrections is an
extremely important mechanism to relieve overcrowding of prisons. If
prisons are less crowded, there is a better chance of rehabilitating
offenders.

Another way of improving rehabilitation is constructive work for inmates
while they are actually incarcerated. I would like to know what steps the
Minister is taking to ensure that all sentenced prisoners have the
opportunity to work while they are in prison, thereby improving their
chances of rehabilitation and reintegration? I ask this question to elicit
information and not to grandstand. With the greatest respect, the hon
Minister is the very last person to talk about grandstanding.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Hon Selfe, thank you very much.

An HON MEMBER: He is selfish.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Don’t listen to him.

Community corrections are critical. A week ago I appointed a new chief
deputy commissioner for corrections because I want community corrections to
be overhauled. If the justice system, the magistracy of this country,
believes that what we seek to do in community corrections is the correct
thing, they will then be able to assist us in the diversion and alternative
sentencing we are talking about. I fully agree with you that the best arm
of Correctional Services should be community corrections. I fully agree
with that.

Secondly, in prisons we have piggeries and agriculture. Correctional
Services is a minigovernment on its own because we do all the things that
Agriculture, Health, Education, Sport and Recreation and Foreign Affairs
do. We do absolutely everything. It is important that there should be
constructive work and that they do work.

I am sure that you saw me in Caledon the other day driving a tractor. I
spend weekends either building with the prisoners or driving tractors with
them because I would like to see them doing something. In George, for
instance, a section of the prison has been built by the prisoners
themselves.

Last Sunday, in Kalksteenfontein, we opened a church that had been built by
community corrections parolees who came from Pollsmoor. That is a brand new
church that they have been building for two years. We are doing everything
to empower them with skills and education so that they don’t just sit
there.

There is no prison that has no rehabilitation processes. Only those who are
a threat to society and would want to run away are locked away and then we
look after them. Those whom we feel are ready to go out are given all the
assistance in the world in order to be able to go out. I am asking
communities to accept them when they come back and to try and assist them
as well.


                    Government support iro nuclear power


134.  Mr D J Sithole (ANC) asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs:



      (1)   Whether the Government supports the utilisation of nuclear power
          for peaceful purpose; if not, why not; if so, what are the
          relevant details;




      (2)   whether the Government supported both Iran and North Korea to
          continue their research in this regard and to use such
          development to advance their economic and developmental needs;



      (3)   whether the Government supports the selling of such technology
          to countries that have the capability but are refused by other
          powerful countries to increase their research and development; if
          not, why not; if so, what will happen to South Africa’s
          capabilities in this regard?

                  N2300E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Chairperson, South Africa supports
the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes as provided for in Article
5 of the Treaty on Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Article 5 of the treaty states that:

   Nothing in this treaty shall be interpreted as a factor in the
   inalienable right of all parties to the treaty to develop, research, the
   production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
   discrimination, and in conformity with articles 1 and 2 of this treaty.

South Africa supports the right of all countries to develop, research,
produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, only and in
conformity with the Treaty on Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons, NPT,
particularly to further advance socioeconomic development. At the same
time, South Africa consistently emphasises the importance of full adherence
to all nuclear disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation obligations by the
states party to the NPT.

Article 3 of the NPT requires all non-nuclear weapons states party to the
treaty to accept comprehensive International Atomic Energy Agency, IAEA,
safeguards in order to enable the agency to verify the nondiversion of
nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons or any other nuclear
explosive devices. South Africa has therefore called on the states not
party to the NPT to join the treaty and place all facilities and materials
under the comprehensive IAEA safeguards.

Likewise, South Africa continually emphasises the importance of all states
co-operating closely with the IAEA to enable the agency to fulfil its
statutory mandate and to provide the necessary assurances that that
material is not diverted to nonpeaceful activities.

As a responsible country that possesses advanced technologies, South Africa
supports the sale of such technologies only to countries in full compliance
with the obligations of the NPT, and in accordance with the provisions of
the Nonproliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Act and the Nuclear
Energy Act. South Africa will continue to act on the basis of principle and
in full compliance with its international obligations.

Mr D J SITHOLE: Deputy Minister, based on what you have said and from the
support that South Africa gives to states that have nuclear capability but
use it for peaceful means, how then does South Africa understand the
negotiations between North Korea, the European Community and Russia in that
respect, given the fact that the EU insists that North Korea cannot possess
the capability and use that capability for peaceful purpose, but they will
be able to sell that capability at a market-related price to the North
Koreans?

How then do you reconcile the very same element with the question of
disarmament that we have been putting in the NPT – that all other countries
that possess nuclear weapons should disarm? How do you reconcile the
peaceful use and the fact that there is a potential that the states that
possess that capability could develop that capability to armaments?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: There is a committee of six
countries that is dealing with the non-nuclearisation of the Korean
peninsula. I want to believe that on our last visit during our meetings
with the Chinese, the South Koreans and the North Koreans, and in our
consultations with the Americans and the Russians and Japanese, major
advances were made. There are still problems, but major advances were made
to deal with the non-nuclearisation of the North Korean peninsula.

I believe that there has been an advance in the way the big powers have
been negotiating on this issue. I believe it’s in the interest of the North
Koreans to begin to understand the advances that have been made during the
last meeting. In the next round of negotiations we hope that the major
players will be more creative in finding a solution to the nuclear weapons
programme of North Korea.

On the growth policies of the nonproliferation treaty, we have consistently
argued that we will fight for a world free of nuclear weapons, and we will
continue to argue that all countries that have nuclear weapons should get
rid of the nuclear weapons so that the danger of the use of nuclear weapons
is terminated for all time.

My own belief is that we would have to use South Africa’s experience in
programme for the elimination of nuclear weapons to help influence other
countries that are not yet nuclear powers to begin to move in the direction
that South Africa moved, because we are totally committed to a world
without nuclear weapons.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, most sensible countries want to see a
settlement of the 60-year old Middle East problems, and most have committed
themselves to a secure Palestine and a secure Israel.

Palestine’s best chance of success lies in a negotiated settlement. Iran
stands out as having called for Israel to be wiped off the map. This
attracted adverse comments about Iran from many parts of the world, with
great suspicion and indeed trepidation about Iran’s nuclear ambitions.

I’d like to ask the hon Deputy Minister whether the South African
government has made it clear to the Iranian government that friendship with
South Africa carries a price tag? The price must surely be good government,
sane and sensible policies and a commitment to working for peace and for
democracy?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Once again, the opposition is
exploiting this opportunity with something that has nothing to do with the
question. We were talking about nuclear programmes and the NPT.

However, let me help educate him, because I think he needs some education.
[Interjections.] The reality of the matter is that you cannot just say that
what will help the Palestinians is a negotiated solution, without even
interpreting who is preventing a negotiated solution in Palestine, between
the Palestinians and the Israelis. So, there is a different question.

I am going to Iran tomorrow, and we will discuss with the Iranians the
statement that their president has made to express our concerns that such
statements do not help the Palestinian cause, and does not help create an
environment where we can bring peace and stability to the whole region. So,
on my trip tomorrow, one of the objectives will be to raise the statement
and seek clarification on what their overall policies are. [Interjections.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Chairperson and hon Deputy Minister, I am also one
of those who need to be educated. I would like to ask you to tell us what
the government’s official policy on Iran’s nuclear energy programme is,
because publicly the government supports it. And, if I may continue to ask,
how easy is it for any government to detect the difference between a
nuclear energy programme that is intended for peaceful purposes and one
that is intended for aggression?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: As the hon member knows, the IAEA
has tremendous safeguards in dealing with this issue, and we are totally
committed to never accept dictates from bigger powers about the use of
nuclear power for peaceful purposes.

Our position on the Iranian issue has been quite clear. We have been
arguing quite systematically – including the need for Israel to get rid of
its nuclear weapons so that the other countries cannot follow suit, using
the Israeli nuclear weapons as a pretext. We have been involved with the
European Union, the Iranians and the United States to try to see whether we
can be more reasonable in the discussions that are going on, so that we
prevent Iran moving to a production of nuclear weapons, and find a
solution.

It is our belief that progress has been made in the Iranian response to the
IAEA situation. We oppose the restarting of the Iranian programme in
Ishran, and we have said that this is not the way to find a solution.
However, we respect the Iranian right to use nuclear power for peaceful
purposes. That we will never change our mind on, because otherwise we will
all become hostages of agendas that are not in the interest of the
countries of the South. [Applause.]

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS
 AND TOURISM - OVERSIGHT VISIT TO WALTER SISULU BOTANICAL GARDEN; OVERSIGHT
   VISIT TO UMTATA AND PORT ST JOHNS; ANNUAL REPORT OF PC ON ENVIRONMENTAL
   AFFAIRS AND TOURISM; JOHANNESBURG +2 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT CONFERENCE




The reports included both the work of the department itself, the SA
National Biodiversity Institute, the Greater St Lucia Wetlands Authority,
SA National Parks, SA Tourism and the SA Weather Services. The department
and the statutory bodies have met all the commitments that they set
themselves in this financial year. These include the drafting of a uniform
national and provincial budget structure; the establishment of the National
Environmental Advisory Forum; the finalisation of an environmental
management co-operation agreement; the compilation of guidelines for an
environmental impact assessment register and a database.

The department has completed the Thor Chemicals environmental impact
assessment, the climate change response strategy, together with the
development of draft asbestos regulations. A plan for the rehabilitation of
fishing harbours has been finalised as well as the drafting of a new policy
framework for great white shark cage-diving and boat-based whale-watching.
There are also amendments to the 4X4 regulations and promulgation of two
new marine protected areas.

This year saw major development with regard to the SA National Parks. The
Giriyondo Border Post has been completed; a 28-berth rest camp was opened
in March in Sendelingsdrift; the planned tourism infrastructure in
Mapungubwe has been completed; all the Kruger National Park accommodation,
as well as campsites in Addo and Storms River Mouth have been pregraded; an
innovative public-private partnership between SA National Parks, the
Department of Education and Pick ’n Pay has been established to encourage
kids to visit parks; the SA Weather Service has overseen the deployment of
the Umtata weather radar and the establishment of five automatic weather
stations in the Eastern Cape; a weather data-capturing programme has been
installed and there is general improvement in the longer-term weather
forecasting ability, and an aviation display system is also in place.

SA Tourism continues to improve. We continue to record a high number of
foreign tourism arrivals. There is growth in foreign tourism arrivals
across the entire regional portfolio, except Europe, and we continue to do
better than our competitors such as Australia. The Sho’t Left campaign has
been an improvement as many South Africans tour their own country,
including black South Africans.

To encourage tourism entrepreneurship amongst the historically
disadvantaged, SA Tourism and Absa are promoting the Emerging Tourism
Entrepreneur of the Year Award over the next three years. In the same vein,
a comprehensive guide to graded products and an aggressive business tourism
strategy and action plan have been developed. We have successfully gained
the market share in France, even though we have lost our share of visitors
from the Netherlands and Germany.

The SA National Biodiversity Institute’s landmarks include the transfer of
key management posts, together with the opening of a new biodiversity
centre in Pretoria. Visitor facilities at Lowveld, Walter Sisulu and
Pretoria National Botanical Gardens have been opened. A public awareness
programme, Greening the Nation, has been established, as well as one-stop
biodiversity information systems. To deepen environmental practice and
awareness, a garden-based environmental education programme, together with
a municipal capacity programme have been undertaken in the Eastern Cape.
The SA National Biodiversity Institute’s, Sanbi, has overseen the
rehabilitation of 65 wetlands and created 1 789 jobs.

In the Greater St Lucia Wetland Park R17,9 million have been spent on park
development and the implementation of an alien clearing plan. Three hundred
and thirty-three jobs in tourism and related industries as well as seven
agricultural gardens for sustainable livelihoods have been secured. To
enhance the work of the park, a communication strategy with a focus on
branding has been developed. Seven hundred units of warthog, oribi,
giraffe, white and black rhino, buffalo and wild dogs have been
translocated to the park.

Having considered the 2004 and 2005 annual reports and financial statements
of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism and its public
entities, the portfolio committee recommends that during the 2006
parliamentary period the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
should come and brief members on the findings of the draft asbestos study
report and approved regulation by the Cabinet, 2006 and 2007’s strategic
plans and budget allocation, mechanisms to be put in place to ensure that
broad-based BEE is implemented in all the tendering transactions of the
department, and consolidation of work with regard to genetically modified
organisms and mariculture.

Furthermore, the SA National Parks should come and brief members on the
elephant management strategy, implementation of the transfrontier
conservation programme and mechanisms that are put in place to ensure that
the management of the park is in accordance with the Protected Areas Act.
The Greater St Lucia Park should come and brief members on actions to be
taken to ensure the promotion of broad-based black economic empowerment in
the new tourism industry in the park, the status of all the existing
poverty alleviation projects and their impact on poverty alleviation and
sustainable job creation.

As the ANC, we support the annual reports and the financial statements of
the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism and its associated
statutory institutions. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G R MORGAN: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and hon members. The Wild Coast
is a unique place. It is part of a new biodiversity hotspot that has been
internationally recognised by Conservation International as a site of world
significance. However, it is also one of the poorest regions in South
Africa. It faces massive development challenges, including the delivery of
basic services infrastructure development and job creation. It was
important therefore that the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs
and Tourism conduct an oversight visit to the region. It’s on that report
that I will concentrate this afternoon. The chairperson has already
outlined many of the recommendations stemming from the annual reports.

We need to look at the Wild Coast with three initiatives in mind: the
proposed mining, the proposed toll road and the proposed national park. The
DA welcomed the announcement by the Minister recently that a Pondoland
national park would be declared. The exact details of the form this park
will take are not clear, but what has emerged is that the area it will
include is simply not substantial enough. We must remember that one of the
criteria for this region, having been declared a hotspot, is that it has
already lost at least 70% of its habitat. So one would think any initiative
for a protected area would try to include as many sensitive areas as
possible.

This park should logically stretch from the uMtavuma River to the uMtentu
River. Of course, this does not have to be a fenced park in its entirety.
It should have core wilderness areas with full protection and a number of
mixed-use zones, and it is critical that people are not excluded from the
land.

But the Minister’s declaration is disappointing. It includes the currently
proclaimed Mkhambati Park and what is known as the Trecor lands, and it
excludes the 22 km stretch of dunes that are set aside for proposed mining.
Minister Van Schalkwyk is, I believe, involved in a considerable spin
operation. On the one hand he says an area will be protected and on the
other hand he implies an area will be degraded.

On my own visits to Pondoland I have frequently heard local officials and
councillors saying that conservationists want to keep the local people in
poverty. They say that development and job creation is the only thing that
is important, even if it means condoned degradation of the environment. But
of course, conservation and development are not mutually exclusive – they
can and must go hand in hand.

I am glad that the committee took the time to meet with the executive mayor
of the O R Tambo district municipality, Ms Zoleka Capa. She made the claim
that she and her local colleagues are always being kept in the dark about
development projects. This may be true to some extent and there is
definitely a need for better co-operative governance in the Eastern Cape.
However, can we take the views of the O R Tambo district municipality
seriously when it includes five ANC-run municipalities that have been
identified by Project Consolidate as councils that cannot even meet the
most basic service delivery targets? There would be less incentive to see
the natural environment as a resource that needed to be plundered in order
to survive if people received the basic services they are entitled to.

Executive Mayor Capa seemed quite content to contradict herself during the
committee visit. On the one hand she said that municipalities had been left
behind with regard to the planning of the proposed toll road, while on the
other hand she said that there had been sufficient public consultation on
the toll road. But even our own Minister would not agree with the latter
view. At a public meeting at Qaukeni in July 2004, the Minister
acknowledged that there had not been enough consultation with local
communities. So who are we to believe?

Is there something else to this story that has not yet emerged? Why was
Capa so quick to defend the so-called consultation process when it was
widely regarded as flawed? Is it because her municipality stands to benefit
from subcontracts during the construction process? It has come to my
attention that the O R Tambo district municipality recently bought R5
million’s worth of earth-moving equipment without issuing a proper tender
process. What is this equipment going to be used for? Are they going to
hire it out to subcontractors?

The portfolio committee received briefings on a number of successful
ecotourism small businesses, including Amadiba Adventures and Mzamba Tours.
There is scope for many more small businesses in the area, but government
must provide the necessary regulatory environment and must guarantee the
integrity of the natural environment that they rely on. And there must be
safety for tourists. Just a few weeks ago a tour bus of foreign backpackers
was attacked outside Port St Johns. Unfortunately, this has become a
regular occurrence, and it will hurt the small rural businesses that rely
on the tourist trade unless acts such as this come to an end.

In closing, I want to make a few comments on the environmental impact
assessment, EIA, process regarding projects like the toll road and mining.
Firstly, the toll road EIA must genuinely look at alternatives to the toll
road. It is indeed important that roads are built in the Wild Coast area,
but there is considerable scope for the upgrading of existing roads.
Secondly, it is time that government gave thorough consideration to
reforming the EIA process. The EIA process for both mining and the road
have been introduced at such a late stage of project development, after
millions of rands have already been invested, that there is immense
pressure on government to approve the projects. It is time that the EIA
itself is written for the relevant environment department and not for the
developer.

I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Hon Chairperson, during the month of August this year
the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism conducted two
oversight visits. From 10 to 12 August 2005 we visited Port St Johns, while
on 16 August we visited the Walter Sisulu National Botanical Garden in
Roodepoort, Johannesburg.

The main objective of the oversight visit to Umtata and Port St Johns was
to monitor and assess the economic impact of a one-kilometre coastal zone
that restricts development and viability of local government; to see the
location of poverty alleviation projects and to interact with stakeholders
in order to solicit input on barriers that inhibit the successful
implementation of poverty alleviation and job creation.

A number of challenges and opportunities were identified that related to
ecotourism development. It was, however, very unfortunate that the
committee could not visit poverty alleviation projects in Port St Johns as
planned.

The main purpose of the study tour to the Walter Sisulu National Botanical
Garden was to examine management of the garden and nature conservation, and
to receive input on progress made in respect of global warming and the
Greening of the Nation project. Amongst other things, we held a meeting
with the chief executive officer of the SA National Biodiversity Institute
and received a briefing.

Unfortunately again, owing to time constraints, we did not get an
opportunity to visit Pretoria National Botanical Garden, and we also did
not get a briefing on climate change and the Greening of the Nation
project.

In September 2004 members of the committee participated in the Johannesburg
+2 Sustainable Development Conference, which was held in Gauteng. The
objective of the conference was to assess the progress made by countries
and governments in achieving the outcomes of the Johannesburg plan of
action.

A wide variety of issues was discussed at the round table discussions. Many
recommendations emerged from these discussions. The report also contains
conclusions and recommendations of this delegation. [Time expired.]

Nkskz R A NDZANGA: Sihlalo, i-Witwatersrand National Botanical Garden
ekufutshane  neRoodepoort, ngaphandle kweJohannesburg, yatshintshwa igama
yabizwa ngokuba yiWalter Sisulu National Botanical Garden, oko kusenziwa
ngokwemimiselo yomthetho owaziwa njengeNational Biodiversity Act.

UXhamela, utata uSisulu, wayeyinkokeli yoqobo. Utat’ uSisulu wayeyinkokeli
eziphethe kakuhle. Waqala ngokuba lilungu loMbutho woLutsha we-ANC, wakhula
kwezopolitiko waza waba yinkokeli yombutho. Kwathi ngonyaka ka-1956 ngowesi-
5 kuDisemba, utata uSisulu nabanye, kubandakanywa utata uMlangeni noMama
uBertha Gxowa, babanjelwa ukuvukela umbuso.

Utat’ uSisulu wazibonakalisa ubunkokeli ngexesha urhulumente wengcinezelo
wayebamba abantu ababesemasimini ukuba baye kusebenza kumasimi eetapile
nombona. Utat’ uSisulu nabanye baye bayibona into yokuba ootata
babenyamalala ixesha elide, kungaziwa ukuba baphi na. Xa bebuya, babebuya
belambile, befile yindlala, begula nokugula. Eso senzo sokuthinjwa kwabantu
saye sayekwa ngenxa yeenkokeli ze-ANC. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms R A NDZANGA: Chairperson, the Witwatersrand National Botanical Garden
near Roodeport, outside Johannesburg, has undergone a name change and is
now called the Walter Sisulu National Botanical Garden; that was done in
terms of the guidelines of the Biodiversity Act.

Father Sisulu, Xhamela, was a real leader. Father Sisulu was a leader with
good conduct. He first became a member of the ANC Youth League. He grew up
in politics and became a leader of this organisation. On 5 December 1956,
Father Sisulu, together with Father Mlangeni and Mother Bertha Gxowa, was
arrested for treason.

Father Sisulu displayed his leadership qualities during the period when the
apartheid government arrested people, sending them to do hard labour on
potato and maize farms. Father Sisulu and others realised that our fathers
disappeared for a long time, without knowing their whereabouts. When they
returned, they came back dying of hunger and suffering from diseases. The
act of holding people hostage was stopped because of ANC leaders.]

The harassment did not end there. Tata was arrested again and charged
together with other ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member! Hon member! May I request
you to return to the consideration of the reports.

Mrs R A NDZANGA: I beg your pardon?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Please concentrate on the reports and
leave extraneous matters. Thank you.

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Well, I don’t know if it is wrong to tell the history of
Ntate Sisulu, because it is true.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I’m not disputing the
truthfulness of what you are saying; I’m just asking you to please keep to
the subject under discussion. Thank you. [Interjections.]

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Madam Chairperson, the renaming of the national botanical
garden as Walter Sisulu National Botanical Garden is an honour, because the
doors that were previously closed to black children are now open. Tat’
uSisulu, we salute you! We are aware of your presence in this House today.
You suffered so that everyone could have a better life. [Applause.]

The visit to the Walter Sisulu National Botanical Garden by the Portfolio
Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism was aimed at receiving input
on the progress made in respect of global warming, the greening project,
climate change and expansion.

The strategy of the botanical garden and the recruitment strategy for
disadvantaged scientists is to advance the ANC policy of transformation. It
was interesting to note that among the priorities of the Walter Sisulu
National Botanical Garden was to transfer skills to the people, especially
the youth, on plants and flowers of our country. The garden is also a
tourist attraction.

We hope that in future there are going to be signs showing the direction to
the garden. There were no signs to direct us when we visited the garden on
16 August 2005. We were guided by the spirit of Tat’ uSisulu.

In conclusion, the SA National Biodiversity Institute should be called upon
to brief the community on the Greening of the Nation project, on the
recruitment and retention of young, previously disadvantaged scientists and
on its draft financial strategy to expand the Walter Sisulu National
Botanical Garden.

The portfolio committee should undertake a study tour of the Pretoria
National Botanical Garden to monitor the management of the garden, as well
as monitor how indigenous plants and species are conserved.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Thank you, Chairperson. Comrades, remember that no matter
the age and no matter the size, a lion will always remain a lion, and it
will roar. Roar, young lions, roar!

HON MEMBERS: Roar!

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Pula! [Rain!]

HON MEMBERS: Ha e ne! [Let it rain!] [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Chair, allow me to roar, according to the ACDP. The
report states that time constraints did not allow for the briefing on
climate change by the SA National Biodiversity Institute. In a report
released earlier this year, that institute warned that rising temperatures
will change the face of South Africa. The greenhouse effect will exact a
severe impact on resources such as water, and poor communities will be
particularly affected.

Emerging farmers have been singled out as the most vulnerable group, and
food production has been earmarked as a high-risk category. The question
arises as to whether enough has been done to address the impact of climate
change. Hunger, poverty and lack of access to water are already critical
areas that require intervention. Climate change will increase these
challenges. The ACDP trusts that climate change will be a priority focus
for the portfolio committee.

The ACDP supports the report. I thank you.

Mme N P KHUNOU: Modulasetulo, maloko a Palamente, dumelang ka leina la
Ntate wa rona. Ke batla go le netefaletsa gore mmuso ona, o ikemiseditse go
tlhokomela batho le botshelo ba botlhe. Ditshepiso tsotlhe tseo mmuso wa
ANC o di dirileng, o leka go di diragatsa. Bagaka ba rona bao ba robetseng,
ba a itumela ko ba leng teng. Aforika Borwa e tla fetoga fa re ka
tshwaragana ka matsogo gonne mabogo dinku a thebana. (Translation of
Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, hon members, I greet you in the name of our Lord. I want to
assure you that our government intends to care for our people and
everyone’s lives. Regarding all the promises that the government has made,
it is trying its best to fulfil them. Our heroes who passed away are very
pleased where they are. South Africa will change if we can join hands, as
we know people have to help one another.]

Often when there are conferences or discussions, the DA always criticises
that we attend and we don’t implement. I want to reassure the House and our
people out there that the ANC leads by example. It is committed to better
the lives of our people. As part of our achievement, I would like to report
on the visit of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
Tourism concerning its attendance of the Johannesburg +2 Sustainable
Development Conference, which was held in Midrand from the 1st – 3rd
September 2004. It was a multiparty delegation and it really helped as part
of oversight and monitoring.

Before I report on the visit, I would really like to congratulate this
department for always keeping the members of the committee informed about
their business and issues, and hope other departments can learn from this.

This conference was a follow-up to the commitment on the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, WSSD. Its objective was to assess progress of
meeting its goals and targets set in 2002, and discuss the way forward in
order to ensure the ongoing legacy of Johannesburg development projects. As
part of its global partnership and commitment, we were there to check if we
were on track and, indeed, we are on track.

I have set aside four goals out of the goals that we dealt with. The first
of those is to reduce the percentage of people without access to basic
water and sanitation. As we all know, the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry, DWAF, is the custodian of the nation’s water resource, and its
role is to promote equity and efficiency. It is committed to put the poor
first. The second point is the provision of infrastructure for water by
2008, and sanitation by 2010. I would like to tell the House that we are
going to meet this target.

The third point is about social and economic programmes in order to
eradicate poverty, and this is based on the vision of sustainable
development. The last one is the linkage between social, economic and
environmental protection.

These are some of the subjects which we discussed and if I dwell on all the
targets I won’t finish, because of the time allocation. We dealt with all
the issues comprehensively in the committees and members are welcome to
read the report on their own.

This conference was a success. It involved all stakeholders. All  three
spheres of governance attended, as well as NGOs, CBOs, church
organisations, etc. The Minister graced the occasion and emphasised that
the government was committed to meet the targets and goals of sustainable
projects set in WSSD. The main subject of the conference was the challenges
that are facing us as South Africans. We need to co-ordinate our programmes
in order to solve the problems together as a country and as the world at
large.

We need to find ways of including plans in our integrated development
plans, IDPs, in municipalities and find a workable solution with NGOs,
CBOs, churches and communities. This integrated approach started with
Agenda 21 and the spirit needs to be revived.

Another topic under discussion was the integration of biodiversity in
sustainable development. I think we need to include all parts of our
society in this. Africans, especially blacks, need to participate. There
has to be a redefining link between poverty eradication and biodiversity
integration as a whole.

There are examples of what we have achieved as a country on biodiversity.
Communities who were evicted from areas like national parks have
successfully won land claims. South Africa has moved swiftly to create six
transfrontier conservation areas which form an integral part of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development since 1994.

South Africa has registered 325 natural heritage sites representing more
than 46 000 hectares. The Working for Wetlands project has been utilised as
a catalyst for fighting poverty to date. The list is endless. The ANC
supports the report on oversight and monitoring. It is important that we
all need to take this very seriously. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mong M T LIKOTSI: Modulasetulo PAC e badile mme ya amohela raporoto ena eo
re e fumanang ho tswa mona potfolio comiting mme PAC e re ho bohlokwa
haholo hore re baballe tikoloho ya rona le ho hopola hore ho bile le maano
a tshwanang le a United Nation Millennium Summit Declaration Goals, moo ho
entsweng qeto hore ho tlamehile hore ka selemo sa 2015 ho be ho fokoditswe
bofutsana ka halofo mme PAC hape e batla e re:” ha ho buuwa ka taba tsena
tsa tikoloho re tlameha hore re hopole hore matjhabatjhaba a ile a kopana
mane Rio Brazil ka 1992, ho se neng se bitswa ka hore ke Rio Earth Summit
ho shebisana ka ditsela tsohle tse ka sebediswang ho baballa tikoloho”.
Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[Mr M T LIKOTSI: Hon Chairperson, the PAC has read and accepts the report
of this portfolio committee and says that it is imperative that we preserve
our environment and remember that there were policies similar to those of
the United Nations Millennium Summit Declaration Goals, where it was
decided that by the year 2015 poverty must be reduced by half, and the PAC
says that when environmental affairs are mentioned, we must remember that
the international community met in Rio, Brazil, in 1992, in what was called
the Rio Earth Summit, to discuss all possible ways that can be used to
preserve the environment.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your minute has expired.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: PAC e amohela ke hona repoto ena. [The PAC supports this
report.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, everyone wants a safe and healthy sustainable
environment to live in and we are proud of our department’s achievement. In
light of the first report regarding the management of the department’s
projects and sectors, we are pleased that funds have been efficiently
utilised to develop, enhance and manage the sector.

As for the second report, the MF is eager to have a relationship developed
between the department and local government. We believe that delivery shall
be enhanced and intensification of public involvement in biodiversity
projects may be enhanced in this respect. The Johannesburg +2 Sustainable
Development Conference contributed greatly to this.

Both oversight visits were beneficial because they provided an opportunity
to experience the development of biodiversity and the situation in areas
needing attention. It is pleasing that the sector is working and is
assisting in our efforts aimed at fighting against poverty and providing
sustainable socioeconomic development. The MF supports the recommendation
made by the sustainable development conference . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I regret your minute is
also over.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr A D MOKOENA: Chairperson, let me start by congratulating our brand-new
chairperson, the hon Langa Zita, who is going to lead our committee. We are
expecting a lot from him, because he is a gifted leader.

I rise here, as a deployee of the ANC serving on the Portfolio Committee on
Environmental Affairs and Tourism, to deliver a brief speech in support of
our committee report on the oversight visits to Umtata and Port St Johns
from 10 to 12 August 2005. Because our report has been tabled in Parliament
and appears on the ATC, I will only highlight specific aspects that require
attention.

I would like to situate my input by contextualising it in the mission and
vision statement, as outlined in the business plan of our committee namely,
and I quote:


  The overall goal of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
  Tourism is to ensure the existence of linkages of environmental issues to
  social transformation; effective and efficient governance of the
  environment and conservation of biodiversity; and expedite transformation
  of the tourism industry in this second decade of our democracy in order
  to maximise job creation and eradicate poverty, facilitate public
  participation and consultation with the communities based on the
  principles of environmental justice, Vukuzenzele, social contract,
  voluntarism and Batho Pele.

Concerning the executive summary, in 1999, a National Poverty Relief
Programme was launched as a vehicle to create jobs through the projects of
various government departments. The Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism did, for each part, also embark on a strategy to work with
communities and other stakeholders in order to identify poverty alleviation
projects, with the hope that in the fruition of time, they may be
sustainable and become permanent jobs.

National Treasury allocated R386 million to our department for the period
2004-05. The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism identified 163
projects with a focus on working for tourism, people and parks, sustainable
health-based livelihood, working for coast and working for waste.

Our study tour had a focus on the implementation and the reasons for
success or failure of some of these projects in Umtata and Port St Johns in
the Eastern Cape. The following 10 points were our main findings.

Firstly, the area that we were visiting falls under the jurisdiction of the
O R Tambo district municipality and has a population of 1,7 million, which
is far more than the entire population of Lesotho. It has a high rate of
unemployment. Ecotourism investors entice local communities with money and
dubious share schemes in exchange for their land. There is a lack of
capacity-building concerning the locals. Learnership programmes do not
benefit the local communities. Indigenous knowledge on biodiversity is
undermined, especially by foreign environmental lobbies and their allies.
The local Umtata Airport is grossly underdeveloped and this hinders
economic growth of the O R Tambo district municipality.
There is a desire to have Blue Flag status for Coffee Bay. Such a status is
accorded to a clean beach and would protect the Wild Coast against the 4x4
invaders. There is a lack of community participation.

The mysterious disappearance of R70 million donated by the EU has angered
communities around here. We recommended a forensic audit to clear the air
for all concerned. Lastly, some EU investors recruit local people and
traditional leaders to form consortia and trusts, and they have actually
made them sign 25-year leases on their land. This has resulted in a
mushrooming of illegal holiday resorts along the pristine parts of the Wild
Coast. The committee urged strong law-enforcement by the O R Tambo district
municipality and the support of the provincial government.

In conclusion, the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism’s
National Poverty Relief Programme is realising some desirable deliverables
in respect of job creation, through the procurement strategy. Secondly, the
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, DEAT, should, however,
ensure that the bulk of funds allocated to this programme are channelled
directly to the unemployed beneficiaries instead of consultants with hefty
overheads.

Finally, municipalities constantly complain that environmental and tourism
matters are an unfunded mandate for them, thus they do not have a budget
for them. Therefore DEAT must ensure that, through its procurement
programmes, municipalities are informed and involved to ensure corporate
governance. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the Reports
be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 17:47.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)    Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 2 November 2005
         to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
         Telkom for 2004-2005:

        TABLING OF ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS IN PARLIAMENT


        I refer to your letter dated 17 October 2005 regarding the non-
        tabling of Telkom’s Annual Report and Financial Statements for
        2004/05 financial year.


        As you may be aware, Telkom applied for an exemption from certain
        provisions of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) of 1999. The
        application was based on the fact that with the listing of Telkom,
        it would be impossible for Telkom to comply with certain provisions
        of the PFMA and the listing requirements of the Johannesburg Stock
        Exchange and New York Stock Exchange. In line with Section 92 of
        the PFMA, the Minister of Finance exempted Telkom and its
        subsidiaries and any other entities under its ownership control,
        from certain provisions of the PFMA on 23 October 2001, as
        published in the Government Gazette No. 22801 dated 09 November
        2001, Notice No. 1097. The exemptions were for a period of three
        years, and included Section 55, which makes provision for the
        submission of Annual Reports and Audited Financial Statements by
        public entities.


        At the lapse of the three-year exemption period, the exemptions
        were reviewed and on 5 November 2004, the Minister of Finance
        granted Telkom an extension for a further period of three years, as
        published in the Government Gazette No. 26981 dated 19 November
        2004, Notice No. 1334. As a result, Telkom is exempted from
        Sections 6(2)(e), 6(2)(f), 7(2), 7(4), 49, 50(1)(c), 50(1)(d),
        51(1)(b)(ii), 51(1)(f), 51(1)(g), 52, 54(1), 54(2), 54(4), 55, 56,
        58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 66(1), 66(3), 66(6), 66(7), 68, 76(4), 83 and
        86 of the PFMA; and all provisions of the Treasury Regulations
        issued in terms of the PFMA.


        Notwithstanding Telkom’s exemptions, I will in future submit to the
        national Assembly, in accordance with Section 65(2)(a) of the PFMA,
        a written explanation regarding the non-tabling of Telkom’s Annual
        report and Financial Statements, in line with the entity’s
        exemption from Section 55 of the PFMA.


        Kind regards


        IVY MATSEPE-CASABURRI
        MINISTER


     (b)    Letter from the Minister of Labour dated 1 November 2005 to the
         Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of
         the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
         explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the
         Information Systems, Electronics and Telecommunications
         Technologies Training Authority (ISETT SETA) for 2004-2005:


      TABLING OF ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS IN PARLIAMENT

      The Annual Report of the Information Systems, Electronics and
      Telecommunications Technologies Training Authority (ISETT SETA) for
      2004/2005 financial year has not been tabled in Parliament by 30
      September 2005, as required in terms of Section 65(2)(a) of the Public
      Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


      I was informed by the ISSET SETA that the office of the Auditor-
      General has confirmed that they received ISSETT annual financial
      statements, but would require two months (mid October 2005) to
      finalise it. The Honourable Member would know that annual reports
      should not be submitted without the signed audited financial
      statements of the entity.


      In regard to the Annual Reports and Financial Statements of the
      Unemployment Insurance Fund as well as Forest Industries Sector
      Education and Training Authority for 2004\2005 were tabled in
      Parliament.


      I will table the outstanding annual report as soon as it is finalized
      and submitted to my office.


      Kind regards


      M M S Mdladlana, MP
      Minister of Labour


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
    Diamonds Second Amendment Bill  [B 39 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
    76), dated 9 November 2005:
        The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered
        the subject of the Diamonds Second Amendment Bill  [B 39 – 2005]
        (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it, and classified by the
        Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B39A – 2005].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
    Electricity Regulation Bill  [B 29 – 2005 (Reintroduced)] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 9 November 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered
        the subject of the Electricity Regulation Bill  [B 29 – 2005
        (Reintroduced)] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and
        classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
        reports the Bill with amendments [B29A – 2005].


