---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 September 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-09-08
---

THURSDAY, 8 SEPTEMBER 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


          CHANGES IN PARTY MEMBERSHIP AS A RESULT OF FLOOR-CROSSING


                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed with today’s business I
wish to announce changes in party membership, which have occurred as a
result of floor-crossing.

Adv Z L Madasa has, today, left the ACDP and joined the ANC. [Applause.]
Order! Order, hon members! The Rev M S Khumalo has also today left the ACDP
and joined the ANC. [Applause.] Order!

I do understand the excitement and the disappointment, but could you please
express that outside, later on.

We now proceed to the next item on the Order Paper, which is Questions to
the President.


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY: THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC



                         Municipal imbizo programme


   7. Mr M M S Lekgoro (ANC) to ask the President of the Republic:

      To what extent (a) does the municipal imbizo programme give effect to
      the Freedom Charter’s basic tenet, namely that the people shall
      govern, and (b) does the programme contribute in building the
      democratic, developmental and delivery capacity of local government?
                                                   N1827E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, the municipal imbizo
programme constitutes a very important effort aimed at achieving two
objectives: the full participation of the masses of our people in matters
that affect their daily lives and, in this way, to strengthen democracy;
and ensuring that we mobilise capacity from all levels and spheres of
government so as to build a strong local government machinery with the
necessary capacity to deliver better services and ensure the development of
our communities.
Indeed, this programme seeks to give effect to the basic tenet of the
Freedom Charter that the people shall govern. This is done through a
combination of democratic processes, including democratically elected
public representatives, and local communities participating in deciding
many important issues relating to local development through the elected
councillors and the ward committees, as well as the elaboration of the
integrated development programmes.

Regular local izimbizo are an important feature of strengthening people’s
participation in the process of governance, which should ensure that the
ordinary people give real meaning to the injunction that the people shall
govern.

The municipal imbizo programme evolved out of the realisation that our
municipalities are faced with many, varied and big challenges that need
special and focused attention from all spheres of government.

Among the challenges facing our municipalities are: the need to bring
stability to the political and administrative components of those
municipalities; the need to ensure good governance, community
participation, and the strengthening of communication between local
government structures and the communities; the challenge of capacity-
building specifically relating to municipal management and developing a
pool of people with specialised skills, like engineers, economists, project
managers and financial officers; the challenge to elaborate and implement
clear local economic development programmes; the need for clear performance
benchmarks for managers, as well as institutional and administrative
development; the need for co-ordination of municipalities, including the
role that should be played by the district municipalities in relation to
the local municipalities, as well as the role of the provincial governments
and national government; the challenge to help bring financial viability
and better financial management to the sphere of local government; the need
to improve service delivery; and improvement in the functionality of ward
committees.

Some of these challenges are compounded by the fact that many of our
municipalities are poor and cover vast geographical areas. For example, the
ward committees are expected to do work in these vast areas to represent
communities in their engagements with the municipal executives. Owing to a
lack of resources in some municipalities, it has not been possible to
perform this task adequately.

Accordingly, for us to ensure that our municipalities give real meaning to
the demand that the people shall govern and that municipalities should
build better capacity to play their development roles, we have to look to
the national government to provide the required resources. In this way, our
intervention will help to transform into reality the legislative vision
about the manner in which municipalities should function so as to improve
the living conditions of the poor.

As far as the lack of appropriate skills is concerned, it is clearly
important to ensure training and reorientation of municipal workers and
managers so that we are able to build the necessary capacity relevant to
the specific challenges facing the individual areas.

Given the many challenges facing local government, the municipal imbizo
programme has been aligned to Project Consolidate, which is a hands-on
programme that allows the national and provincial spheres of government,
together with the other social partners, to support and work with local
government structures. In this way together we contribute towards the
strengthening of democratic and developmental local government.

Further, as the hon members are aware, there have in the past few months
been a number of protests around lack of service delivery and poor
infrastructure development. Accordingly, the government has taken
additional measures, including Project Consolidate, to identify the
capacity shortfalls at the local level and institute programmes to address
those deficiencies.

In instances in which the lack of delivery is due to negligence and
corruption, as well as to the failure of councillors to do their jobs, we
should not hesitate to take appropriate action. This we have to do because,
by their negative actions, those who are engaged in these acts of
corruption make it difficult for our local government structures to achieve
the necessary level of development and provide the relevant services to our
people.

This clock, Madam Deputy Speaker, says I should keep quiet now. Thanks,
Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon President.

Mr M M S LEKGORO: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Thank you, Mr President,
for your detailed answer to my question. However, I still need to ask
further whether there are any mechanisms in place and systematic ways in
which the issues raised in the izimbizo are followed up by the different
departments. And, if that is the case, are you satisfied with the kind of
responses you are given to the issues? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. Yes,
indeed, we always take detailed notes . . .Well, let me explain it like
this, first of all. In the municipal imbizo we normally have two major
meetings. One of them is with the mayors, the municipal managers and the
councillors responsible for particular areas of development in the
municipality. That enables us then to look in some detail at how the
management structure and other structures of the municipalities are
constituted, how they are functioning, what the shortfalls are, what needs
to be done, and so on.

The second meeting would be with the ward committees throughout the
district or metropolitan municipality. That then also gives an indication
as to how the ward committees are functioning, what the relationship is
between them and the executive structures, what the financing is like -
because, as I have just indicated, some of these areas are very big and in
some instances we found that ward committee members were actually expected
to pay out of their own pockets in order to travel around and interact with
the people.

We take note of all of this. Of course, then I should say that these
municipal izimbizo are also attended by the provincial governments, which
are therefore able to follow up in detail on all of the issues that are
raised - whether they relate to capacity problems within the executives or
to matters of proper interaction between the communities and municipal
management and the mayors and so on. They are followed up.

But it is clear that, as I was indicating just now, there are very, very
serious capacity problems in the municipalities with regard to various
kinds of personnel. Those are not people who would be immediately
available, but we are discussing this matter in the context of Project
Consolidate in order to make sure that it is indeed addressed. Thanks,
Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]
Dr P W A MULDER: Mr President, the outstanding debt of local government in
South Africa, owing to outstanding payments for services, is estimated at
about R40 billion at present. Against this background, some municipal
managers receive salary packages bigger than your own salary, sir, or any
of your Ministers sitting on the other side.

Is the government willing to look again at this situation and reconsider it
before the new tax on property is implemented? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thanks, Madam Deputy Speaker. Yes, I’m quite
certain that we do need to look at this particular matter but, I think, in
the context of looking at the general financing of local government. That
includes this thorny question of the remuneration of councillors because,
given the importance of local government - the size of the municipal areas
since our reform of the local government system – indeed it would seem that
we need to find a way to make sure that these elected local leaders do have
the capacity to have a hands-on approach and therefore we need to create
the possibility for them to discharge their responsibilities.

There is an obvious challenge that we meet as we go around these
municipalities, particularly the rural ones, in that it is very difficult
for them to retain skilled personnel. Even when they are able to find them
and recruit them, there are many instances in which they don’t stay for
very long.

For instance, in one municipality the mayors themselves told us that, with
regard to the managers, they actually have to rely on teachers. So they
recruit teachers from the schools and they become the managers. They may be
very good teachers, but not necessarily good managers. But in order to get
those good managers, you then have to look at the salaries that you offer
them and the conditions. So, I am saying, hon Dr Mulder, that yes, indeed,
we need to look at this matter but within the context of the totality of
the financing of local government. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Mr President, as you’ve alluded to
in your reply and picked up on in the izimbizo, it is very clear that there
is a lot of dissatisfaction with the poor rate of service delivery.

In the past week we also heard that 44% of the councils received qualified
audit reports. Now, on behalf of the DA I want to ask you: Don’t you think
that the skills are available in South Africa? A lot of people have lost
their positions in local government. They are ready to deliver their
services to the country and, if they are afforded the opportunity, will
your Presidency take some initiatives in this regard to allow these people
to come back into the labour market and make a real difference at this
level? Thank you. [Interjections.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Most certainly, hon member, given these
particular challenges in local government, I think it is indeed correct,
that where there are such skilled people in the country, we should indeed
reach out to them. I agree with that. [Applause.]

I think you will be familiar with the fact that Project Consolidate has, in
fact, specifically sought to do that and has made a call to the country in
general and engaged various civil society organisations to reach out to
this kind of person.

Later, in one of the questions, we will talk about work, for instance,
which is being done by the Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut in relation to this
kind of question. I know that the Afrikanerbond itself was also in touch
with the Minister of Provincial and Local Government to offer its services
in terms of finding this kind of person.

By all means we need to find these people to assist with regard to this
matter. I also think that where we do not have them – a matter that this
House has discussed for many years - and there are skills shortages within
the country, we shouldn’t hesitate to find people from elsewhere in the
world who would, at least for now, mentor the managers who are there, give
them the necessary skills, empower them, and then, of course, go home. We
need to do that also as a matter of urgency, because of the role and place
of local government in our system of government. Thanks, Madam Deputy
Speaker.

        Representations regarding former Deputy President Jacob Zuma

   8. The Leader of the Opposition (DA) to ask the President of the
      Republic:


      (1)   Whether any organisation has made representations to his office
          to appeal for the (a) reinstatement of the former Deputy
          President Jacob Zuma and/or (b) corruption charges against Mr
          Zuma to be dropped; if so, what are the relevant details in each
          case;




        2) whether he has responded to these representations; if not, what
           response does he intend giving; if so, what was his response;




      (3)   whether he intends (a) reinstating Mr Zuma as Deputy President
           and (b) instructing the National Prosecuting Authority to
           withdraw the corruption case against Mr Zuma; if so, why?
                                                              N1782E

THE PRESIDENT: The hon Tony Leon asks, Madam Deputy Speaker, whether any
organisation has made representations to our office to appeal for the
reinstatement of former Deputy President Jacob Zuma, and/or corruption
charges against Mr Zuma to be dropped, and the answer to both questions is
no.

The second question is whether the President has responded to these
representations, if not, what response does he intend giving. The second
question obviously falls away in the light of what I’ve just said.

The third one asks whether the President intends (a) reinstating Mr Zuma as
Deputy President, and (b) instructing the National Prosecuting Authority to
withdraw the corruption case against Mr Zuma. The answer to the first part
is that the hon Leader of the Opposition is referring to the statement I
made to a Joint Sitting of Parliament on 24 June of this year. In that
statement I clearly spelled out the reasons for releasing Mr Zuma from his
government responsibilities. Those reasons still apply.

The second part of that question, about instructing the National
Prosecuting Authority, the answer to that is no. Thank you. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. Mr
President, obviously I don’t have any knowledge of how the alliance
partners communicate with each other, but it is apparent . .
.[Interjections.] . . .from even a cursory reading of the daily newspapers,
which often are unreliable, and sometimes reliable – as you know – that, in
fact, this call has been made by your alliance partners in the tripartite
alliance, Cosatu and the SA Communist Party.

Whether this is being communicated to your office directly or indirectly
would seem to be a secondary question. Because - may I ask you as a follow-
up, sir – whether in fact this crisis, which is being precipitated by your
very correct decision to dismiss Deputy President Zuma from his post, is
not having an effect on governance itself and on the delivery of services,
which you spoke about previously?

In other words, Mr President, what I am asking is, given the amount of time
that you and your colleagues in Cabinet, who are in the governing alliance,
seem to have to spend in dealing with this matter, should it not in fact be
resolved as a political crisis, sooner rather than later? [Interjections.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: From my observations, hon member, I haven’t
noticed that there has been any impact on the time that Ministers and
Deputy Ministers are devoting to their work. I haven’t seen it. The
government continues to function properly and effectively; it is not an
issue. So, we will continue to work as government.

What happens in terms of the interactions among the members of the
tripartite alliance, perhaps next time, when I come and stand here as the
President of the ANC I will answer that. [Laughter.] But, no, I would like
to assure the hon member and the House that, no, this particular
controversy has no impact on government whatsoever. Thanks, Madam Deputy
Speaker. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Van Der Merwe? I have a request here for you to
address us. If you haven’t done so . . .

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: No, I will put a question to the President after he
has answered my question, which is the third one.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Thank you, hon President, for
your reply. Many South Africans, including the ACDP, support the decision
that you took to release former Deputy President from office because of
allegations of corruption with his former advisor.

They also do not approve of the actions of representatives of organisations
that call for the reinstatement of the former Deputy President. What is
even more worrying is to see members of such organisations not according
respect to the present Deputy President.
Is there anything that the President or his office is doing to ensure that
the office of the current Deputy President is accorded the respect that it
deserves, and that the Deputy President herself is treated with dignity?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, Deputy Speaker and hon member, we are
of course a democratic country, and as government we definitely respect the
right of South Africans to express their views. And, indeed, as you
indicate, some of them have.

I am firmly of the view that the hon Deputy President does not need any
particular protective measures. I think she is a very grown-up girl, and
she can stand on her own feet. [Applause.][Laughter.] Thanks, Madam Deputy
Speaker.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like to thank the
hon President for resurrecting the wall between the party and state, which
he did in his answer to my previous question.

Just to develop on that answer, sir, will you give an assurance to
Parliament that no state or government resources at all will be used in
furtherance of any commission of inquiry, which you’ve called to deal with
the tripartite problems in the ANC and its alliance partners? In other
words, wil this be purely – if you will confirm this – a party matter which
will not involve any state resources at all should you have a commission of
inquiry?
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, at no point have I
called for a judicial commission of inquiry, which would then be an
institution set up by the state and funded by the state, and therefore the
matter really doesn’t arise, does it? [Applause.][Laughter.]


                    Application for presidential pardons


9.    Mr J H van der Merwe (IFP) to ask the President of the Republic:

      (1)   What progress has been made in respect of applications for
            presidential pardons submitted to him by the IFP two years ago
            on behalf of 384 applicants in terms of section 84(2)(j) of the
            Constitution;




      (2)         whether any of the applications have been considered; if
            not, why not; if so, (a) what are the relevant details and (b)
            when is it anticipated that these applications will be
            finalised?
            N1833E


The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, the applications
referred to by the hon member have not yet been sent to the President, and
are still with the Department of Justice. The matter has unfortunately been
delayed in the Department of Justice, which has received more than 1 000
applications for pardons for crimes allegedly committed for political
reasons.

We’ve urged the Minister of Justice to ensure that the processing of these
and other applications is expedited. We will consider the appropriateness
of a presidential pardon for each case once the Ministry and the Department
of Justice have completed the processing of the applications, and verified
the facts of each case, understanding very well the prerogatives granted to
the President of the Republic by section 84(2)(j) of the Constitution, to
which the hon member referred.

However, I’d like to draw the attention of the hon member to some of the
difficulties that attend the application for presidential pardons submitted
by the IFP. I am informed that some of the people concerned are serving
sentences for offences that include murder, robbery, housebreaking, theft
and rape.

The IFP says these offences were committed in the context of the terrible
political violence that engulfed KwaZulu-Natal, Gauteng and Mpumalanga
during the years of transition from apartheid to democracy. None of the
applicants took advantage of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
process to apply for amnesty. The Ministry and Department of Justice must
therefore go through the complex process of deciding the basis on which to
make any recommendations to the President, whether for or against each
individual application.

For instance, it’s difficult to understand how the IFP and the applicants
concerned can explain that defenceless women were raped in order to advance
a political purpose of the IFP. I am sure that the IFP wouldn’t argue that
. . .[Applause.] I am sure the IFP wouldn’t argue that, and thus transform
the heinous crime of rape into a pardonable political offence.

In addition to considering the details of each case, the Ministry and
Department of Justice have to consider whether the release of any of these
prisoners would contribute to building peace and establishing
reconciliation in the areas where the offences for which they’ve been
imprisoned were committed.

They must also ensure that their recommendations to the President are based
on the application of a set of criteria that are consistent with the spirit
that inspired the establishment of the TRC. Apart from anything else, such
criteria would help us to avoid ad hoc and arbitrary presidential decisions
that would undermine the important principle of equality of treatment of
all our citizens, and the necessary transparency in this regard.

I’d also like to remind the hon member that, when we tabled the report of
the TRC in Parliament, we indicated that those who had committed political
offences within the meaning of the TRC Act and had not taken advantage of
the TRC process, would have the option to engage the National Prosecuting
Authority.

Government made the suggestion precisely to minimise the intervention of
the President of the Republic in the manner requested by the IFP when it
asked the President to pardon serving prisoners, basing himself on claims
made by prisoners and political parties that rape, housebreaking and
robbery have been committed to advance a legitimate political cause.

Nevertheless, as I have already indicated, we will in due course respond to
the applications lodged by the IFP. However, I would plead with the hon
member to understand that what his party has asked the President of the
Republic to do carries extremely serious implications for what our country
has been striving to achieve over the last 11 years, relating to such
important issues such as national reconciliation, respect for the rule of
law and the promotion of safety and security for everybody within our
borders – that’s citizens, residents and visitors.

Faced with the challenge to make decisions that bear on such grave matters,
I believe that we must make haste slowly. The hon member, the IFP and the
prisoners they represent must understand that with regard to the
applications they have lodged, given their implications for the future of
our country, patience is a virtue. Thank you very much, Madam Deputy
Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, with the greatest of respect,
if ever there was an unsatisfactory answer to a question, we have just
heard it. [Interjections.]

The point is, Mr President, these 384 people have been waiting now for two
years without any news. We have written letters to the Minister of Justice;
we have written letters to you on two occasions; we have asked to see you,
sir, and we have asked to see the Minister of Justice, with no result.

Twice, in this House, we have called this a violation of human rights, but
we hear nothing, nothing, nothing. I have to bring the matter here to you
after two years, sir, to force you to answer, and your answer is totally
unsatisfactory. If, after two years, nothing has been done, what are we to
tell these people? Do they have to wait another 50 years? [Interjections.]

Mr President, what I don’t understand is, if it hasn’t been investigated,
how do you know about the rape charges and all those things and that
they’ve done this or that, and that they haven’t been to the TRC? It means
it has been investigated, but nothing is reported to us. Maybe you could
also refer to the Apla person who received amnesty, but was a rapist.
[Interjections.]
As far as we are concerned, we are waiting on you to answer the questions
and to do your duty, and to put pressure on the Minister of Justice to do
her work! [Interjections.][Time expired.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: As I hear the hon member, when he says that
I haven’t answered the question, what he means is that I haven’t told him
what he would like to hear. [Applause.]

What I have said is that the Ministry and Department of Justice are
processing these matters, which is part of the reason why they would know
this information. If you ask for a pardon, you are asking to be pardoned
for something. Therefore, the people who put in the applications will say,
“I am in jail for the following reasons.” That’s how the Minister of
Justice would know what they were convicted for, because she has looked at
the applications.

I am saying that they are processing them, and at the appropriate moment we
shall come back to the people who have applied for these pardons to
indicate what decision should have been taken. Thank you, Madam Deputy
Speaker. [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, the President has
referred in his reply to the broader picture. May I seek your indulgence to
ask you whether the time has not arrived, 11 years down the line, that we
draw a final curtain, in some way or another?
We have some questions outstanding which need to be dealt with. There is
the matter of reparations. I don’t think that has been finally concluded. A
possible cut-off date for further prosecutions should be set, and also an
evaluation of certain situations; let me name just one – Quattro against
Vlakplaas. [Interjections.] We have to bring the matter to a conclusion
that will not create an impression of selective justice.

My question is, sir: Wouldn’t you consider appointing a multiparty
commission to look at the whole situation and to come up with
recommendations that could possibly now finish the unfinished business?
[Interjections.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, what we need to do in
response to what the hon Delport is saying is that perhaps we should bring
together such a group he is talking about – a multiparty group to discuss
this question. I’ll certainly raise it in government and let’s see whether,
in fact, we would agree with that.

I agree that it is necessary for us to move towards some finality with
regard to all of these matters. It is a complex question and we obviously
don’t want to sustain a situation of tension in the country.

I think the hon Delport would know – certainly we have said this before –
that one of the things that needed to be done, given that we had said that
people could approach the National Prosecuting Authority, was that some
guidelines needed to be given to the prosecuting authority in order to
follow up on these particular matters again to make sure that we do move
towards finality with regard to this. So, there is work that is going on
with regard to that.

Yes, it might very well be that all the parties are afforded a possibility,
among other things, to understand what government is doing about this
matter and what government’s thinking is. It may very well be that some
good ideas will come from all the parties as to how this matter could be
taken forward because, certainly from the point of view of government, we
have been insisting that we can’t depart from the fundamental objectives,
which informed the establishment of the TRC - which was the achievement of
national reconciliation, national unity and an ability for the country to
move beyond its past.

We must pursue that goal. The ways and the means and the hows of how we do
that; perhaps some good ideas may come from an interaction with all the
political parties. So, as I said hon Delport, I’ll raise the matter with
government and we will come back with some responses with regard to the
proposal you have just made. Thanks, hon Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]
Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr President, we are also raising the question of Apla. In
fact, a number of MK people also write to us. [Laughter.] Mr President,
this is not propaganda. I see that some people are taking this very
lightly. There are a number of young people who were very young and who
were given orders, and they are suffering.

As for the PAC, of course, we have written to you, Mr President, about our
own members. In many cases we are told that correspondence has been
forwarded to the Ministry of Justice. And really, nothing has happened. We
do appreciate the fact that there may be a number of people who have
applied. But certainly, if we are waiting for two to three years without a
single person being considered, we feel that it is really unfortunate.

The TRC reconciliation seems to be benefiting the very perpetrators of
apartheid instead of benefiting the victims of apartheid and, as you have
rightly said, sir, the whole question of the TRC was to bring about
national unity and reconciliation. I’m not so very sure how this is going
to be brought about when we have a number of bitter people in these jails
who see no reason why they should be in jails when they fought for this
very freedom. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes. But, hon Pheko, I think we must also
agree that the TRC has made a very important contribution to these
processes of national reconciliation and unity. There are indeed
outstanding matters. I see that the Deputy Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Development is here. Perhaps I will speak to both him and
the Minister so that they can then interact with you and with hon Koos van
der Merwe, so that they can indicate what is being done and the particular
problems they are experiencing with regard to the processing of the
applications.

I think you are quite correct, that it had to be made and that this might
be the best way to deal with the matter. Then we would be able to have that
direct communication with the Ministers of Justice. Thanks, Madam Deputy
Speaker.


                 Regional Progressive Governance Conference


10.   Mr S L Tsenoli (ANC) to ask the President of the Republic:


      In what way has the recent regional Progressive Governance Conference
      helped to strengthen the progressive movement on the African continent
      and internationally?                         N1828E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, first of all I’d like
to take this opportunity to mention that the regional Progressive
Governance Conference referred to by the hon member is part of the
preparations for the Progressive Governance Summit that will take place in
October in our country. This will bring together a number of heads of state
and government drawn from all parts of the world, as well as other
participants, who seek to promote a progressive response to the various
challenges facing the world.

With regard to the question, the answer is yes, the regional conference has
strengthened the progressive movement regionally and internationally. We
refer here to the progressive movement not as a single structural
organisation but as a combination of processes, including various
governmental and non-governmental formations, institutions, programmes and
initiatives aimed at changing the world for the better. In this regard, the
progressive agenda on the African continent refers to the totality of
programmes and initiatives whose vision is a renaissance of the continent,
which is mainly driven by the African Union, its development programme
Nepad and progressive civil society.

The theme of the regional Progressive Governance Conference was putting the
people first towards a common progressive agenda. This common progressive
agenda on the African continent includes such elements as establishing
peace; security and stability throughout the continent; building and
deepening of democratic systems and institutions; the rule of law and
respect for peoples and human rights; achieving economic development of
African countries individually and collectively; achieving the
comprehensive development of Africa; ensuring that our countries have the
necessary infrastructure in such critical areas as water, health,
education, electricity, transport, telecommunications and so on; defeating
poverty and underdevelopment in all parts of the continent and reducing
wealth disparities in our countries; eradicating debilitating diseases such
as malaria, cholera, river blindness, bilharzia, TB and Aids; realising the
emancipation and empowerment of women and the poor; and ending the
marginalisation of the youth and people with disabilities.

This continental progressive agenda is part of the global progressive
agenda, which includes commitment to the development of the poor and
underdeveloped regions of the world as expressed among others by the
Millennium Development Goals and the G8 Africa Action Plan. It includes a
commitment to bring about a fair and developmental global trade regime; a
restructuring and democratisation of multilateral institutions, including
the UN; a commitment to multilateralism in addressing global challenges;
and a commitment to sustainable development, as was agreed during the
Johannesburg World Summit for Sustainable Development.

The regional conference has  resolved that it is necessary to revitalise
the continentwide movement that worked together to defeat colonialism and
apartheid so that this movement can work with the AU and strengthen Nepad
programmes. The revival of this continental movement would mean that all
the African people as a whole – workers, intelligentsia, youth, women,
faith communities, businesspeople, politicians, artisans and so on – would
combine their resources and capacities and do whatever is necessary to
accelerate the regeneration of our continent.

By adopting this resolution, the conference began an important process that
will hopefully lead to the strengthening of the progressive movement on our
continent. And, of course, the conference gave an opportunity to a good
number of African progressives to interact and establish necessary contact
with one another.

Similarly, the regional progressive conference did indeed help to
strengthen international progressive movement. As far as Africa is
concerned, as we have already indicated, an international progressive
movement has to deal with such critical matters as bridging the gap between
the developed and the developing countries.

Indeed, among others, the conference dealt with the important matter of the
modern economy, its different features and the manner in which progressives
can, and should, transform and utilise its economy to benefit the poor,
consistent with the progressive agenda.

The conference also dealt with what has to be a common approach of
progressives internationally around the challenge of the democratisation of
the system of global governance, central to which is the reform of the UN
and other multilateral institutions.

Further, the conference addressed the challenges facing in different ways
both the developing and developed countries. One of these is the issue of
social cohesion, which in the developed countries is affected by, among
others, their changing demography, as well as immigration from countries of
the South, which in turn brings more challenges such as marginalisation,
racism and xenophobia.

Clearly, developing a common agenda on these and other challenges, the
regional Progressive Governance Conference has taken an important step
towards the strengthening of the progressive movement regionally and
internationally. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would urge hon members to
engage with the report of the conference, once it is available. Thank you
very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr S L TSENOLI: Thank you, Mr President. I appreciate your responses. South
Africa enters these discussions and debates about the progressive agenda
with our best foot forward, being led by the ANC. We, however, would like
to hear from you, sir, how additionally the problematic power relations
between the North and South are affecting the speed with which we will be
able to realise this progressive agenda as it evolves. Thank you, Madam
Deputy Speaker.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, this is of course one
of the central items on that progressive agenda. Indeed, it is one of the
central questions in terms of global processes going on at various points.
I think the point is well established that the countries of the South are
saying that the distribution of power and the use of power relations are
structured and are functioning in a manner that does not genuinely address
the concerns of the developing countries. That’s why we have paid a lot of
attention to this matter of the restructuring of the UN because, clearly,
the decisions that were taken during a different historical period should
not be allowed to persist.

Therefore this particular matter, as you know, is on the agenda of the
General Assembly meeting next week. And we are keen to see that there is
progress with regard to the matter of this restructuring of the UN in order
to ensure that the developing countries take their rightful place in that
context.

The engagements that we have been having with the G8 in the context of the
Nepad programme have also been focused on this matter. Fortunately, we did
agree with the G8 from the very beginning that they needed to accept that,
as Africans, we would take our own decisions about the future of our
continent and that what we are therefore asking them to do is to support
programmes that have been decided by the Africans themselves. We are not
asking them to decide for the continent what those programmes should be.
Fortunately, they accepted that approach. We also put the matter to them
that in the context of that partnership there must be equal accountability.
So we, as African countries, are quite ready to say this is what we have
done and this where we are going, and this is where the shortfalls are.

But equally, these partners of ours in the G8 also had a responsibility to
account for their own conduct. The programme of action that was adopted at
the last G8 summit in Gleneagles, Scotland, was based entirely on what the
African countries have asked for.

I would say that, in the context of the original question that the hon
member asked, I believe it is necessary also to engage in popular
mobilisation to impact on this matter of these relations. It’s clear that
even in the developed countries there are many millions of people who are
very concerned about the same matters about which we are concerned, and who
are interested to see their own governments move in the right direction in
order to address the concerns of the developing countries. But I think that
we, too, need to develop a similar popular movement to promote the same
agenda. Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Thanks, Madam Speaker. Mr President, just on a practical
note, I would like to paraphrase, for emphasis sake, your view as expressed
in the regional Progressive Governance Conference, that, I quote:

     Sustained and adequate economic growth and development are dependent on
     the existence of various macroconditions, namely, inter alia,
     democracy, good governance, the rule of law and property rights.


In the light of the foregoing, how does the undemocratic behaviour and the
lack of respect for the rule of law undermine the African effort and the
global fight against poverty, especially in the context of the undemocratic
practice and lack of respect for the rule of law as displayed by the Zanu-
PF government?

Furthermore, why should the South African government continue backing the
Zanu-PF government at the expense of the rest of the Zimbabwean citizens?

The PRESIDENT: Indeed, Madam Deputy Speaker, the question that the hon
member raises about the importance of issues of good governance, democracy
and so on, are indeed very important, which is why we contribute as much as
we can to address these various challenges around the continent.

I notice that the hon member hasn’t mentioned other very large challenges
on our continent and I am not quite sure why. Whether it is the Congo,
Sudan, Côte d’Ivoire or Mauritania and so on, these are matters in which,
as I am saying, we are trying to contribute the best we can, to try and
find solutions thereto. Yes, indeed, you need this base that he referred to
in order for each one of our countries to be able to address this very
serious challenge of poverty and underdevelopment.

I do not believe that I need to say anything more about Zimbabwe. We have
addressed this matter many, many times, and our position hasn’t changed on
this issue. Indeed, I believe that it is important for all African
countries, including ours, to respect the positions that he indicated about
democracy and so on. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, arising from the first
reply of the President, could I ask him how likely does he believe is the
reform of the UN Security Council to be achieved at the forthcoming meeting
of the UN General Assembly and the leaders summit there?

Does the President think that it is probable? If it is not probable, does
he believe that the final position taken by the African Union on the reform
of the Security Council is helpful in getting the Security Council to
change, or does he think, in fact, that the final position of the African
Union has made the achievements of the Security Council reform less likely?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, if I were to hazard a
guess, I would say that it is not likely that this forthcoming meeting of
the UN General Assembly will, indeed, effect this restructuring of the UN
as a whole, including the Security Council.

I think that it is clear that many member states of the Security Council
require that there should be even more discussion about these matters. We
would have preferred, indeed, that these matters were resolved at this
forthcoming General Assembly, but, as I say, if I were to hazard a guess, I
would say that it’s not likely.

We will probably have to agree that more time should be given to that
reform process. But hopefully a decision could be taken, specifically about
the processes in which we should engage, as we give ourselves more time in
order to come up with a result.

The position that the African continent has taken for some time has been
that the power of veto should be abolished for everybody and that the
Security Council should operate without it. Therefore, in the context of
the expansion of the numbers of permanent members of the Security Council,
to the extent that some permanent members of the council continue to have
the veto, it would only be fair that any additional and new permanent
members of the Security Council should enjoy the same rights. It would not
be correct that there should be, in a sense, a two-tier system within the
group of countries that would be permanent members.

It was for that reason that the extraordinary summit of the African Union
said that we do, indeed, need to engage everybody on this question, to say
that if the power of veto was being retained, then everybody who is a
permanent member ought to have that power of veto.

Of course, I am quite certain that the continent is aware of the fact that
these are negotiations. I do not believe that the approach would be that we
are making a demand and that if it is not met we walk away and go home. It
has to be a process of engagement; there has got to be a process of
negotiation. This is what would require more time. Indeed, I think that
people would then have a look at this question again. In the end I don’t
believe that one can predict what the outcome is going to be with regard to
this veto issue.

But I think that, generally, there has been an acceptance that there needs
to be an expansion of the Security Council, which would include an
expansion of the permanent members. In that context, the African continent
would be entitled to permanent membership. As you know, the panel that was
set up recommended that Africa should get two permanent positions in the
Security Council.

But, as to the matter of veto, I think it becomes part of the process of
negotiations.


         Promotion of the transformation and reconciliation process


11.   Adv A H Gaum (NNP) to ask the President of the Republic:
      In view of the need for the transformation of our society and for
      national  reconciliation, how will the Government (a) convince
      minority communities, including those who enjoyed privileges, to
      accept and participate in and actively promote the transformation and
      reconciliation process and (b) ensure at the same time the retention
      of their resources and skills within the country, motivating them to
      invest their considerable talents and skills for the betterment of the
      future of all South Africa’s people?
      N1780E


The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, in responding to this
question, I think it is important that the House notes that as a country we
have made significant progress with regard to the issues of reconciliation
and transformation, since 1994. The unfortunate truth is that the many
positive things that South Africans are doing to change our country for the
better do not make media headlines. Yet, the fact of the matter is that
there are many individuals and organisations that are making a difference
with regard to the many challenges facing us.

I believe that we should also draw great comfort from the fact that the
mood among the people points to what the Homecoming Revolution describes as
“a new patriotism that is taking root, challenging the view expressed by
some that South Africa merely experienced a honeymoon period over the last
10 years.” The Homecoming Revolution based its conclusion on findings
released by Future Fact 2004 which, they said, “confirmed what many have
sensed and commented on during the last year, 2003, that the mind-sets of
South Africans towards the country have become increasingly positive and
national pride is becoming an intrinsic part of South African culture.”

A survey conducted by A C Nielsen reported that of those surveyed 93% said
that they were proud to be a South African; 87% said South Africa has a
potential to become a truly wealthy and powerful nation; 83% said South
Africa should play the leading role in African politics and development;
80% said I am willing to do whatever I can to make South Africa a better
place; 77% said South Africa is a nation of ordinary people doing
extraordinary things; 68% said they will always try to purchase locally
manufactured or made goods whenever they can, and 66% said when they were
with people who try to run South Africa down, they use their positive
knowledge of South Africa to give them a better picture.

I believe that this indicates that our people, as a whole, including those
who belong to the minority communities, are committed to the betterment of
the future of all South Africa’s people. We have in the past referred to
some of these South Africans who are making important contributions with
regard to helping our country move forward, such as the Homecoming
Revolution initiative, which is campaigning for South Africans abroad to
come back and use their skills and resources for our common good.

On Tuesday we met with representatives of Business Unity South Africa –
Busa – among whom were representatives of the Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut.
The AHI explained to us the work that they are doing in collaboration with
the Departments of Provincial and Local Government and of Land Affairs. I
subsequently asked and got permission to use their example in responding to
this question. I therefore ask Parliament’s indulgence in my relating the
story of the Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut so as to demonstrate what is
possible in dealing with the challenge of reconciliation and
transformation, as well as the huge challenges of development that still
face us.

In 1995 the AHI and Nafcoc created a partnership and developed the national
business course that ran for three years, aimed at assisting emerging
businesses, which were mainly black. The partnership served as the basis
for the unity of the different chambers of commerce, which in 2003 formed
the Chambers of Commerce and Industry in South Africa – Chamsa – which
involved Nafcoc, Fabco, Sacob and the AHI. Similar efforts with other
organisations brought about Business Unity South Africa. Clearly this was
an important contribution to the transformation of race-based institutions
to non-racial organisations.

In addition, in 2001 the AHI entered into agreement with the Minister of
Provincial and Local Government, hon Sydney Mufamadi, with regard to
collaboration on the local government challenges. The AHI mobilised the
Sakekamers to partner with specific local communities. The biggest success
was in the District Municipality of Enkangala in Mpumalanga, where the
joint venture helped to create infrastructure to house an abattoir, various
workshops, retailers and so on, and worked with black businesses from
Witbank and Middelburg.

Currently, there is a farming area in this municipality which is used for
production of vegetables under the mentorship of one of the Sakekamer
members. At the moment the AHI is working with other municipalities on a
number of other projects.

Further, it has also created a structure called Agri Trust, based in the
Limpopo Province, which helps with technical capacity with regard to land
evaluations and other technical matters related to the issue of land. In
this regard Agri Trust is collaborating with the Offices of the Land Claims
Commissioners. The AHI is currently discussing with the Minister of
Agriculture and Land Affairs its possible contributions to the issues
around agricultural development and land reform. In his letter to the
Presidency Mr Jacob de Villiers of the AHI also says:

   At present the Rapport newspaper is giving space and exposure to letters
   advocating a peace corps for South Africa to give a helping hand from the
   developed communities to the disadvantaged communities. It is suggested
   that the Afrikaners initiate the project on an inclusive basis because
   there are so many things that can be done by everyone to allow everybody
   to be able to develop to their full potential.

The excellent efforts of the AHI are just one example. I am certain that
there are many other similar initiatives undertaken by people from minority
communities that help with the task of reconciliation and the development
and transformation of our country. What we need to do is to find these
initiatives and programmes, highlight them and ensure that they serve as
examples to the rest of the South African people as to what can be done to
take our country forward. Thanks, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Adv A H GAUM: Mr President, one problem with the brain drain is that
government invests a lot of money in training and then those skills are not
retained in the economy. Young people from minority communities also face
particular realities.

Recently, the Grade 9 learners of a certain Afrikaans former Model C school
had to make subject choices for Grade 10. They were born after 2 February
1990, but because they believe that their job prospects in South Africa are
bleak I am told by one of them that they opted for subjects that would
provide them with the best prospects of foreign employment. What is your
message to these Grade 9s and their generation when they have to make
choices for the future? And what is government doing to address the loss of
skills and to bring qualified South Africans from all races back to our
country? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: As I tried to indicate in this reply when I
quoted the survey done by the surveying company A C Nielsen, I think it is
necessary to communicate to all our people that there is absolutely no way
in which the future of any South African can be bleak. It’s obvious that
there might be some people who might entertain that sort of fear. But if we
look at the practicality of our situation and the actuality – what has
actually happened in South Africa - I think that there cannot be anybody
from any of the national minorities who is able to demonstrate that their
standard of living has worsened in the last 10 years. Nobody can, because,
in fact, the opposite has happened. [Applause.]

And indeed, research shows that some of the best beneficiaries of
democratic change are people from the national minorities. It is necessary
continually to address the matter of fears that people might still
entertain. Their fears, I am quite certain, will not be substantiated by
the actual practice in this country.

If you talk to some of the biggest estate agents in the country, they will
tell you that part of the high demand for housing actually results from
South Africans who left in the past and who are now either coming back or
buying houses pending their return. I think that there are many, many South
Africans who left before who have come to understand that the pastures that
they thought were green elsewhere are not, in fact, as green as they
thought they were. [Applause.]

Therefore I think it is our collective responsibility to communicate to the
young people you are talking about, and say to them: Don’t listen to the
propaganda, look at the actuality. Look at what has really happened over
many years and also look at these people who are coming back.

A few months back I was talking to the leadership of the SA Jewish Board of
Deputies and they were saying that one of the challenges that they were
facing was the re-opening of schools that had been closed. People are
coming back into the country and you’ve got this net immigration into the
country and an expansion of the Jewish population, precisely because they
can see that the future in this country is by no means bleak and that the
future is indeed very bright. But I think it’s our common task, all of us,
to communicate this message to the young people of our country. Thanks,
Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr T D LEE: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President, your government claims that
all those who were discriminated against under apartheid are included in
the definition of “black” and should all be treated equally when it comes
to affirmative action. Yet, coloured people continue to be discriminated
against in the new South Africa. [Interjections.] Not only are we denied
jobs; we are also retrenched to make way for African blacks.

Mr President, this is working against reconciliation and nation-building.
When, Mr President, will we start to practice what we are preaching? Thank
you. [Interjections.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I would appreciate it very much, Deputy
Speaker, if the hon member could bring me the information that he has just
indicated. [Applause.][Interjections.] I would appreciate that, so that we
can act on the matter, because it cannot be correct that the coloured
community gets marginalised and discriminated against in the manner that he
is indicating. Let us respond to this matter practically because, indeed,
if what is being said is correct, I am saying that it is bad and we should
not accept it.

Therefore I will very much appreciate it if the hon Lee can give me the
necessary documentation on this so that we can then act on it. Thanks,
Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.][Interjections.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Hon Deputy Speaker, Comrade President, the ANC-led
government continues to say that South Africa belongs to all who live in
it, including hon Lee. How can we, today, apply the relevance of what Chief
Albert Luthuli said back in 1961? He said that in economic matters we will
be satisfied with nothing less than equality of opportunity in every
sphere, and the enjoyment by all of those heritages which form the
resources of the country which up to now have been appropriated on racial
basis. We do not demand these things for people of African descent alone,
but for all South Africans.

Hon President, he continued to say that we would not compromise. To
compromise would be an expediency that is most treacherous to democracy,
for in the turn of events the sweets of economic, political and social
privileges that are the monopoly of only one section of the community, turn
sour even in the mouths of those who eat them. Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, indeed, hon member, this obviously is
one of the principal challenges we face – that of economic equality. It is
one of the challenges we face when we talk about the building of a non-
racial South Africa, and one of the challenges we face when we talk about
issues of national reconciliation. Therefore this fundamental
transformation of our economy, in all sorts of ways, becomes critically
important.

I am quite sure that the hon member is aware of various initiatives that
government is involved in with regard to this issue. For instance, issues
we are raising about employment equity have to do with this issue; matters
that we are pursuing with regard to black economic empowerment are about
this issue. Programmes that are run by government to, in a sense, transfer
resources from the rich part of the economy to the poorer parts of the
economy are part of that process.

However, it is clear that this is going to be a long and hard struggle. I
think you are quite correct in referring to the late Albert Luthuli and,
indeed, I don’t believe that we can compromise with regard to the
sustenance of the struggle to achieve that economic equality. Therefore I
think that we should continue to implement the programmes that we have
agreed on, and continue to review the effectiveness of those programmes to
see whether, in fact, we are making the progress that we need to make.

I do think you are quite correct, hon member, by drawing our attention to
the need to focus in particular on this area of our national life. Thank
you very much, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am just reacting to what the
President said. During the previous debate, the President invited us to
discuss with him the problems created by affirmative action. At the moment
your Minister of Labour has been quoted as saying that affirmative action
will be here forever. That’s a very negative message that has been sent out
in that sense. Remember that with your election campaign you became aware
of the problems created by this when you met some poor whites during the
campaign. These issues must still be discussed and I think they are very
important.

We are all aware, sir, of the problems being experienced specifically on
local government level, as we have debated this today. In most South
African towns there are retired local government officials with many years’
experience in local government. Most of them are from minority groups. From
day to day, they personally experience the problems that many towns have
regarding service delivery, such as power failures, infrastructure
problems, etc because they are residents there.

Some of them spoke to me and offered their assistance, specifically when
they heard that the government wanted to import foreigners to do this work.
They said they could do it much easier and much cheaper, with their
experience. Is the government willing to consider this offer made by these
South Africans? [Interjections.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Dr Mulder, I am sure that even today you
could meet with Minister Mufamadi and hand over those names to him. I am
sure he would welcome that. [Applause.] Indeed, we have to continue with
the programmes of affirmative action to redress these extraordinary
imbalances that continue to persist in our society.

I am not quite sure that it can help us very much to sit here and speculate
as to when the cut-off date is. I think what we should focus on – and as I
was trying to say a bit earlier – is to constantly measure the progress
that we are making with regard to closing these gaps. Are the programmes
and things that we have put in place producing the result that we need?
Even if there are unintended consequences, let’s look at those and see what
unintended consequences there are. But this would arise because we are
continually assessing the impact these programmes are having so that we can
then correct things.

Therefore I don’t think it would help anybody just to stand up and say, “on
17 December 2017 the affirmative action programmes will come to an end”.
None of us have that capacity of foresight. Thank you, Madam Deputy
Speaker. [Applause.]


              Effect of Second National Anti-Corruption Summit


12.   Ms F I Chohan-Khota (ANC) to ask the President of the Republic:

      In what way has the Second National Anti-Corruption Summit enhanced
      the fight against corruption in the public and private sectors and
      against the negative effects corruption has on economic development,
      social values, democracy and good governance?
                             N1829E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, it may be somewhat
early to have a full assessment of the manner in which the second national
anti-corruption conference has enhanced the fight against corruption, given
that this important meeting took place just under six months ago, starting
on 22 March.

However, because the summit is linked to earlier work on this critical
matter and because of the resolutions it adopted, I would say that it is
clear that it will make the necessary and timely contribution to the fight
against corruption.

To implement the resolutions of the summit, the national anti-corruption
forum adopted a national anti-corruption programme of action in June this
year, three months after the summit meeting. This was an important step
towards ensuring that the decisions of the second national anti-corruption
summit do enhance the fight against corruption in the public and private
sectors.

We are very happy that urgent steps have been taken to address the need for
better co-ordination between the different sectors, as well as between
various organs of state that have anti-corruption responsibilities. In this
regard, I am pleased that, already, business and civil society have
identified their permanent representatives to the national anti-corruption
forum.

We must also welcome the fact that the National Treasury has allocated
funds to the Public Service Commission so as to strengthen the secretariat
of the forum. Clearly, this will help greatly to increase the effectiveness
of our offensive against corruption.

Further, all other resolutions of that summit are being implemented by the
various sectors that constitute the national anti-corruption forum. As
demonstrated recently by the Departments of Social Development and of Home
Affairs, as well as some of our provinces, government will continue to
discharge this responsibility to root out corruption in the public sector.
Beyond this, I do believe that, indeed, all of us and all our citizens
should join the fight against corruption because this practice is
inevitably inimical to the achievement of the goals of reconstruction and
development that we have set ourselves. This applies especially to the
critical task to eradicate poverty and underdevelopment.

In the past, we have tried to indicate some of the roots of the crime of
corruption, not just in our country but globally. We have done this to
emphasise the need for unrelenting vigilance, based on the understanding
that, as pointed out by various people and institutions, value systems
created by a market economy make a critical contribution to the
encouragement of corrupt practice.
In his book, The Crisis of Global Capitalism: Open Society Endangered, the
well-known financier, George Soros, writes, and I quote:

   One of the great defects of the global capitalist system is that it has
   allowed the market mechanism and the profit motive to penetrate into
   fields of activity where they do not properly belong. The promotion of
   self-interest to a moral principle has corrupted politics and the failure
   of politics has become the strongest argument in favour of giving markets
   an even freer reign.


   The functions that cannot and should not be governed purely by market
   forces, including many of the most important things in human life,
   ranging from moral values to family relations to aesthetic and
   intellectual achievements. Yet market fundamentalism is constantly
   attempting to extend its sway into these regions, in a form of
   ideological imperialism.

He goes on, and says:

   According to market fundamentalism, all social activities and human
   interactions should be looked at as transactional contract-based
   relationships and valued in terms of a single common denominator, money.


In other comments, George Soros says, that, in an earlier epoch:

   People were guided by a set of moral principles that found expression in
   behaviour outside the scope of the market mechanism. As the market has
   extended its sway, the fiction that people act on the basis of a given
   set of non-market values has become increasingly more difficult to
   maintain.


   Unsure of what they stand for, people increasingly rely on money as a
   criterion of value. What is more expensive is considered better. The
   value of a work of art can be judged by prices it fetches. People deserve
   respect and admiration because they are rich. What used to be a medium of
   exchange has usurped the place of fundamental values, reversing the
   relationship postulated in economic theory. What used to be professions
   have turned into businesses. The cult of success has replaced a belief in
   principles. Society has lost its anchor.


Madam Deputy Speaker, five minutes was over a long time ago. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I know. Thank you, hon President.

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Deputy Speaker, Mr President, thank you for your
profound response to the question. In your opening address to the anti-
corruption summit earlier this year you addressed very starkly the matter
of actual levels of corruption versus perceived levels of corruption in the
country. An independent survey has shown, not surprisingly, that South
Africans generally perceive significantly higher levels of corruption than
is actually the case in reality.

From your particular perspective, Mr President, what do you think leads to
this distortion? How can we, as South Africans, alter our perceptions so
that we deal with the phenomenon of corruption, not only seriously, but
also realistically? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, it may very well be
that it is better to overestimate the extent of corruption rather than
underestimate it, if such overestimation results in raising the levels of
vigilance against corruption.

I hope the hon member will allow me to continue reading what I have written
here, because I think it makes a very important point. This relates to the
findings of the Nel Commission regarding the Masterbond matter, which I
think was reported in 1997. In his report, Justice Nel, said:

   This investigation had revealed an astonishing degree of dishonesty,
   inefficiency, lack of professional integrity and lack of independence on
   the part of some the auditors involved with these Masterbond companies.
He said that he found it difficult to believe that some of the auditors
concerned with the Masterbond companies could have been so inefficient or
blatantly dishonest as was being gradually revealed by the forensic
investigation.

He said:


     The saga of dishonest or inefficient auditors which further emerged
     during the course of the investigations conducted by the commission
     belied the generally perceived honesty, integrity, efficiency and
     independence of auditors.


He continued and said:

     It became apparent that, with a few notable exceptions, the auditors
     involved seemed to believe that in addition to auditing the books of a
     company, their function was to assist and protect the management of
     such company as far as possible. They also seemed to believe that the
     end justifies the means.

I think that what Justice Nel said about the very honourable profession and
indeed the observations he made about what all of us think of auditors –
that you could have a serious situation like this, where he said that his
findings belied the generally perceived honesty, integrity, efficiency and
independence of auditors – emphasises the point that George Soros made,
that the kind of society we live in and the kind of society he lives in, in
the United States, can create the conditions for this kind of behaviour
that Judge Nel decried.

And, indeed, you saw the expression of this when big companies like Enron
in the United States collapsed. Because of the collapse of those companies,
it became clear that what Judge Nel had said earlier about some of the
wrongdoings within the auditing profession had affected companies in the
United States.

I think that all of this points to the need for us to be extremely serious
about the implementation of the resolutions of that second anti-corruption
conference. As I was saying, it may very well be that it’s not a bad thing
that we somewhat overestimate the incidence of corruption if that would
help us to be very vigilant.

Let me finish by quoting what the UNDP Human Development Report of 1999
said regarding the question of governance, which relates to this issue.
They said:

     Governance does not mean mere government. It means the framework of
     rules, institutions and established practices that set limits and give
     incentives for the behaviour of individuals, organisations and firms.


     Without strong governance, the dangers of global conflicts could be a
     reality of the 21st century: trade wars promoting national corporate
     interests, uncontrolled financial volatility setting off civil
     conflicts, untamed global crime infecting safe neighbourhoods and
     criminalising business and the police.


Therefore I think that part of what we have to do as we discuss this
question of ensuring that we do indeed build a strong developmental state –
part of that focus of that developmental state must be on this matter of
ensuring that we have the institutions, framework, values and systems to
confront this fight against corruption, which is generated by the
socioeconomic formation in which we live. Thank you very much, Madam Deputy
Speaker. [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President, the DA supports you in
your declared aim to root out corruption. However, unfortunately, empirical
evidence suggests that so far the real answer to the hon Chohan-Khota’s
question is nil. Because the latest reports indicate that corruption is
costing the taxpayer R4 billion per annum and growing, and the full range
of corruption is endemic at all levels of government, as you yourself, Mr
President, have indicated.

Parliament’s structures, in particular the opposition parties, are the
country’s front-line whistle-blowers precisely because of the protection of
parliamentary privilege. [Interjections.] So my question is, Mr President,
why then are representatives of Parliament and opposition parties excluded
from these anti-corruption summits?

We have asked to be invited. We have even sent submissions but we have not
even received the courtesy of an acknowledgement, let alone a response or
an invitation. So, may we ask you, Mr President: Do you agree that we
should be excluded from these summits and various fora to fight corruption?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No, hon Camerer, I don’t think that you
should be excluded from the fight against corruption. I don’t think so. I
didn’t know that you had been excluded. We will follow up on that matter,
because I think you should be involved. I am very pleased to hear that the
DA is in the front line of the fight against corruption. [Interjections.] I
think that’s very good news. [Laughter.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Will the ANC join us?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, indeed. The hon Tony Leon says he
invites the ANC to join the DA in the fight against corruption.
[Interjections.] But I would also say, hon Camerer, that despite what I
said in my response earlier on about issues of reality and perception, I
think we should also not, kind of, go overboard. I think there is a lot of
work that is being done against corruption in the country. I think that I
can produce empirical evidence also to show what kind of action has been
taken about particular individuals who have been caught.

While we say that there might be whatever evidence you have referred to, I
think we also need to say that there is very clear evidence of a really
very firm and sustained engagement in the country against corruption.
Thanks, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, the summit identified
several shortcomings in the Protected Disclosures Act, the so-called
“whistle-blowers Act”. This is undoubtedly a crucial weapon in the fight
against corruption.

However, it is apparent that, in certain cases, whistle-blowers are not
being properly protected from victimisation. What progress, hon President,
has the task team made in addressing this and other shortcomings in the Act
as highlighted in the summit? Is it expected that the SA Law Reform
Commission will report to Parliament before the end of the year, as
resolved by the summit?

Whilst I appreciate that the summit was held in March, there is clearly an
urgency in addressing this issue. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, as I understand it,
the SA Law Reform Commission is addressing this particular issue. Indeed,
as you indicated, the summit identified the problems, but as to when the
law commission will report, I don’t know. I also do not know also whether
we have that kind of authority – maybe Parliament has – to tell the law
commission to “report by 1 December”. I don’t know.

But what I know, certainly, is that they have taken up the matter and I am
quite certain that they do understand the urgency of it. Thanks, Madam
Speaker.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, hon President. It’s nice to see you in the House.
[Laughter.] Hon President, we welcome the anti-corruption summit and we
don’t welcome the corruption that is happening in the Republic of South
Africa.

Just this morning placards read out, “Corruption in certain
municipalities”. Hon President, to what extent is the image of our
beautiful country affected by this corruption? And, what severe action
could be taken by our government?

I say “our government” and I am not going to say “your government, my
government”, because it is our government. [Applause.] Hon President, I am
not going to say “your Ministers, my Ministers”, but I will say “our
Ministers”. [Applause.] Yes, hon President, in which respect could this
matter be overcome in this country as we all stand by our government to
help and see to it that we overcome such practice? Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: As I was trying to indicate, hon member,
this is a global problem and it has its particular origins in the kind of
society we live in. I think we should therefore ready ourselves for a
sustained fight on this matter, and not take the position that we will
engage corruption now, and we will finish it next month, next year or
whenever. I think it will continue to come up, which is why I was insisting
on sustained vigilance with regard to this issue.

Of course, necessarily, regarding the institutions, the processes and the
law and all of that, a critically important part, I think, of this fight
against corruption is the awareness of the public, including the hon Sheila
Camerer, about these tasks, so that all of us can engage it in the manner
that she was indicating, as a front-line whistle-blower for, instance.

Yes, there might be issues about the image of the country and so on, but I
think our first response in the fight against corruption must be to address
it because of the negative and corrosive impact it has on us – not so much
about what everybody else in the world thinks about us, but because of what
this thing is doing to our society - and therefore confront it in the way
that we should.

I don’t know if there are people who have particular images about South
Africa. Fortunately, we normally don’t talk about other countries because,
if we wanted to respond, we could also make all manner of statements about
other countries, which those countries would find very uncomfortable.

However, I think that we should focus on ourselves to make sure that we
stop the corrosion and rot in our society, and address this matter of the
creation of a people-centred society. We can’t have that if corruption is
running rampant. Therefore I think that that must be the matter of concern,
rather than what somebody else in the world might think of us. Thanks,
Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

The House adjourned at 15:42.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


        Auditing Profession Bill [B 31 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)
        [Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in Government
        Gazette No 27981 of 30 August 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         9 September 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly (Floor-crossing)


    Membership status of the following members has in terms of Schedule 6A
    of the Constitution (floor-crossing) changed, as follows:


      • Rev M S Khumalo and Adv Z L Madasa, on 6 September 2005, have left
        the African Christian Democratic Party (ACDP) and joined the
        African National Congress (ANC).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – National Treasury
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 51-2005].


2.    The Minister of Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
        Education (CHE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


3.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela National
        Museum for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 160-2005].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
        Resources Agency for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 182-2005].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
        Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 157-2005].


4.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     a) Accession of South Africa’s Membership of the International Centre
        for Scientific and Technical Information (ICSTI), tabled in terms
        of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     b) Explanatory Memorandum Accession of South Africa’s Membership of
        the International Centre for Scientific and Technical Information
        (ICSTI).


5.    The Minister of Health

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
        Research Council (MRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 91-
        2002].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
        Laboratory Service (NHLS) for 2001-2002, 2002-2003, 2003-2004, 2004-
        2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for 2002-2003, 2003-2004, 2004-2005.


6.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Sports
        Commission for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 65-2005].

     b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Institute for
        Drug-Free Sport for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 161-2005].

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the Road Accident
    Fund Amendment Bill [B 64 - 2003] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 7
    September 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having considered the subject
        of the Road Accident Fund Amendment Bill [B 64 – 2003] (National
        Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint
        Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, presents the Road Accident
        Fund Amendment Bill [B 64B - 2003].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development on a workshop
    on the Children’s Bill (B70-2003)(Reintroduced) held from 12-13 April
    2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Social Development having held a workshop on
    the Children’s Bill (B70-2003)(Reintroduced) from 12-13 April 2005 at
    the Cape Town International Convention Centre, reports as follows:

    Introduction


    The Portfolio Committee on Social Development held a two-day workshop
    on 12 and 13 April 2005 in order to seek clarity on certain policy
    issues related to the Children’s Bill [B70 – 2003 (Reintroduced)]. The
    workshop was held at the Cape Town International Convention Centre, and
    was attended by Members of Parliament, representatives of civil society
    organisations, child protection practitioners, academics, legal
    advisors and officials from the Department of Social Development.




       Day 1




    Intersectoral cooperation



     Presentation by Ms Paula Proudlock, Children’s Bill Working Group
     (CBWG)


    The presentation noted that it was important to ensure that the Bill
    provides the necessary legal framework for the realisation of South
    Africa’s obligations to children. It noted that not all of the
    children’s rights in the Constitution are relevant to the Children’s
    Bill, and argued that it would be important to list the right that the
    Bill is trying to give effect to. This could be captured in the objects
    clause, which will ensure that the substantive provisions in the Bill
    flow from the statement of rights. It could also help identifying roles
    and responsibilities on the side of the state and other service
    providers, as well as clarify whether a service should be compulsory or
    discretionary (the Minister must/the Minister may).


    The presentation listed the rights that the Children’s Working Group
    believes are directly relevant in the Bill. They include the right to:


    • family or parental care, or appropriate alternative care
    • social services
         • protection against maltreatment, neglect, abuse or degradation
    • freedom from all forms of violence
    • protection against exploitative labour practices
         • have a legal representative appointed at state expense in civil
           proceedings where appropriate
         • basic education (insofar as this right relates to early
           childhood development programmes)


    In addition, the Bill should also address the constitutional imperative
    that the best interests of the child are paramount in every matter
    concerning the child. It was also argued that the Bill could indicate
    that it was aimed at partially realising a right, as there are a number
    of other vehicles for realising children’s rights, such as policy
    documents, programmes and administrative action. The Children’s Bill
    Working Group argued that the enumeration of rights should be followed
    by a clarification of what the child is entitled to, who must take
    responsibility for fulfilling the right, and what the nature and extent
    of the obligation on the State is in this regard. It should further
    follow that the substantive provisions that follow in the Bill are
    based on the constitutional rights listed earlier.


    In conclusion, the presentation noted that Parliament was bound by the
    Constitution recognising children’s rights in legislation, and to hold
    the Executive accountable for the implementation of the law. The
    Children’s Bill should create the obligation on the Executive to
    recognise children’s rights and to implement programmes and services
    that will realise these rights, even if the law can only be implemented
    in phases because of a lack of resources.



    Discussion



    Members noted that certain aspects of the chapter dealing with
    children’s rights had not been covered in the presentation, and asked
    how clauses 3 and 4, for example, should be dealt with. It was also
    pointed out that the Committee wanted to establish a framework for the
    interpretation of the rights mentioned. In response, the presenter
    argued that the rights listed in the South African Law Reform
    Commission (SALRC) version of the Bill included rights that do not
    really fall within the ambit of the Children’s Bill. While it would be
    best to retain a children’s rights chapter in some form, the inclusion
    of the relevant rights in the long title and the preamble of the Bill
    would go a long way to resolving the issue.


    Presentation by Advocate Anne Skelton, Centre for Child Law, University
    of the Witwatersrand
    The presentation noted that an understanding of the need for a
    children’s rights chapter could start “from the bottom up”, which would
    clarify the need for the Bill to include a mechanism for intersectoral
    cooperation.



      Discussion



    Members noted that the question of how Government envisaged interaction
    across the three levels of government and between departments, was
    being addressed by the Intergovernmental Relations Bill, and that this
    Bill could possibly have a bearing on how the Children’s Bill would be
    implemented. Chapters 1 to 3 of the Bill should provide the tools with
    which to drive its implementation, and are structured in accordance
    with how the SALRC conceptualised it. However, it would be better to
    follow the route suggested by the CBWG in that the Bill focuses on
    realising particular children’s rights, and to state these rights in
    the “objectives” clause. This would mean that the largest part of
    chapter 3 could be omitted.


    In relation to whether the Bill should provide for an intersectoral
    committee, it was argued that Cabinet had clearly rejected this concept
    for the Children’s Bill. The Office on the Rights of the Child had not
    responded satisfactorily on the question of what responsibility they
    could take to ensure intersectoral collaboration. Members expressed
    their doubt about whether an intersectoral committee provided for in
    the Bill would be the appropriate vehicle for the purpose of
    implementing the legislation. A participant noted that the draft
    intergovernmental relations Bill would speak to the relationship
    between the three teirs of government, and not to the relationships
    between government departments. It was further argued that Cabinet had
    not necessarily rejected the concept of an intersectoral committee
    being provided for in legislation, as the Child Justice Bill provides
    for such a mechanism. Finally, it was proposed that this mechanism be
    considered for inclusion in the Regulations to the Children’s Bill, and
    that the Committee be empowered to create the policy framework that had
    been envisaged with the National Policy Framework in the draft SALRC
    Bill. However, the question was raised whether policymaking was not the
    exclusive prerogative of the Executive.



       Protection of the rights and interests of minors: guardianship



    Presentation by Mr Hendrik van der Merwe, Office of the Master of the
     High Court


    The presentation set out the functions of the Master of the High Court
    in relation to children, noting that it generally involved protecting
    the rights and interests of minor children that are the heirs or
    creditors in deceased estates. This includes appointing tutors or
    curators to handle the minor’s affairs, holding funds on behalf of a
    minor or handling claims for maintenance against a deceased estate. It
    was further noted that the Master’s handling of matters where the
    interests of a minor are concerned with great diligence and in strict
    adherence to regulations.


    In relation to the phenomenon of “property grabbing”, it was noted that
    this happens generally not because children’s property is not protected
    by law, but because people generally, and children in particular, are
    not aware of their rights. The Master’s Branch is currently consulting
    with the Department of Education on the possibility of including the
    relevant information in the life skills curriculum.


    The presentation further pointed out that the Master’s Office would
    under no circumstances, appoint a child to administer a deceased
    estate, as the requirement in this regard is that the person appointed
    must be 21 and have legal capacity. It is only in the case of a minor
    that has been emancipated, or when the age of majority is lowered to
    18, that this will change. However, the growing number of orphans in
    South Africa results in the Master’s Office regularly receiving
    requests for the appointment of a guardian over minors, not so much in
    order to administer children’s estates, but to act in the various other
    capacities for which the consent of a parent or guardian is normally
    required. The appointment of a tutor is not always the appropriate
    response, as it might not serve the purpose for which the request was
    lodged, and High Court applications for the awarding of guardianship is
    a lengthy and cumbersome process.


    In discussions between the Master’s Office, Social Services, Family
    Advocates and the Registrar of the High Court, it emerged that the most
    feasible solution would be for caregivers to apply to be appointed as
    foster parents. This could also entitle the family to State support in
    the form of the foster care grant.


    Discussion


    During the discussion, Members asked what the opinion of the Master’s
    Office would be with regard to the proposal to award child-headed
    households full legal capacity. In addition, the question of the role
    of the Master’s office in cases where minor children inherit property
    was raised. Members also wanted to know whether, in light of the fact
    that services from the Master’s office are being made available at
    certain magistrates’ courts, the Master would also deal with questions
    of guardianship.


    In response, the presenter said that where there are no parents, the
    Master’s office must identify persons to take charge of the property,
    for example, at a meeting of family members. In such cases, a tutor
    could be appointed, but the options are limited by the relevant
    legislation. Where a minor has been left with property, the Master must
    appoint someone to act as tutor or caretaker. Tutors have limited
    responsibilities, although there have been instances where tutors have
    been allowed wider functions. When the sale or transfer of the fixed
    property is at stake, any proceeds from such a transaction will be
    transferred to the Master’s Trust. The person in whose care the child
    is placed by the Department of Social Development is often the person
    to whom money will eventually be transferred. However, there are no
    clear guarantees that the money will be used for the benefit of the
    child.


    In relation to customary law, the presenter noted that there are some
    issues around adoption that are proving to be a challenge. In terms of
    current law and the Children’s Bill, only court-approved adoptions are
    valid; however, the Bill does not address the de facto situation with
    regard to customary adoptions.


    Members raised the issue of whether magistrates’ courts would be able
    to deal with issues of deceased estates, given the fact that until the
    Moseneke case, the estates of black persons were as a matter of law
    dealt with by magistrates. In response, the presenter said that there
    are serious capacity limitations with regard to magistrates, and only
    estates with a value of less than R50 000 are currently devolved to
    staff at magistrates court level. It was also pointed out that the
    “service points” referred to are currently in a pilot phase, and it is
    not thought to be feasible at this point to devolve the responsibility
    of appointing tutors and taking charge of children’s property rights to
    this level of office.


    Further discussion on the matter made it clear that the difference
    between parental rights and responsibilities and guardianship must be
    explored further. These questions must also be raised within the
    context of possible conflicts between, for example, communal land
    ownership and the statutes that guarantee property rights in an
    individual capacity, the role of tribal authorities in implementing
    laws regarding children, and the question whether the children are
    protected. A further question of whether the law should allow for
    automatic rights and responsibilities on the basis of blood, and
    whether these rights and responsibilities should be awarded on the
    basis of merit, irrespective of blood relationships. Once more, the
    questions relate to how the new law will affect the customary practice
    where people take care of children without undergoing formal processes
    in the courts, and to the measures available to protect children should
    disputes arise between different family members. Informal kinship
    arrangements are being made every day, and the question is whether
    these must all be formalised, given the difficulties people in rural
    areas have in accessing courts.


    Members noted that the issues around parental rights and
    responsibilities introduce new dynamics into the common law as it
    relates, for example, to custody. Clause 45(1) provides that the
    magistrates’ court could deal with issues of custody, which raises the
    question whether the Bill aims to amend the common law definition of
    custody. It was also pointed out that the Recognition of Customary
    Marriages Act provides for a magistrates court to issue a certificate
    stating that a couple have been married. It could, therefore, be useful
    to explore whether such a mechanism could not be introduced for the
    purpose of facilitating customary adoptions or care situations.


    The discussions on the manner in which guardianship is conceptualised
    suggested that the relationship between guardianship, parental rights
    and responsibilities and custody, and in what manner they should be
    dealt with, needed to be revisited. However, some members expressed a
    preference for awarding magistrates the authority to deal with
    guardianship. The Bill needed to clarify the different concepts, and
    ensure that there is harmony between the different practices and legal
    frameworks that relate to children.


    Virginity testing


    Submission by the Commission on Gender Equality (CGE)


    The submission, focusing on the interests and rights of the girl child,
    noted that children’s rights are constitutionally guaranteed, including
    the child’s right to bodily integrity. It also noted that Section 28 of
    the Constitution provides that children should be free from violence,
    coercion, discrimination, intimidation and abuse. The submission
    further pointed out that Section 12 of the Constitution guarantees
    freedom and security of the person, which again includes the right to
    physical integrity, while Section 14 states that everyone has the right
    to privacy. Against this background, it was argued that virginity
    testing constitutes an infringement on the child’s constitutional
    rights. Virginity testing, whether with the child’s consent or not, is
    an invasion of privacy, while disclosing a child’s virginity status is
    a further invasion of privacy. In this respect, the submission argued
    that the Bill does not protect children adequately, as it does not
    provide for non-disclosure of the girl child’s virginity status to
    someone other than the child. The submission also questioned whether
    children ever participate in the practice freely and through informed
    consent, as it could be argued that parental coercion and social
    pressure under the guise of culture could play an important role in the
    process.


    The next section of the submission explored the question of whether the
    limitations clause in the Constitution (Section 36) could be invoked to
    allow for the above-mentioned infringement on the child’s rights in a
    context where social demands could override the child’s right to
    privacy and bodily integrity. The submission argued that the
    justification of practising virginity testing in the name of “culture”
    is a contested issue, and that the results of the test can be
    unreliable, as the hymen can be ruptured without sexual penetration. In
    addition, with regards to using the practice as part of the fight
    against HIV and AIDS, it was argued that there should be less invasive
    means of addressing the pandemic, such as educating and empowering
    children to make informed choices with regard to their sexuality.


    The Children’s Bill does not prohibit virginity testing, but provides
    that the child has the right to refuse testing. It was the view of the
    submission that the Bill does not adequately protect children.


    With regard to gender equality, the submission held that Section 8 of
    The Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act
    (Act No. 4 of 2000) prohibits any practice, including traditional,
    customary or religious practice, which impairs the dignity of women,
    and undermines equality between women and men”. These provisions must
    be seen in the context of practices that place a higher value on women
    who are virgins, while the woman who is not a virgin upon marriage, is
    vulnerable to abuse from her husband because of the lower esteem in
    which she is held. On this basis, it was argued that virginity testing
    impairs the dignity of the girl child, and exposes her to
    stigmatisation and abuse. It was also noted that while in some
    instances, boys are also subjected to virginity testing, the practice
    is far more prevalent in relation to girls, and therefore discriminates
    against the girl child on the basis of gender.


    The CGE raised concern about a number of specific issues in clause 12
    of the Children’s Bill:


         • While the clause provides that a child may refuse to undergo a
           virginity test, the Bill does not require the child’s consent to
           be tested.


         • No penalties are stipulated for non-compliance with unhygienic
           virginity testing.


    • No procedure is prescribed in respect of the test.


         • The Bill does not provide for confidentiality in respect of the
           results of a virginity test.


    In conclusion, the submission noted that the CGE does not support
    virginity testing, and while every person has the right to practise
    their culture, this must be done in accordance with the Constitution.


    Discussion
    The presenter was asked whether children would have the option of not
    being tested for virginity. In response, the presenter said that this
    would be the case, but that it would have to be accompanied with the
    appropriate information on the reason for doing a virginity test.


    In the ensuing discussion, Members raised a number of questions
    relating to the manner in which the clause had been phrased. The first
    focused on whether there was a shared definition of what “harmful
    cultural practices” means, and whether the issue is that the Bill
    should protect children against practices that are harmful in a medical
    sense, in which case the formulation of the clause was perhaps
    inappropriate. In addition, consideration should be given to whether
    the practices must be prohibited below a certain age in order to allow
    children to participate meaningfully in decisions around virginity
    testing and circumcision. It was pointed out that the practice of
    virginity testing was not necessarily an effective deterrent against
    sexual activity among young girls, and that the labelling that was
    associated with the practice could stigmatise a girl in a community. At
    the same time, there has been evidence that being identified as a
    virgin could make a young girl vulnerable to being raped by men who
    believe that having sex with a virgin could cure them from HIV. The
    Committee should therefore also consider whether the Bill should
    address possible discrimination should a girl refuse to be tested, or
    should the test reveal that she was no longer a virgin.


    One of the participants noted that the original wording proposed by the
    SALRC had been “potentially harmful practices” in order to make it
    clear that there was divergence of opinion on the matter. The earlier
    proposal also called for education programmes aimed at informing
    communities about the different debates on these cultural practices. In
    addition, the possibility was mentioned of removing the common law
    defence with regard to virginity testing, and that someone could be
    charged with indecent assault, should a girl be tested against her
    will.


    Members of the Committee proposed that the entire clause be redrafted
    to remove the negative associations of “harmful cultural practices”,
    and to ensure that there is clarity about what the Bill intends
    protecting children from.


    Corporal punishment


    Presentation by Ms Linda Mngomezulu, South African National Civic
    Organisation (SANCO)


    The submission by SANCO noted that corporal punishment is rooted in the
    history of power-centred societies where some individuals retain power
    and control over others through coercion and force. Although a
    substantial amount of work has been done to develop methods that
    provide an alternative to “smacks and spanks”, these have not been
    translated into training programmes aimed at instilling a different
    style of parenting. Child psychologists have also clearly shown the
    emotional damage that corporal punishment causes young people, and the
    paper argued that corporal punishment could be viewed as a precursor to
    intolerance and violence in society. Some of the after-effects of
    corporal punishment highlighted in the paper include repeating domestic
    and family violence, road rage and unstable emotional relationships as
    adults. The paper also warned that the immediate removal of corporal
    punishment could cause serious problems, as the family is already under
    tremendous pressure to cope with the changes in a society in
    transition. Unless parents are assisted adequately to apply alternative
    methods of disciplining children, they might feel that they are losing
    control of their families completely, and this may lead to complete
    disintegration of families.


    Despite the caution mentioned, the presentation argued that there
    should be no corporal punishment of any kind, and that South Africans
    must find other, more effective ways of enforcing discipline. These new
    methods should be phased in through the promotion of a different
    lifestyle, rather than through a “dry legislative approach”. In
    addition, the criminalisation of parents must be delayed until new
    methods have adequately been absorbed and internalised by society.


    Presentation by Carol Bower, RAPCAN


    The presenter noted that, although corporal punishment has already been
    banned in the public sphere, there are many people who believe that it
    cannot be banned in the private sphere. RAPCAN argued that there are
    many clear links between corporal punishment and difficulties later in
    life. Given the fact that South Africans are trying to come to terms
    with the remnants of a violent past, and given the high levels of
    violence still prevalent in the country, children should be taught that
    violence is not an appropriate response to a difficult situation.


    In relation to the argument that corporal punishment is sanctioned in
    the Bible, the presenter pointed out that many of the forms of
    chastisement proposed in the Bible have already been outlawed, such as
    cutting off the hand of someone who steals, or stoning to death someone
    who commits adultery. It was more important, according to the
    presenter, to explore what it is that corporal punishment teaches the
    child. It does not teach the child discipline, but rather that violence
    is an acceptable form of behaviour. Discipline should be a process and
    not an event. Therefore, corporal punishment should be banned with the
    clear realisation that discipline in the home is a difficult area, and
    that a radical change of attitude is required from all parents. Parents
    must be taught how to address discipline, and be provided with
    alternatives to beating their child.


    Discussion


    Members said that there was not much disagreement on the principle that
    corporal punishment must be replaced with alternative forms of
    discipline, but noted that there would be questions around implementing
    education and parenting programmes to deal with issues of discipline.
    The presenter responded by saying that it is already a crime to assault
    one’s child, but that parents still have recourse to the common law
    defence of reasonable chastisement. Organisations are not calling for a
    flood of criminal charges against parents, but for the start of a
    process of changing attitudes. The starting point would be to recognise
    that violence against the child is not acceptable, and that it is an
    infringement on the child’s right not to be degraded.



    Presentation by Dr Moses Thindisa



    The presenter argued that there is a difference between abuse and
    physical punishment that is appropriate. He called for legislators to
    refrain from being prescriptive to the point where parents are not able
    to decide for themselves how to raise their children. In the discussion
    that followed his remarks, participants noted that when one says it is
    in order to apply corporal punishment, one has to consider what is
    appropriate and when it becomes abusive.


    Children’s right to consent to medical treatment



    Presentation by Dr Eva Seobi



    The presentation focused on the difficulties experienced by medical
    personnel when dealing with children who have to make decisions
    concerning medical treatment such as termination of pregnancies or
    access to contraceptives. The presenter noted that children below 16
    are not equipped to make informed decisions on their own. When asked
    about whether they are sexually active, children often reply in the
    negative, and indicate that they are not interested in contraceptives.
    However, the very same children often present at health facilities when
    they are pregnant or when they have contracted sexually transmitted
    infections. It was therefore argued that the provisions in the Bill
    regarding children’s right to make decisions about medical treatment
    and reproductive rights are inappropriate, and that children should
    always make such decisions under the guidance of their parents or
    guardians.


       HIV testing of children


    Presentation by Dr Janet Giddy, Director of HIV Programmes at McCord’s
    Hospital, KwaZulu-Natal


    The presenter noted that the law had not kept pace with the HIV
    pandemic, and that a    number of ethical dilemmas have already arisen
    with regard to rapid testing for HIV. The greater availability of HIV
    treatment has impacted on people’s willingness to come forward and seek
    treatment. Treatment has also reduced the stigma attached to HIV and
    AIDS, and the entire conceptualisation of the condition appears to be
    changing.


    Dr Giddy argued that the scope of who may consent to HIV testing of
    children must be widened, and expressed support for the age limit of 12
    as proposed in the Bill. However, one must also consider allowing
    informal caregivers to assist children in making the decision, and to
    give consent where the child is unable to do so himself/herself.
    However, the question that arose was what rights the child would have
    to refuse testing if he or she did not want to be tested.

    Day 2



      Impact of the Children’s Bill on common and customary law


    Submission by Professor Chuma Himonga (Faculty of Law, University of
    Cape Town)



    General comments


    The submission noted that the Children’s Bill should not proceed on the
    assumption that African traditional institutions do not and cannot be
    expected to protect children because of the patriarchal nature of
    traditional society. It argued that living customary law is, unlike
    official customary law, dynamic, flexible and adapts to changing
    conditions. Therefore, and because it should not be assumed that
    traditional leaders are not influenced in their thinking by the values
    of the Constitution, they should not be excluded by the Bill from
    dealing with children’s issues in appropriate cases. This is especially
    important because they are close to the communities where children live
    in rural areas.


    But even in the case where traditional leaders still apply patriarchal
    norms, the solution seems to be to educate them about the
    constitutional values, rather than to exclude them from exercising any
    jurisdiction over children under the Bill. In fact, it seems inevitable
    that the Bill should make provision for education and awareness-raising
    programmes concerning the specific roles for traditional leaders and
    the staff of all other institutions charged with the responsibility of
    administering the Act who do not have professional legal training or
    training in human rights and values.


    The submission argued that, in light of the inaccessibility of the
    courts in broad terms, the emphasis for the protection of children must
    be on community responses, for example, through families, local
    community leaders and organisations operating at community level rather
    than through courts as a primary approach. If courts are to be used, it
    must be those that are close to the community in location and are
    accessible in terms of procedures, cost etc.


    The Constitution and other international children’s rights instruments
    give recognition to the role of parents and the family in so far as
    they place the primary responsibility for the upbringing and the
    development of children upon the families of the children. Normal
    parents know their children and their needs better than anyone else
    does, and they ‘will be more concerned as well as better able than
    anyone else to ensure that whatever action they take will serve their
    children’s welfare. In addition, it was argued that the exercising of
    parental rights and responsibilities in this context does not
    necessarily undermine the idea of children’s rights generally. Since
    society assigns child-rearing responsibilities largely to the family,
    it could therefore be argued that it is reasonable to accord the family
    as well some significant discretion in imparting its values to the
    children within it.


    The submission warned against the practice of simply adopting
    approaches to the protection of children from other countries without
    due regard to the special circumstances pertaining to South Africa as
    an African country, with constitutionally protected diverse cultures
    and religions. It was pointed out that the rights of the child in the
    Bill of Rights are limited. Their protection should not be taken as
    absolute, to the exclusion of other legitimate interest of society.
    There is also a need for a healthy balance between the child’s autonomy
    rights (i.e. rights that recognise self-determination) and the rights
    and responsibility of parents to bring up children and to help them
    develop into responsible adults.


    In conclusion to the general comments, the submission argued that a
    statute dealing with children should strive to avoid, as much as
    possible, unclear and complex language that will require interpretation
    by courts and consequent litigation, as many people will simply not be
    able to afford litigation to the detriment of children. This would be a
    difficult issue, as many of the topics dealt with in the Bill fall
    within the ambit of constitutional rights, which would require
    interpretation by courts and not by ordinary citizens or traditional
    authorities etc.
    The extent to which the Bill repeals common and customary laws
    particularly in relation to certain cultural practices in customary law


    The submission noted that the scope of the Bill was so wide that it
    would not be possible to point to all the instances where common law
    and customary law would be affected. The comments would therefore be
    focused at a general level and at the level of specific reference to
    clauses 8 and 12.


    General


    In the first place, the submission argued that, in light of the fact
    that legislation takes precedence over common law, any rule of common
    law which conflicts with the provisions of the Bill will be replaced by
    the Bill, while rules of common law that do not conflict with the Bill
    will remain in operation. If the intention of the Bill is to repeal all
    common law rules concerning children this should be made clear by a
    general provision in the Bill to the effect that the Act applies
    notwithstanding any common law to the contrary.


    There is, however, no rule of interpretation stating that in the event
    of a conflict between customary law and any legislation, the latter
    prevails, and it was argued that such a rule would be contrary to s 211
    (3) of the Constitution which provides that ‘the courts must apply
    customary law when it is applicable, subject to the Constitution and
    any legislation that specifically deals with customary law.’ In so far
    as the Bill does not ‘specifically deal with customary law’ it does not
    exclude customary law from applying ‘when it is applicable.’ If,
    therefore, the choice-of-law rules indicate that customary law applies
    to a matter before the court, then it will be bound to apply customary
    law and not common law or the Children’s Act. The factors that are
    currently used to determine whether customary law applies to a matter
    before the court include the agreement of the parties, the nature of
    the transaction, the lifestyle of the parties, and the environment of
    the transaction. Consequently, customary law continues to apply in most
    areas covered by the Bill unless it is contrary to the Constitution.


    The submission argued that the effect of this is, for example, that the
    provisions of chapter 4 of the Bill on parental responsibilities and
    rights would not prevail over customary law on parental
    responsibilities and rights. One option for dealing with this difficult
    area would be to include a general provision in the Bill stating that
    the provisions of the Bill apply notwithstanding any rule of customary
    law to the contrary. The effect of such a provision, it was argued,
    would be to wipe out all customary law, including customary law that
    does not infringe the Constitution. But this risks a constitutional
    challenge against the Bill on the ground that it infringes ss 15, 30,
    31 and 211(3) of the Constitution, all of which recognise customary law
    subject to the Constitution and the Constitution only (or in the case
    of s211 (3), subject to the Constitution and to legislation dealing
    specifically with customary law).


    The second option offered by the submission is to ‘integrate’ customary
    rules that are consistent with the Constitution into the Children’s
    Bill, thereby removing the separate co-existence of customary law and
    the Bill.


    The third option is to leave the position as it is and let the two
    systems run parallel to each other, with people opting for whatever
    system they choose to use. However, it was noted that this raises the
    question of how to determine which children will continue to be
    governed by customary law and which children will be governed by the
    Children’s Act. It was argued that there is a need for the Bill to
    provide for the application of the Act in terms of which children it
    will apply to. The current choice-of-law rules for determining what
    system of law to apply when there is a conflict between customary law
    and the common have been developed by the courts, but the submission
    argued that they are not appropriate for resolving the question of the
    application of the Children’s Act.


    Clauses 8 and 12


    Clause 8 provides for the resolution of conflicts between other
    legislation and Chapter 3, but not for the resolution of conflicts
    between customary law or common law and the chapter. In the event of a
    conflict between customary law and the rights of the child in Chapter 3
    (which are similar to the rights of the child in Chapter 2 of the
    Constitution), the latter should prevail unless the conflicting rule of
    customary law can be given precedence in terms of s 36(1) of the
    Constitution. This is because no customary right may limit a right
    entrenched in the Bill of Rights unless the constitutional right is
    limited by s 36(1). However, it was argued that in order to carry out
    this intention, clause 8 would need to be expanded to include customary
    law. The clause could also be expanded to the effect that in the event
    of a conflict between a provision of Chapter 3 and any other
    legislation or common law or customary law, the provisions of this
    Chapter prevail (subject to the Constitution) except – (a) to the
    extent that such other legislation or common law or customary law is or
    could…’


     This amendment creates room for the preservation under clause 8(a) of a
     rule or principle of common law or customary law that, though contrary
     to the rights of the child guaranteed in Vhapter 3, is not contrary to
     the Constitution or is justifiable and reasonable, in terms of s 36 of
     the Constitution.


     With regard to clause 12 of the Bill, which clearly prohibits any
     harmful cultural practice that affects the well-being, health or
     dignity of the child, the submission argued that all customary
     practices that are harmful to the child are repealed, unless they are
     “saved” by clause 8(a) of the Bill. Whether or not the practices in
     question are covered by this clause will be a matter, presumably, of
     judicial interpretation. However, the need for judicial interpretation
     will increase the need for litigation.


     The next question posed by the submission was what the harmful
     practices contemplated by clause 12 are, since the Bill does not define
     them. The submission argued that this raises the danger that not all
     harmful practices are prohibited or that only practices of certain
     communities are targeted. It would appear that only the cultural
     practices of child betrothal, child marriage, marriage without consent
     of the parties to it, virginity testing and circumcision that are
     associated with customary law, and therefore with Black South Africans,
     are prohibited or regulated under clause 12. In comparison, the
     submission pointed out, other practices that could be termed harmful,
     depending on who is looking at them, are not prohibited. A related
     question is how the harmfulness of some of the specifically named
     cultural practices, such as virginity testing, has been established in
     the absence of scientific empirical research, as opposed to anecdotal
     research that shows that they are indeed harmful.


     The submission therefore recommended that a definition of harmful
     cultural practices be included in the Bill, and that practices
     identified as harmful be prohibited outright. Practices that are not
     covered by this definition should not be prohibited. The challenge
     would be how to define harmful cultural practices, and to consider
     whether it is the best interests of the child alone that must be taken
     into consideration, or the legitimate needs or interests of the child’s
     family or community as well.


    Chastisement under customary law and common law


    The submission noted that both customary law and the common law permit
    chastisement as a method of disciplining children. In customary law,
    this method is not always restricted to parents; other adult members of
    the community may use it to discipline the child of another person as
    well. The submission argued that reasonable disciplinary chastisement
    by the parent should not be prohibited, and that no criminal or civil
    liability should attach to reasonable chastisement. In addition, there
    must be recognition of the need to educate parents on parenting and
    alternative methods of disciplining children, as well as the need for a
    protection mechanism at the local level to protect children from abuse
    by community child councils (or such other name) comprising of, for
    example, local chiefs, family members of the child, the abused child,
    members of the South African police,
    psychologists/psychiatrists/educationalists, social workers and members
    of community-based organisations.


    It was argued that this mechanism should be directed at a restorative
    justice model with prosecution as a last resort. In areas with
    customary communities, the councils should incorporate acceptable
    customary methods of dealing with offenders. In cases where a parent
    exceeds reasonable chastisement and admits his or her responsibility
    for abuse to the police, such parents should be diverted from being
    charged and prosecuted by agreeing to attend the community council with
    the aim of reaching an appropriate undertaking. This option, however,
    would also require a minimum definition of what is reasonable corporal
    punishment, taking into account the nature of what is done to the
    child, its duration, frequency and effect on the child, as well as the
    child’s age, and the child’s personal characteristics. The option
    avoids the criminalisation of ordinary parents as opposed to abusive
    parents.


    The submission argued that the idea that a parent cannot even smack a
    child on the bottom to discipline him or her is not likely to be
    readily accepted by a lot of parents, and that the consultative process
    by the South African Law Reform Commission on the question of corporal
    punishment found no clear support for the outright abolition of this
    method of disciplining children. Legislation on children is of little
    benefit if it does not enjoy the broad support of families and
    communities, but relies instead solely on law enforcement agencies to
    implement it.


    It was further argued that the concept of reasonableness in relation to
    chastisement seems to provide a balance between the cultural rights or
    religious rights of families connected with the upbringing of their
    children on one hand, and the other rights, including the rights of the
    child in the Constitution and international law on the other hand. The
    provisions of the Children’s Bill and of other laws that punish the
    conduct of parents resulting in the ill-treatment and the abuse of
    children, such as legislation against domestic violence, the common law
    offences of assault, assault with intent to cause grievous bodily harm
    and attempted murder will still be available to protect the child
    against parental abuse.


    The submission argued that an approach that outlaws chastisement was a
    hard and uncompromising child-rights approach in line with article 19
    of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which
    protects the right of the child from all forms of physical or mental
    violence, injury or abuse, and in line with constitutional rights.
    Corporal punishment as a judicial sentence and as a disciplinary
    measure at school was abolished by the Constitutional Court, because
    the court considered it to be inhuman, degrading and an affront to
    dignity, and it could not be saved by the limitations clause of the
    Constitution. The above approach would therefore hold that all forms of
    corporal punishment, whether under common law or customary law or in
    the family, should be outlawed.


    It was the contention of the submission that it would be difficult to
    determine where to draw the line between reasonable chastisement and
    abuse, and to monitor the conduct of parents to ensure that their
    disciplinary measures remain reasonable. Therefore, the prohibition of
    all forms of corporal punishment could be seen as a more effective
    mechanism for protecting the child.


    In relation to the third option, namely a prohibition of corporal
    punishment without criminal penalties initially, but accompanied by a
    ‘comprehensive public awareness and education campaign and the
    provision of the necessary supportive services for parents and
    children, the submission noted that the advantage of this option is
    that it would ‘ultimately encourage ways of child rearing which promote
    dignity, respect and self-discipline.


    With reference to sub clause 142 (3) which reads: “any legislation and
    rule of common law or customary law authorising corporal punishment of
    a child by a court, including the court of a traditional leader is
    hereby repealed to the extent that it authorises such punishment”, the
    submission argued that the Constitutional Court has already decided
    that corporal punishment as a judicial sentence is unconstitutional,
    and there is already legislation outlawing it. In so far as traditional
    courts are part of the judiciary, they are not exempt from this law.


    Succession


    The submission noted that the practice of “property grabbing” is
    harmful to children to the extent that it deprives them of a source of
    livelihood, especially in light of the general breakdown of traditional
    support systems for individuals that were anchored in kinship
    relationships, as well as the conditions of poverty under which the
    majority of people live. In these circumstances, the property left by
    parents is a critical resource for the support of their minor children.




    It was pointed out that the Constitutional Court’s decision in the case
    of Bhe has settled the question of children’s rights to inherit from
    their parents, albeit temporarily. The effect of the decision is that
    all children, whether male or female or extra-marital are entitled to
    inherit from their parents in terms of the Intestate Succession Act of
    1987. This legal position will continue until Parliament has enacted
    legislation regulating succession under customary law.


    It was recommended that the Bill should not only prohibit any practice
    that prevents children from inheriting from their parents, but that it
    should also provide for children to inherit from their parents along
    the lines of the temporary scheme instituted by the Constitutional
    Court in the Bhe case.


    Parental rights and Responsibility under customary law and the Link to
    statutory law


    Guardianship


    The submission held that the parental rights and responsibilities
    provided for in the Children’s Bill are at variance with customary law.
    In terms of customary law, children are affiliated to their mother’s
    husband and his family if he paid lobolo for her marriage, regardless
    of who the biological father is. On the other hand, children of an
    unmarried woman are affiliated to the head of her family and his
    family. The support of the children is primarily the responsibility of
    the family to which they are affiliated. The father has no
    responsibility towards the support of his child unless he has acquired
    guardianship through the system of affiliation of children discussed
    above. Underlying the customary law of the child is the welfare of the
    child, which is embedded in the group responsibility of the family of
    the parent to which the children are affiliated.


    Relation to statutory law


    It was further argued that the provisions of the Bill conflict with s
    8(4)(e) and (5) of the Recognition of Customary Marriages Act, which
    make explicit reference to the role of customary law and traditional
    leaders in relation to provision for maintenance after divorce and to
    mediation in disputes before the dissolution of the marriage
    respectively. The submission noted that this Act does not exclude
    matters relating to children from the application of these provisions.
    Since the provisions of the Bill do not override customary law, it may
    be assumed that they do not prevail over any legislation that deals
    specifically with customary law either. Thus the provisions of the
    Recognition of Customary Marriages Act above are unaffected by those
    provisions of the Bill with which they are in conflict.


    Section 28(2) of the Constitution states that the best interests of the
    child are of paramount importance in every matter concerning the child.
    This principle is applicable to customary law as well. This would mean
    that if the affiliation of the child or the notion of the best
    interests of the child under customary law stated above is contrary to
    the best interests of the child as perceived from the point of view of
    the constitutional principle, then the latter would prevail over the
    former. The decision-maker would therefore be required to apply the
    constitutional principle to determine the issue of custody of the child
    contrary to the system of customary law of affiliation of children
    discussed above.
    With regard to the guidelines to the interpretation of the best
    interests of the child provided by clause 6 of the Bill, the submission
    noted that they apparently accommodate customary law to the extent that
    they make reference to the factors listed in clause 6(1)(a), (f), (h),
    (j) and (k). They do not therefore conflict with the acquisition of
    parental power under customary law. The other factors are in one way or
    another at variance with the basic principles of affiliation of
    children under customary law.


    Forums for deciding matters relating to children


    The Bill provides that only the High Court has jurisdiction over issues
    of guardianship of the child. The submission argued that the High Court
    should not have exclusive jurisdiction on matters of guardianship.
    Instead, matters of parental responsibility and rights should also be
    dealt with by traditional leaders, provided that they are properly
    educated on the constitutional principles and values underlying the
    rights of children, as well as by other lower courts. In addition, it
    was argued that, in light of the HIV pandemic, as a result of which
    adults die in quick succession, it would be extremely cumbersome for
    several people to go to the High Court in succession to be appointed as
    guardians of the same child every time the child’s guardian dies.


    The submission proposed that the Bill provide for the jurisdiction of
    traditional leaders in matters of guardianship, alongside with the
    provision that they be afforded the education that is relevant to the
    discharge of their jurisdiction in matters of guardianship. The
    traditional leaders’ jurisdiction in this regard could be linked to the
    community child council referred to earlier by, for example, requiring
    the participation of the council in the hearing of disputes on
    guardianship by traditional leaders’ courts.


    Along with this recommendation, it was recommended that the Bill also
    provide for automatic guardianship of children after the death of both
    parents of the child. For example, adult siblings, grandparents,
    uncles/ aunts etc should be guardians in that order, unless the best
    interests of the child suggest otherwise. This would help minimise
    uncertainties on the question of guardianship and obviate unnecessary
    litigation over guardianship.



      Conceptualisation of foster care




     Presentation by Jackie Lofell – Johannesburg Child Welfare Society



    The definition of  “foster care” has important implications for social
    security, for example, the foster care grant. There is a need to make
    some state aid available to informal caregivers to alleviate the
    pressures from the foster care grant, as well as on children’s courts
    and social workers. In addition, there is no sign of any growth in
    child and family welfare service infrastructure to accommodate the huge
    increase in foster care placements, and there are regular complaints
    that services are being closed or curtailed because of lack of funding.



    It has been noted that the country’s foster care system has become an
    “income maintenance system” for families offering kinship care who lack
    access to other forms of state aid. By allowing our foster care
    services to become predominantly a means of accessing income support,
    we are not only short-changing the poor families whom the system cannot
    absorb in the vast numbers who are presenting themselves, but are
    instead destroying all hope of ever responding properly to the children
    who are being referred due to rape, assault and every other form of
    active maltreatment.


    There is a need to resolve whether the definition of “foster care”
    should maintain the existing status of a “foster parent” or whether it
    should include some aspects of guardianship. Limitations on the right
    of foster parents, especially where guardianship issues are concerned,
    often hamper their ability to carry out their parenting functions.
    Furthermore, there is a need to redefine custody, to expand it in order
    to insure that some aspects of guardianship fall within custody, for
    example, some responsibilities such as school placement can be dealt
    with by the custodian. Recognition should also be given to new forms of
    foster care, to allow for greater mutual support and increased
    flexibility of care arrangements



      Discussion



    There is a need to re-conceptualise what kind of competencies to be
    given to non-governmental organisations (NGOs), social workers and how
    much power should be given to neighbours and other adults to support
    child-headed households. It was argued that foster care should not be
    used as a means to address the issue of child-headed households, but
    instead consider a whole range of programmes. A flexible approach is
    advocated, recognising that while some children in child-headed
    households will end up in foster care or residential care, other should
    remain in their homes. In order to give affect to the Bill, issues
    around financing of NGOs must also be sorted out, since statutory child
    protection services cannot be at the mercy of discretionary rules. In
    addition, the whole system of remuneration for social workers (also in
    the NGO sector) must be looked at seriously.



       Parental rights and responsibilities




    Presentation by Professor Julia Sloth-Nielsen – University of the
     Western Cape



     The presentation argued that there was a need to modernise large tracts
    of the law relating to children, i.e. reflecting the shift away from
    outdated concepts of parental power and absolute control over children
    to a legal framework that reflects their rights and responsibilities,
    as mandated by both the Convention of the Right of the Child and
    Section 28(1)(b) of the Constitution. In addition, there is a need to
    accommodate the diversity of family forms that are found in South
    Africa, ensuring that the traditional bias of the family is limited.
    The approach in chapter 4 is to focus on pathological problems, instead
    of the recognition that most biological parents want to do what is best
    for their children.


    The principled position should be maintained that a child’s status
    connections (biological and legal) where parents are married to each
    other, both would have rights and responsibilities in respect of their
    biological children. There is a need to recognise the reality of social
    parenting and the functional connections that children may have with a
    variety of care-givers over the course of their childhood.


    Allocating different aspects of parental responsibility to adults who
    are exercising different roles and functions towards individual
    children creates a future that is characterised by enhanced
    flexibility. The Bill does not provide equal rights for unmarried
    parents of children, and there is a need to re-examine the position of
    unmarried fathers. While clause 21 indicates that if the father takes
    care of the child for 12 months, he qualifies automatically for full
    parental responsibilities and rights, the Bill is not clear on how such
    an automatic process would work.




      Discussion



    Members proposed that the word ‘custody’ should be replaced by ‘care of
    child’ and a list of what constitutes care should be provided. In
    addition, the word ‘access’, which suggests the rights of the parent,
    should be replaced by ‘contact’, which should allow children to have
    the right to decide on who they want to see, especially from puberty
    onwards. There was considerable debate about the need to unpack what
    rights and responsibilities to confer on children heading child-headed
    households, and this debate raised issues of the age of the child
    heading such a household. An argument was raised that the Bill may have
    to consider a cut-off age for children heading households, since
    recognition has to be given to the fact that below a certain level of
    maturity, children cannot cope with such complex issues. However,
    clause 32 already provides recognition of the de facto child-carers,
    including child-headed households. The Committee is faced with the
    challenge of what the legal response should be to the fact that
    children are already providing care of their younger siblings. It was
    suggested that a way to deal with the issue is certainly not to bring
    child-headed households into the children’s court, as this will add to
    the pressure already on courts. Instead, it was recommended that a
    flexible approach is needed to deal with child-headed households. Such
    initiatives may include a mentoring programme to protect children from
    financial exploitation, and provision may have to be made for more than
    one guardian to deal with different issues affecting child-headed
    households. It was further suggested that the Bill should make
    provision for a category of child in a child-headed household that
    requires special care.




    There was some debate on the need for a partial foster-parent or
    different types of foster parents to allow access for child headed
    households to the foster grant. While the role of such a foster parent
    could be explored further in the section-76 part of the Bill, it was
    suggested that such a foster parent should act in consultation with the
    child heading a household. In response, a counter-argument stated that
    to give recognition to a person living outside the child-headed
    household as a foster parent would essentially undermine the concept of
    giving recognition to child-headed households. Instead, the Bill should
    contain provisions that empower child-headed households, while
    community services should be strengthened to support such households.


    It was argued that the issue of unmarried fathers’ rights should be
    revisited, and it was suggested that if a father lived with the child
    for a period of 12 months after birth, the father should qualify for
    automatic responsibility. However, a counter-argument raised suggests
    that this issue of non-automatic rights of fathers has been tested in
    court, and it was found that the current practice is based on fair
    discrimination. One should also take into account the historical
    disadvantage of women, and the dominant view is that granting such
    automatic responsibility will further disadvantage women. The 12-month
    period provided for in the Bill raises questions of how will be
    implemented. Issues to consider include who will police this provision
    and whether it would be implemented on the basis of an affidavit. There
    is a need to look at the process for the screening of ‘supervisors’, as
    contemplated in clause 136.




    Child protection register




    Submitted by Jackie Lofell – Johannesburg Child Welfare Society






    Reporting and registration of incidents of abuse



    The submission argued that the Bill was silent with regard to providing
    unequivocal protection against criminal and civil charges for anyone,
    whether or not included in the list of mandatory reporters, who reports
    an incident of child abuse in good faith. It is suggested that such
    informants be guaranteed confidentiality, irrespective of the provisions
    of the Promotion of Access to Information Act.


    The vulnerability of a child to abuse will be influenced by factors
    including age, sex, rape and disability status, and a provision should
    be included in the Bill for such information to be recorded in part A of
    the Register.


    Clause 105(c)(ii) of the Bill makes it mandatory that where a report of
    abuse is substantiated, children’s court proceedings must automatically
    be initiated, and this being the automatic duty of the relevant social
    worker in the employ of the Department of Social Development or the
    designated child protection organisation or clerk of the children’s
    court who receives the report. While it is recognised that the clerk of
    the court is relevant in this case, with regard to other potential
    recipients of the report it is considered undesirable. The opening of a
    court of enquiry would be counterproductive in the following cases:




        • Cases of sexual abuse that occur outside the home environment and
          in which there is no need to place the child in any form of
          statutory care.
         • Cases of abuse where a parent takes appropriate action to
           protect the child.
         • Cases where early intervention can work without the children’s
           court being brought into the picture.
         • Instead, it is suggested that the onus should be on the social
           worker or other responsible person to confirm that some form of
           action has been taken which can reasonably be expected to ensure
           the safety of the child. This may not involve court action, and
           defies the belief that a child is being done a favour by
           bringing him or her to court.



    Section B of the Child Protection Register



    Clause 122(2) provides that an offender may not be entered on Section B
    of the Register until the time for noting an appeal or review has
    expired, or while he/she has an appeal pending. Given the low rate of
    conviction for such cases in this country, and the fact that it may
    take years for an appeal to be finalised, it is unacceptable that even
    someone found guilty beyond reasonable doubt by a court of law to have
    abused a child should be able to stay off this register and hence gain
    fresh employment in a child care setting, by virtue of having lodged an
    appeal, or simply being entitled to do so. Entry on the Register would
    in any case not be limited to cases in which guilt has been proven
    beyond reasonable doubt and since the Register will be highly
    confidential only children’s organisations will have access and it will
    be limited to screening of staff and volunteers. Therefore, clause
    122(2) is entirely uncalled for, and would reduce the effectiveness of
    the Register. Instead, it is suggested that provision be made for
    ‘interim registration’ in which the pending appeal is noted, and which
    can be cancelled if this is subsequently indicated.



    While clauses 123, 124 and 126 aim to ensure that prospective employees
    and volunteers in children’s services are excluded if their names
    appear on the Register, these clauses fail to include those employed in
    social worker services by the Department of Social Development. Clause
    128(3) makes provision for a person to be considered ‘rehabilitated’
    and his/her name removed after five years. However, on the basis of
    current knowledge, cases involving sexual abuse and severe assault
    should be excluded from this provision. Rehabilitation of sexual
    offenders against children has, as an essential component, a commitment
    by the offender to permanently remain away from situations in which
    opportunities for re-offending may arise.



      Discussion

    The discussion suggested that there was a flaw in the Bill in the sense
    that Part-B of the Child Protection Register does not clarify in what
    instances and for what reasons a persons is to be included in the
    register, but instead puts the obligation on the courts. The question
    was raised whether the children’s court, as contemplated in clause 120,
    is the most appropriate route to take.  It has to be taken into account
    that these courts are already overburdened. There is a need to ensure
    that there are legal forums within the Department of Education to make
    an assessment that a teacher should be included on the register, even
    when found guilty by an informal, non-legislative disciplinary forum at
    school level. An issue was raised about the convergence between the
    Register in the Sexual Offences Bill and the Register Part B of the
    Children’s Bill.




      Children with disabilities




    Submitted by Mr July Nkutha – Disabled Children’s Action Group




    Children’s Rights



    The presentation proposed that clause 11 be placed in the ‘principles’
    chapter, thereby providing the foundation upon which all other chapters
    are based. In addition, the following amendment should be made to
    clause 11(1)(b) providing the child with special care and necessary
    support services.



    Harmful cultural practices



    In the context of harmful social and cultural practices to which
    certain children with disability are subjected, purportedly to exact a
    cure, it was proposed that the following be added:



         • Clause 12 (6) Every child with a disability has the right not to
           be subjected to harmful social and cultural practices that
           attempt to “cure” them, but which are detrimental to their well-
           being, health or dignity. Such children must be allowed to
           receive adequate medical diagnosis and treatment.



    Information on health care




    Clause 13 does not specify information relating to a child’s
    disability. It was argued that a child should also have the right to
    access information regarding his/her health condition, which has
    resulted in disability. In addition, the issue was raised whether this
    information is available in a medium accessible to persons with a
    disability, such as, for example Braille for the visually impaired.



    Access to courts



    While clause 42(7) and clause 14 refer to access to courts for
    children, the submission expressed concern about the many barriers that
    there are for children with disability in getting access to courts.
    These would include aspects of communication (for children with hearing
    or speech impairments), information and the physical environment. It
    was, therefore, recommended that a clause be added to ensure that
    children with disability have the same opportunities as those accorded
    to other children, and that they are treated in a way that assures them
    respect and dignity. This should include the appropriate awareness and
    training programmes for court personnel.



    It was recommended that the, now omitted, clause 70 of the draft Bill
    of the South African Law Reform Commission (SALRC) be re-introduced. It
    should also be mentioned that magistrates should have the ability to
    communicate effectively with children with disabilities.



    Parental rights and responsibilities



    It was recommended that the interpretation of specific rights and
    responsibilities of parents as contained in chapter 1 be amended as
    follow:


    “parental responsibilities and rights” in relation to a child, means
    the responsibility and right-
   a) to care for the child
             b) to have and maintain contact with the child, including
                learning of specific means of communication where necessary
                (such as Sign Language or Braille to communicate with a
                child with hearing or visual impairment)
   c) to act as guardian for the child.



    Protection of children



    It was argued that children with disability remain among the most
    vulnerable groups of children on account of their physical dependency
    on carers and/ or barriers to communication that they experience. They
    are, therefore, more at risk of abuse and neglect. Research indicates
    that unless information is disaggregated, it is not possible to track
    either positive or negative trends. It was, therefore, recommended that
    that the following amendment is made:


    Clause 114 Contents of Part A of Register
    114(2) Part A of the Register must reflect-
   a) in the case of reported incidents referred to in subsection (1) (a)-
                    i) the full names, surnames, physical address and
                       identification number of the child
                     ii) the child’s age, gender and disability status


    Children in especially difficult circumstances


    The presenter argued that the assumption that programmes developed for
    the general population of children will automatically benefit children
    with disability is false, since disabled children do not have equal
    access to resources and opportunities, and special measures are
    necessary to ensure their full inclusion and participation. In
    addition, children with disability or chronic illness are among the
    categories of children in especially difficult circumstances and the
    Bill needs to contain specific strategies aimed at:




            • Assisting children with disability to have access to social
              services (including ECD, education and health care);
            • Empowering them to develop their self-reliance and potential;
            • Empowering parents or care-givers of children with disability
              to support and nurture their children in the home environment
              and educating parents of care-givers of such children on
              matters affecting their children.



    It was recommended that chapter 16 (children in Especially Difficult
    Circumstances) of the SALRC draft of the Children’s Bill be re-
    inserted.




    Intersectoral collaboration



    A coordinating mechanism for ensuring intersectoral collaboration and
    implementation of the Children’s Bill should be explicitly provided for
    in the Bill. With regard to children with disability, it is essential
    that this mechanism:




               ▪ Is created in legislation to ensure that it has a clear
                 mandate to co-ordinate services across departments, that it
                 has representation from all relevant government
                 departments, and that representatives are in decision-
                 making positions;
               ▪ Includes parents of children with disability, and young
                 people with disability, as well as NGOs and CBOs that are
                 providing services for children with disability;
               ▪ Ensures sufficient provision by government for purchase
                 of services by NGOs for children with disability;
               ▪ Ensures that service provision is coordinated and
                 comprehensive, with each department or organisation
                 recognised as part of a package of support services
                 (including education, transport, housing, assistive
                 device);
               ▪ Provides information and a resource list on services,
                 which is easily available and accessible to children and
                 their families;
               ▪ Ensures that local and traditional authorities assess,
                 monitor and address the needs of children with disability;
               ▪ Establishes systems to monitor the extent to which
                 children with disability are able to participate in
                 activities and benefit from services.



      Discussion



    Concern was raised about how the Bill defines ‘disability’. The
    challenge is to draft a definition that is broad enough to encompass
    all disabled children. It was recommended that the Bill should
    explicitly provide for a coordinating mechanism. Concern was raised
    about the inaccessibility of courts for disabled persons, for example,
    the lack of facilities or knowledge of who to contact to translate in
    Sign Language at courts. It was submitted that in child-headed
    households where the disabled child is the eldest child, it would be a
    challenge to determine what rights and responsibilities to confer on
    such a child.



    It was agreed that while there are a number of gaps in legislation in
    the sense that it does not adequately address the needs of disabled
    people, such as the Education Act, the Children’s Bill cannot,
    necessarily, amend all shortcomings in other laws. However, it was
    suggested that the Bill should include a provision that expressly
    provides for the synergic implementation of different laws that affect
    disabled children. It was suggested that in the area of the principles
    and objects of the Bill, attention could be given to the needs of
    particular vulnerabilities.





      Children’s Rights



    Submitted by Jody Kollapen, Chairperson of the South African Human
    Rights Commission (SAHRC).


    It was proposed that reference to the constitution be placed in the
    Preamble, Long title and the Objectives / Rights chapter in the Bill
    (chapters 2 & 3). Support was also expressed for the idea that the
    Preamble makes reference to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
    and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child. The
    submission further supported a longer preamble that is firmly based
    within our constitutional dispensation and obligations.



    Clause 4(2) – reasonable measures within available resources



     Concern was raised about the language that is used in this section. The
     phrase ‘reasonable measures within available resources’ refers to the
     concept of progressive realisation of economic and social rights. The
     rights pertaining to children should not be subject to progressive
     realisation. In fact, certain subsections of section 28 are non-
     derogable in terms of the constitution (Sections 28(1)(d) and (e),
     28(1)(g)(i) and (ii), 28(1)(i) and are thereby specifically excluded
     from progressive realisation. The effect of the current use of the
     phrase ‘reasonable measures within available resources’ in clause 4(2)
     may introduce into the Bill a limitation on Section 28 that is not in
     the Constitution. Therefore, such a limitation would be open to a
     constitutional challenge.



    Specific features of the Bill



     There are some inconsistencies in the Bill that need to be attended to:


            • Clause 10 refers to children meaningfully participating in
              decisions that affect them. Further on in the Bill, clause
              31(1)(a) has a good formulation in order to determine the
              appropriate instances in which children should participate in
              matters. These two sections should be revisited and brought
              into synergy and conformity with each other.
            • Clause 10 states that children can participate in any matter
              affecting them and goes on further to refer to proceedings.
              This language is on the one hand wide in reference to any
              matter yet on the other hand is qualified by reference to
              proceedings. This results in an inconsistency as proceedings
              limits the matters concerning a child where they ought to
              participate. Children’s participation in matters affecting
              them should not be limited to proceedings.
            • Clause 12 provides protection to children from harmful
              cultural and social practices. The SAHRC would prefer a more
              positive language construction in this section. Such a
              construction ought to affirm a child’s positive right to
              participate in the social and cultural lives of their
              communities. Thereafter the protection feature from harmful
              and cultural practices should be included.
            • The language in clause 14 is too wide. The word “any” should
              be qualified in relation to the child, the interests of the
              child and / or the welfare of the child.
            • Clause 16 refers to the duties of children in general
              language. It is proposed that the drafters should look at
              section 31 of the African Charter, which gives content to the
              nature of the duties. The SAHRC is not in principle opposed
              to duties being placed in the Bill. However, these must not
              be couched in language in which the impression is created
              that they are a trade off against rights.



    Disability



    The presenter argued that the Children’s Bill should deal with the
issue of disability. The submission supported the inclusion in the Bill of
a positive affirmation of the principle of non-discrimination. This could
be placed in the Preamble, Long Title and objectives/rights chapter of the
Bill. There is no reason to not mention disability specifically in the Bill
as one of the grounds of discrimination. It was proposed that the section
that deals with the ‘best interests standard’ should include reference to
non-discrimination on the grounds of disability. Clause 42(7), which deals
with courts, could also make specific reference to making courts disability
friendly. Clause 11 could also make reference to disability.



    Discussion



    The Committee resolve to give attention to the technical aspects of the
    Bill, such as the inconsistencies in the use of language. It was agreed
    that the issue of children of non-nationals needed further unpacking,
    and that there is a need to determine which Department is ultimately
    responsible for these children. For example, the challenge remains on
    how to place unaccompanied minor children in foster care since the
    Department of Home Affairs will not provide a 13-digit identity
    document to such children. There was some concern about how the Bill
    defines ‘disability’, and it is suggested that the Promotion of
    Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act 4 of 2000 may
    assist in how the Bill defines disability.


    An argument was raised in favour of strong affirmative action for
    disabled children and foreign minors, since they are from the most
    disadvantaged groups. It was recommended that the Bill should expressly
    provided for disabled children and unaccompanied foreign children. It
    was also noted that there is a need re-instate provisions dealing with
    foreign children, and such children should fall within the ambit of the
    children’s court. While recognising that foreign children should be
    dealt with by the children’s court, it does not necessarily imply
    special services to these children. A question was raised why clause 4,
    which deals with implementation of the proposed Act, makes to reference
    to non-state actors in implementing the Act. The principles on non-
    discrimination should form part of clause 5, and it should also be
    referred to in clauses 6 and 9. In this way the ‘best interest’ clause
    includes attention to the special needs of disabled children.



    The need for all children in need of care of protection to referred to
    Children’s court



    Submitted by Denni Leppan – Commissioner Wynberg Children’s Court



    The submission raised concern that children’s court commissioners were
    not generally consulted during the drafting of the Bill. Support was
    expressed for clauses 47, 68 and 152, which place no obligation on the
    social worker to refer a matter to court, since it allows the social
    worker to use discretion. It was submitted that the section 75 part of
    the Bill would not be implementable without the re-inclusion of chapter
    10 and 11.


    The 24 hours provided for in clause 152(2)(b) to notify the provincial
    department of social development or designated child protection
    organisation, was regarded as being too short to be practically
    implementable. The presenter further argued that it was not necessary to
    report the matters identified in clause 105(1) to the clerk of the
    children’s court, and therefore referral to no need for reference to the
    clerk of the children’s court in clauses 105(1), 105(2), 105(3), 105 (5)
    and 105 (7). Finally, it was noted that there is a need to determine if
    there is sufficient clarity of instances where a child may be brought to
    the children’ court.



   Discussion



   It was agreed that Ms Leppan would provide a more comprehensive
   submission on the Children’s Bill to the Committee.[1]


   The relationship between auxiliary social workers, child and youth care
   workers, community caregivers and social workers.




    Submitted by Jackie Loffel - Johannesburg Child Welfare Society



    Social workers are one of the key categories of personnel who will be
    required to implement the future Children’s Act, but should, however,
    not be regarded as the dominant category. While social workers have a
    critical role to play, they do share this role with arrange of other
    workers, but it does not imply that they should necessarily supervise
    other categories of workers. However, within formal child protection,
    social workers are key, and they tend to work closely with child
    auxiliary and youth workers. A core of skilled social workers is needed
    order to ensure the implementation of the Children’s Act.



    Submitted by Zeni Thumbadoo – National Association of Child Care
     Workers.


    Child and youth care workers are regarded as critical practitioners to
    fulfil the developmental needs of children and youth. These workers are
    in daily contact with children, and their work can be regarded as youth-
    focussed, relational, holistic, and contextual. While child and youth
    care workers have traditionally been seen within the context of
    residential care, their work are also expanding into community
    programmes.



      Conclusion to proceedings



     At the end of the proceedings, it was felt that the Committee could not
     spend much more time debating policy issues, and that the next step
     would be for the Department’s legal drafters to provide the Committee
     with alternative drafts of those clauses that had been identified for
     further refinement. These drafts would be considered when the Committee
     next met after the recess.


3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development on Public
    Hearings held on the Children’s Bill (B70-2003) (Reintroduced) from 11-
    13 August 2004:


    The Portfolio Committee on Social Development having held Public
    Hearings on the Children’s Bill (B70-2003)(Reintroduced) from 11-13
    August 2004, reports as follows:




    Introduction



    The Portfolio Committee on Social Development held public hearings on
    the Children’s Bill [B70-2003 (Reintroduced)] on 11 to 13 August 2004.
    This report reflects those written and oral submission made on the
    Section 75 version of the Children’s Bill.
    The following organisations, and individuals, made submission:


    Children’s Bill Working Group
    RAPCAN
    SA Society for the Prevention of Child Abuse and Neglect (SASPCAN)
    South African National Council of Child Welfare
    HIV/AIDS Sector
    Dikwanketla – Children in Action
    Southern African Catholic Bishops Conference
    Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project
    Alliance for Children’s Entitlement to Social Security
    Save the Children
    Wybrow-Oliver Attorneys (Adoption)
    Law Society of South Africa
    Robyn Shepstone
    UNHCR
    Education Law Project – Centre for Applied Legal Studies
    Peoples Family Law Centre
    Aids Law Project
    Lawyers for Human Rights
    Youth Action Group
    Network Against Child Labour
    Soul Buddyz
    Childline
    South African Council of Churches
    Johannesburg Child Welfare Society
    Early Learning Resource Unit
    Bethany House Trust
    Qhamani Educare
    Valley Development Project
    Nonceba Meyiwa
    National Alliance for Street Children
    National Association of Child Care Workers
    Disabled Children’s Action Group
    Molo Songololo
    SA Aids Vaccine Initiative
    Media Monitoring Project
    Commission on Gender Equality
    South African Prisoners’ Organization for Human Rights
    South African Association of Social Workers in Private Practice



    Chapter 1: Interpretation, Objects, Application and Implementation of
    Act




    Clause 1: Interpretation



    Submitted by the National Alliance for Street Children (NASC)[2]
Clause 129 specifies that the parent of “primary care giver” must consent
to medical treatment or a surgical operation for a child under 12 year of
age. However, the definition of “primary care giver” does not include a
child and youth care worker at a shelter.


Recommendation


The Principal of the Shelter should be allowed to consent the child
receiving medical treatment or a surgical operation. Also, if a child under
12 years of age arrives at a clinic/hospital on their own and request
medical treatment, the medical practitioner or senior nurse in charge of
the hospital should be authorised to give such consent. This would either
necessitate a change to the definition of primary care giver to include
principal of the shelter or an amendment to clause 129.
Clause 130 allows the person in charge of the hospital or clinic to consent
if the child has no parent or care-giver and there is no designated child
protection organisation arranging the placement of the child.


Recommendation


The Principal of the Shelter should be allowed to consent to the child
being tested for HIV. If a street child under 12 arrives at a clinic or
hospital on their own and requests testing, the medical practitioner or
senior nurse in charge of the hospital or clinic should be authorised to
provide such consent. This would either necessitate a change to the
definition of primary care giver to include the principal of the shelter or
an amendment to clause 130.


Submitted by Lawyers for Human Rights (LHR)

The Bill contains shortcomings in providing protection and care to foreign
children in South Africa. Currently foreign children are given limited
protection in a variety of forms and are often vulnerable to abuse and
neglect. There exists a lot of uncertainty within the governmental and non-
governmental child protection agencies about the legal and procedural
position of foreign children. Although legislation exists that outlines the
rights and duties of foreigners in South Africa, it is inadequate on the
treatment and protection of foreign children. Therefore, it is important
that the Children’s Bill, which when enacted will become the principal
legislation relating to childcare, expressly includes foreign children in
its scope.


The current draft of the Children’s Bill expressly deals with refugees and
undocumented migrants in only two areas, namely: foster care placements and
trafficked children. It is submitted that in both instances the protection
being suggested is haphazard and does not take into account the huge
procedural gaps that challenge true access to protection for these
children.


Recommendation

The Bill defines a child as “a child under the age of 18 years”. In order
to ensure certainty that the Bill indeed includes foreign children in its
scope, LHR recommends that the definition be changed as follows:

“Child means any child under the age of 18 years, regardless of
nationality”.

Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 

Definition

“abuse” 
The submission held that the definition of “abuse” in the Bill did not
follow the definition in the Prevention of Family Violence Act, and
proposed that “neglect” should be included in the definition. 
“adoption working agreement” 
The submission was concerned that attorneys are, in terms of Chapter 17,
excluded from the adoption process. 

“family member” 

The submission noted that the definition of “family member” was too
extensive, especially in sub-clause (e), and that this may led to
exploitation in certain instances, such as in the instance of an au pair
appointed to take care of the children. 

"parent"

The Law Society argued that the definition of “parent” should include, as
sub-clause (d), "a surrogate mother who has elected not to terminate the
surrogate agreement within the prescribed period". Consequently, it was
argued that the words "means a biological, adoptive or commissioning parent
where the agreement referred to in (d) below has not been terminated"
should be inserted after the heading "parent". 

With reference to the issue of child maintenance, the submission noted
that, although the Bill proposes changing the age of majority to 18,
maintenance payments should continue until the child becomes self-
supporting. In addition, for dependants younger than 21 years of age,
maintenance should be negotiated on the child’s behalf by the primary
caregiver.

Submitted by Wybrow-Oliver Attorneys

“adoption services”

The submission noted that the Bill only provides for accredited adoption
social workers and designated child protection agencies to provide these
services, and argued that specialist attorneys should also be accredited to
perform this service. It was argued that the Bill should contain a
definition of “adoption services”, which should read as follows:

“facilitating the permanent placement of a child by means of an adoption”

“adoption attorney”

It was recommended that the Bill define an “adoption attorney” in a manner
similar to an adoption social worker. The Law Society of South Africa would
register those attorneys who are competent or who have been trained by the
Law Society. It was also recommended that the Law Society provide the names
of duly registered attorneys to the Director-General: Justice, who would
forward the names to the Director-General: Social Development for the
purpose of accreditation. The definition of an adoption attorney could read
as follows:

“an attorney in private practice, in a law firm or an agency, or in the
employ of a child protection organisation, who has a speciality in adoption
services registered with the Law Society of South Africa and who is
accredited by the Director-General of the Department of Social Development
to perform adoption and/or inter-country adoption services”
Clause 2: Objects of the Act


Submitted by the Children’s Institute


The Bill focuses on secondary and tertiary interventions once a child has
been abused or neglected at the expense of primary prevention and early
intervention services. It is submitted that if the Bill does not adequately
provide for greatly improved provision of primary prevention and early
intervention services, the second and tertiary layers of care will continue
to operate in crisis mode as more and more abused and vulnerable children
need to be taken up into the formal child protection system. The White
Paper on Social Welfare of 1997 set out the Department’s policy shift
towards a social developmental approach and away from a residual welfare
approach. However, the Bill does not reflect this shift in policy
direction. Accordingly, it is submitted that the Bill should focus clearly
on primary prevention needs and that the principle of primary prevention is
included as an object of the Act.

Recommendation

That clause 2, “Objects of the Act” is amended to read as follows:

Objects
1) The objects of this Act are –

To make provision for structures, services and means for promoting the
survival and sound physical, mental, emotional and social development of
children;
To assist families to care for and protect their children;
To utilize, strengthen and develop community structures which provide care
and protection for children;
To prevent, (as far as possible), any ill-treatment, abuse, neglect,
deprivation and exploitation of children;
To provide care, protection and treatment for children, who are suffering
ill-treatment, abuse, neglect, deprivation or exploitation or who are
otherwise in need of care and protection; and
Generally, to promote the well-being of all children.

Submitted by the National Alliance for Street Children

Recommendation

The Objects clause of the Bill should be amended in order to include an
express objective to assist families to care for and protect their
children.

Suggested Amendment:

The objects of this Act are –

  • To make provision for structures, services and means for promoting the
    sound physical, mental, emotional and social development of children;
 • To assist families to care for and protect their children;
 • To utilize, strengthen and develop community structures which provide
   care and protection for children;
 • To prevent, as far as possible, any ill-treatment, abuse, neglect,
   deprivation and exploitation of children;
 • To provide care, protection and for children who are suffering ill-
   treatment, abuse, neglect, deprivation or exploitation or who are
   otherwise in need of care and protection; and
 • Generally, to promote the well-being of children.

Submitted by Disabled Children’s Action Group (DCAG)[3]

The objects section of an Act describes the nature and scope of the Act.
The objects clause as it is currently formulated, makes no reference to the
obligation to promote and protect the rights of vulnerable children such as
children with disabilities and chronic illnesses.

Recommendation

The objects clause should be amended so as to include an express reference
to the obligation to provide services, care, support and protection to
children in especially difficult circumstances.

Suggested Amendment


The objects of this Act are –

(a) to make provision for structures, services and means for promoting and
monitoring the sound physical, intellectual, emotional and social
development of children;
    (b) to strengthen and develop community structures which can assist in
        providing care and protection for children;
    (c) to protect children from maltreatment, abuse, neglect, degradation,
         discrimination, exploitation and any other physical and moral harm
         or hazards;
    (d) to provide care and protection for children who are in need of care
         and protection;
    (e) to provide assistance, support and protection for children in
        especially difficult circumstances
[(e)](f) to give effect to the Republic’s obligations concerning the well-
being of children in terms of international instruments binding on the
Republic; and
[(f)](g) generally, to promote the protection, development and well-being
of children."


Submitted by the HIV/AIDS Sector

Recommendation

The Objects clause of the Bill should be amended in order to include an
express objective to assist families to care for and protect their
children. Chapter 9 of the August 2003 version of the Draft Bill (primary
prevention and early intervention) does include this provision, however, to
give it prominence, the HIV/AIDS Sector suggest that it be included in the
objects clause as well.

Submitted by Dikwanketla – Children in Action

The submission agreed with the objects of the proposed Act and that the
Bill will be the law that will or should ensure that all the needs of all
children in South Africa are addressed.



    Chapter 2: General Principles



    Submitted by the South African Aids Vaccine Initiative (SAAVI)
The proposed clause 5(6) of Chapter 2 of the Bill provides that “a person
who has parental responsibilities and rights in respect of a child and the
child, where this is appropriate, having regard to the age, maturity and
stage of development of the child, children must be informed of any action
or decision taken in a matter concerning the child which significantly
affects the child.” The submission argued that the aforementioned proposed
clause does not recognise the fact that in some instances the Children’s
Bill recognises the competence of children to act independently of their
parents or guardians. The protection of children’s confidentiality with
regard to their medical treatment, general health status and HIV status may
be of utmost importance in encouraging children to access health services
and to participate in research.


Recommendation

The clause should be redrafted to provide for instances where a child is
alone, having regard to age, maturity and stage of development, must be
informed of any action or decision taken in a matter concerning the child
which significantly affects the child.

In terms of the Best Interests of the Child Standard, provided for in the
proposed clause 6(1)(a) to (l), these appear to be mostly directed at the
issues arising where the best interests of an individual child are being
considered for purposes of determining custody or otherwise placing a
child.

It is also recommended that these factors be broadened to enable them to be
applied to a class of children (for instance, children participating in an
HIV vaccine trial) as opposed to an individual child. It is also suggested
additional factors are included to facilitate decision-making, such as the
purpose of the decision or act, the rights of a child (as contemplated in
the proposed clause 11) and how they will be affected by the decision or
action, and alternative decision or actions that may have a less
restrictive or more beneficial impact on the rights of the child.

Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 

Recommendation

With regard to clause 5(3), the submission proposed that the words “or
sexual orientation" should be inserted at the end of the sentence to ensure
that the clause does not permit discrimination on the basis of sexual
orientation. 

Chapter 3: Children’s Rights

Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project
The submission by the Community Law Centre (CLC) noted that the South
African Constitution, in section 28, provides specific rights for children
in addition to the range of general rights that they enjoy under the
provisions of the Bill of Rights. Among others, section 28 requires that a
child’s best interests have paramount importance in every matter concerning
the child.

In addition to the applicable Constitutional provisions, South Africa has
ratified both the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
(CRC) and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child. It
was the contention of the CLC that these issues have to be borne in mind
when discussing the Children’s Bill as they form the core principles on
which the Bill is premised.

Apart from specific recommendations contained in the submission, there was
a strong call that the following be revisited and reinserted in the final
piece of legislation:

National policy framework

Prevention provisions

Re-incorporation and strengthening of the children’s rights chapter


Children’s Protector concept further explored and an effective monitoring
section re-incorporated in the Bill


Submitted by Dikwanketla – Children in Action
    Recommendation


    The following rights should be added: the right to be looked after and
    have a home, the right to speak and be listened to, the right to be a
    child (any person under the age of 18), the right to health and access
    to information and health care, to equal opportunities, to be
    themselves, to welfare, to be protected from drugs; the right to life,
    information, to play and rest, to development, not to be stolen, bought
    or sold, to foster and parental care, to food, water and clothing; the
    right to privacy and their own religion; the right not to be subjected
    to harmful social and cultural practices, and the right to participate
    in judicial administrative decisions about children.


    Submitted by the Education Law Project, Centre for Applied Legal
    Studies, University of the Witwatersrand


    The focus of this submission was Chapter 3 of the Children’s Bill, which
    deals with Children’s Rights. The Education Law Project (ELP) is of the
    view that the removal of the key rights clauses from Chapter 3 of the
    current Bill, which formed part of South African Law Commission (SALRC)
    draft, undermines the original intent, purpose and effect of Chapter 3.
    The original intent, purpose and effect of Chapter 3 were to elaborate
    on to the rights in the Bill of Rights insofar as they relate to
    children. In particular, the ELP is concerned that the removal of the
    clause dealing with the right to education will impede the potential for
    the State to provide access to a basic education of an adequate standard
    to all children living in South Africa, undermining their ability to
    realise their full potential.
    It was argued that Chapter 3 serves as a benchmark against which the
    various State departments should be able to measure their obligations in
    respect of children’s rights. The submission argues that original SALRC
    draft Bill attempted to do this by identifying and elaborating on those
    rights that have particular relevance for children in accordance with
    South Africa’s international law obligations, and in accordance with the
    particular needs of South African children. The current draft of the
    Bill either omits key rights totally, or merely restates rights already
    in the Bill of Rights. This status quo fails to enhance the full
    realisation of children’s rights and defeats the purpose that the
    inclusion of Chapter 3 in the Bill was meant to serve. Instead, it makes
    the inclusion of Chapter 3 as a chapter dealing with children’s rights
    meaningless since in its current form it is unable to fulfil the
    objectives that it was meant to serve.


    The right to education is probably the most widely recognised socio-
    economic right in international instruments and in the constitutions of
    individual countries. The underlying rationale for international
    recognition of the right to education has been described as its
    importance in enabling individuals to develop and realise their full
    potential, and to learn good values and thereby make good citizens. The
    unique history of apartheid education required that constitutional
    drafters recognise the legacy of inequality and the need for redress
    through the entrenchment of the right to basic education. Prior to 1994,
    education was structured along racial lines so as to prepare learners of
    different race groups for the roles they were expected to serve in
    apartheid society. This legacy persists today despite Government efforts
    to redress apartheid education and may be largely attributed to the
    failure of the regulatory framework to sufficiently create an education
    system that is of an adequate standard and that is both physically and
    economically accessible to all.


     The regulatory framework provided by the South African Schools Act, Act
     84 of 1996, and the Education Policy Act, Act 27 of 1996, appears not
     to provide for an education that is of an adequate standard and that is
     economically accessible to all. Contrary to South Africa’s obligations
     in terms of international law, school fees are charged at both primary
     and secondary schools. While the regulatory framework attempts to
     alleviate the burden of school fees for the poorest parents by setting
     a mandatory ‘means test’ for the granting of full and partial
     exemptions that individual schools are obliged to abide by when
     determining their exemption policies, this exemption policy is widely
     acknowledged as inadequate.
    Any education clause contained in the Bill must take cognisance of South
    Africa’s obligations in terms of international law, particularly as
    regards the guarantee to free education. Article 28(1)(a) of the
    Covenant on the Rights of the Child (CRC) requires that State parties
    “make primary education compulsory and available free to all”. Article
    28(1)(b), however, provides that State parties make secondary education
    “available and accessible to every child, and take appropriate steps
    such as the introduction of free education and offering financial
    assistance in the case of need”. This suggests that primary education
    should be completely free and that steps such as the current means test
    should only become a factor at the level of secondary education.


    Recommendation


         • A comprehensive list of children’s rights is re-instated in
           Chapter 3 in accordance with South Africa’s international and
           domestic obligations and in accordance with the specific needs
           of South African children. In particular it is recommended that
           the education clause be re-instated in Chapter 3.
         • The proposed education clause requires the State to provide
           educational facilities of a reasonable standard for an adequate
           education. It is further recommended that the clause define
           South Africa’s obligations in terms of guaranteeing free
           education.
         • Other entitlements that ought to form part of the education
           clause may be determined in consultation with civil society and
           a thorough scrutiny of the international instruments that are
           binding on South Africa.





    Submitted by the Children’s Institute



    It is submitted that the Children’s Bill no longer contains a
    comprehensive list of c     rights. Key rights have been omitted,
    including the rights relating to education, refugee and undocumented
    migrant children, children with disabilities and chronic illnesses,
    leisure and recreation, prohibition against unfair discrimination, and
    property.



    Recommendation



    That a Child’s Rights Charter is included in the Bill that:


         • Is comprehensive (includes all relevant rights as set out in the
           United Nations Convention of the Rights of the Child and in the
           African Charter on the Rights of the Child. The list should not
           be limited to “welfare protection rights” but should contain all
           the rights to which children are entitled. Accordingly, it is
           recommended that the following rights be included:
      o Prohibition against unfair discrimination.
      o Best interests of the child.
      o Child participation.
      o Name, nationality and identity.
      o Family relationship and alternative care.
      o Property.
               o Protection from maltreatment, abuse, neglect, degradation,
                 exploitation and other harmful practices.
               o Protection from harmful social and cultural practices.
      o Protection from economic exploitation.
      o Education.
      o Health care.
      o Food and nutrition.
      o Water and sanitation.
      o Shelter.
      o Social Security.
      o Environment.
      o Social Services.
      o Refugee and undocumented migrant children.
      o Children with disabilities and chronic illnesses.
      o Leisure and recreation.
      o Access to child and family court.
         o Age of majority.
         • Is binding on all Government Departments.
  • Elaborates on the rights in the Constitution using international law
    adapted to South Africa’s particular circumstances, and challenges and
    supplements those areas where the Constitution is silent.
    Obliges all Departments in all spheres of Government to review
    legislation, policies and programmes to ensure that the relevant rights
    are both incorporated and adhered to.
    Conduct child impact assessments before making decisions with regard to
    policy, legislative and programme options.
    That the “best interest’s right” be amended as follows in order to
    oblige Departments to conduct child impact assessments:


    “Best interest of child paramount”


    (1) An organ of state, an official, employee or representative of an
    organ of State, or any other person in authority who has official
    control over a child, must, when acting in any matter concerning the
    child, apply the standard referred to in section 28(2) of the
    Constitution that the child’s best interest is of paramount importance.
    (2) All national, provincial and local organs of state must be guided
    by the principle of best interests of the child when making policy,
    legislative, budgetary and administrative decisions that concern
    children.


    Recommendation
    It is recommended that:


    Annual plans are drawn up that indicate how they intend to promote and
    protect children's rights through their policies, plans, budgets,
    programmes and actions.
    Reports are forwarded to the Minister of Social Development on the
    implementation of such plans using prescribed performance indicators.
    Table the plans and reports in Parliament to be considered by the Joint
    Monitoring Committee on Children, Youth and Persons with Disabilities.
    The draft Children’s Charter to read as follows:


    “Children’s Rights”


    Application


       1) The rights, which a child has in terms of this Chapter,
          supplement the rights that a child has in terms of the Bill of
          Rights.
       2) All organs of state in any sphere of Government and all
          officials, employees and representatives of an organ of state
          must respect, protect, promote and fulfil the rights of children
          contained in this Chapter.
       3) A provision of this Chapter binds all persons, natural or
          juristic, if, and to the extent that, it is applicable, taking
          into account the nature of the right and the nature of any duty
          imposed by the right.


    “Conflicts with other legislation”


    In the event of a conflict between a provision of this Chapter and any
     other legislation, the provision of this Chapter prevails except to the
     extent that such other legislation is or could be interpreted as a
     limitation of general application on such provision that is reasonable
     and justifiable in an open and democratic society based on human
     dignity, equality and freedom, taking into account all relevant
     factors, including those listed in section 36(1)(a) to (e) of the
     Constitution.


    “Unfair discrimination”


       1) No organ of state, and no official, employee or representative of
          an organ of state, and no other person may unfairly discriminate
          directly or indirectly against a child on the ground of –
              a) The race, gender, sex, pregnancy, marital status, ethnic or
                 social origin, colour, sexual orientation, age, disability,
                 religion, conscience, belief, culture, language or birth of
                 the child or of any parent, guardian, caregiver or family
                 member of the child; or
              b) The family status, health status, socio-economic status,
                 HIV status or nationality of the child or of any parent,
                 guardian, caregiver or family member of the child.
        2) Discrimination on any of the grounds listed in subsection (1) is
           presumed to be unfair unless it is established by the respondent
           that the discrimination is fair.


    “Best interest of child paramount”


             a) An organ of state, an official, employee or representative
                of an organ of state, or any other person in authority who
                has official control over a child, must, when acting in any
                matter concerning the child, apply the standard referred to
                in section 28(2) of the Constitution that the child’s best
                interest is of paramount importance.
              b) All national, provincial and local organs of state must be
                 guided by the principle of best interests of the child when
                 making policy, legislative, budgetary and administrative
                 decisions that concern children.


    “Child Participation”


1) Every child capable of participating meaningfully in any matter
   concerning that child has the right to participate in an appropriate way
   in those proceedings, and views expressed by the child must be given due
   consideration.
2) Children with disabilities must be supported where appropriate to enable
   participation.


    “Name, nationality and identity”


    Every child has the right –
   a) To be registered promptly in terms of the Registration of Births Act,
      Act 51 of 1992; and
   b) To the preservation of his or her identity and nationality, subject to
      the other provisions of the abovementioned Act.


    “Family care or alternative care”


              1) The child’s parents and family have the primary
                 responsibility to provide for the child’s care and
                 protection.
         (2)     The State must render appropriate assistance to families
                 in the performance of their child rearing responsibilities
                 and must ensure the development of accessible institutions,
                 facilities and services for the care of children.
         (3)     Where the child’s parents or family are not willing or are
                 unable to fulfil their duty of care, the State has an
                 obligation to step in and provide assistance to the child
                 and family or appropriate alternative care for the child.


    “Family relationship”


         (1)     Every child has the right not to be separated from his or
                 her parents or family against the will of the parents or
                 family and of the child where the child is capable of
                 expressing a choice, except when that separation is in the
                 best interest of the child.
         (2)     Every child separated from his or her parents or family
                 has the right to maintain a personal relationship and
                 regular contact with their parents or family, except when
                 those personal relations and that contact are not in the
                 best interest of the child.


    “Property”


    Every child who owns property or who is a dependent of a deceased
person who owned property, has the right to the administration of that
property in the best interest of that child.


    “Maltreatment, abuse, neglect, degradation, exploitation and other
    harmful practice


           1) Every child has the right to be protected, through
              administrative, social, educational, punitive or other
              suitable measures and procedures, from all forms of torture,
              physical violence, mental harassment, injury, maltreatment,
              abuse, neglect, degradation and exploitation.
           2) Every child who has been tortured, maltreated, harassed,
              abused, neglected, degraded or exploited has the right to
              have access to social services including counselling and
              medical treatment at state expense.


    “Harmful social and cultural practices”


      (1)   Every child has the right not to be subjected to harmful social
           and cultural practices, which affect the well-being, health or
           dignity of the child.
      (2)   Every child –
           (a)   Below the minimum age set by law for a valid marriage has
                 the right not to be given out in marriage or engagement;
                 and
            (b)  Above that minimum age has the right not to be given out
                 in marriage or engagement without his or her consent.
      (3)   Female genital mutilation or the circumcision of female children
           is prohibited.
      (4)   Every male child has the right –
            (a)  To refuse circumcision; and
            (b)  Not to be subjected to unhygienic circumcision.
      (5)   Every child has the right –
            (a)  To refuse to be subjected to virginity testing; and
            (b)  Not to be subjected to unhygienic virginity testing.


    “Economic exploitation”


    Every child has the right to be protected, through administrative,
    social, educational, punitive or other suitable measures and procedures,
    from –
   a) Economic exploitation; and
   b) Performing any work –
       i. That is inappropriate for a person of that child’s age; and
      ii. That places at risk the child’s well-being, education, physical
          and mental health, and spiritual, moral or social development.
    “Education”


1) Every child has the right to –
               Education that is compulsory and available free to all
               Educational facilities of a reasonable standard
               Vocational information and guidance; and
               Receive education and information through a medium which
           makes such education and information accessible to the child,
           having regard to the child’s language, personal circumstances
           and any disability from which the child may suffer.
2) The education of a child must be directed towards –
   a) The development of the child’s personality, talents and intellectual
      and physical abilities to their fullest potential;
   b) The development of respect for the democratic values of human dignity,
      equality and freedom enshrined in our Constitution;
   c) The development of respect for the child’s parents, cultural identity
      and values, and language;
   d) The preparation of the child for a responsible life in a free society,
      in the spirit of peace, friendship, humanity, tolerance and national
      unity; and
   e) The development of respect for our natural and cultural heritage.


    “Health Care”


    Every child has the right to basic health care that promotes the
child’s health, prevents acute and chronic health conditions and
disabilities, adequately manages and treats acute and chronic health
conditions and that provides rehabilitation after illness or injury. This
right includes the right to -
     Confidential access to contraceptives and health-related information on
     sexuality, reproduction, termination of pregnancy, STDs and HIV,
     regardless of age.
     Confidentiality regarding his or her health status and the health
     status of a parent, caregiver or family member.
     Request and receive information on health promotion and the prevention
     of ill health and disease.
     Have access to appropriate assistive devices that are necessary to
     enable the participation of children with disabilities and chronic
     illnesses in community life.


    “Social security”


       Every child has the right to social security, including access to
       social assistance if the parent or caregiver cannot or does not
       provide for the basic needs of the child.
       Every child with a disability has the right to have access to social
       assistance if such social assistance is needed to enable the child to
       survive, develop and participate to full potential.


    “Water and sanitation”


        1) Every child has the right to have access to clean water within a
           reasonable distance from his or her home.
        2) Every child has the right to have access to sanitation services
           aimed at preventing infections and diseases.


    “Environment”


    Every child has the right to an environment that is not harmful to his
    or her safety or health.


    “Basic nutrition”


1) Every child has the right to basic nutrition in order to prevent illness
   and disease and to promote their right to survival and development. The
   state must provide programmes that are designed to reach all children
   living in poverty.
2) A child suffering from malnutrition, or who is at risk of malnutrition
   has the right to prompt assistance from the state through the immediate
   provision of food or other emergency relief.


    “Shelter”


    Every child has the right to shelter that adequately protects the child
against the elements.


    “Legal representation”
1) Every child has the right to legal representation in criminal
   proceedings affecting the child, and the state must assign a suitably
   qualified practitioner to represent the child if the child cannot afford
   his or own legal representative.
2) Every child has the right to legal representation in civil proceedings
   affecting the child, and the state must assign a legal practitioner to
   represent the child if the child cannot afford his or her own legal
   representative and if substantial injustice would result if the child was
   not represented.


    “Social services”


    Every child has the right to social services, including services that
are aimed at:
    Assisting the child’s caregiver or parent to provide for the child’s
survival, development and participation needs.
    Assisting the child and the child’s parent or caregiver to address
social problems within the family and community that are violating the
child’s rights.
    Assisting parents and caregivers of children in especially difficult
circumstances to provide adequately for their children’s needs.
    Providing adequate protection for children who have been abandoned,
abused or exploited.
               Providing adequate alternative care for children whose
           parents or caregivers are unable or unwilling to care for them.
               Providing adequate shelter and care for children living on
           the street or in child-headed households
               Providing adequate protection, care and humanitarian
           assistance to refugee and undocumented migrant children.


    “Refugee and unaccompanied minors”


1) Every child who is a refugee or asylum seeker in terms of the Refugees
   Act and every unaccompanied foreign child, has –
          The rights set out in this Chapter,
          The right to be re-united with his or her parents or family if the
      child was separated from his or her parents or family.
          The right to receive humanitarian protection and assistance to
      realise the rights referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b).
       (2) No child may in any way whatsoever be refused entry into the
   Republic, expelled, extradited or returned to any other country or be
   subject to any similar measure, if as a result of such a refusal,
   expulsion, extradition, return or other measure, such child is compelled
   to return to or remain in a country where -
   a) He or she may be subjected to persecution on account of his or her
      race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership of a
      particular social group; or
   b) His or her life, physical safety or freedom would be threatened on
      account of external aggression, occupation, foreign domination, other
      events seriously disturbing or disrupting public order in either part
      of the whole of that country.


    “Children with disabilities and chronic illnesses”


       (1) Every child with a physical, sensory, neurological, intellectual
   or psychiatric disability and every child with a chronic illness, has the
   right –
   a) To enjoy life in conditions which ensure dignity, promote self-
      reliance and facilitate active participation in the community.
   c) To receive support that contributes to and enhances the quality of
      life.
   d) To receive financial assistance from the state to ensure a standard of
      living adequate for his or her development and equal enjoyment of his
      or her constitutional rights.


    “Leisure and recreation”


    Every child has the right to rest and leisure and to engage in play and
recreational activities appropriate to the child’s age, including the right
to have access to recreational facilities within reach of his/her home or
school.
    “Access to courts”


    Every child has the right to bring a matter to court, provided that the
matter falls within the jurisdiction of that court. A child may be assisted
in bringing the matter to court according to the ordinary rules of law,
however, may also do so in his or her own name.


    “Age of majority”


    A child, whether male or female, becomes a major upon reaching the age
of 18 years.


    “Enforcement of rights”


1) Anyone listed in this section has the right to approach a competent
   court, alleging that a right in the Bill of Rights or this Chapter of the
   Children’s Act has been infringed or threatened, and the court may grant
   appropriate relief, including a declaration of rights.
2) The persons who may approach a court, are:
   a) Anyone acting in his or her own interest.
   b) Anyone acting on behalf of another person who cannot act in his or her
      own name.
   c) Anyone acting as a member of, or in the interest of, a group or class
      of persons.
   d) Anyone acting in the public interest.
   e) An association acting in the interest of its members.


    Submitted by Lawyers for Human Rights


    Both domestic and international law recognise the special requirements
of refugee children. Refugee children obtain rights accorded to children
generally, and as refugees specifically. Similarly, foreign children who
are not eligible for refugee status also have needs specific to their
circumstances, particularly in the context of the possible removal from the
Republic. Unaccompanied refugee and foreign children are the legal
responsibility of the government.


    Recommendation


    That a clause dealing with the specific rights of unaccompanied refugee
and foreign children is added to the Bill, reading as follows:
     “ Refugee and unaccompanied minors”


   1. Every child who is a refugee or asylum seeker in terms of the Refugees
      Act and every unaccompanied foreign child, have –
   a) the rights set out in this Chapter,
   b) the right to be re-united with his or her parents or family if the
      child was separated from his or her parents or family.
   2. No child may in any way whatsoever be refused entry into the Republic,
      expelled, extradited or returned to any other country or be subjected
      to any similar measure, if as a result of such a refusal, expulsion,
      extradition, return or other measure, such child is compelled to
      return to or remain in a country where -
   a) He or she may be subjected to persecution on account of his or her
      race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership of a
      particular social group; or
   b) His or life, physical safety or freedom would be threatened on account
      of external aggression, occupation, foreign domination, other events
      seriously disturbing or disrupting public order in either part of the
      whole of that country.


    Submitted by the National Alliance for Street Children (NASC)


    The NASC supports the inclusion of a comprehensive list of rights for
children in the Bill, however are concerned that the revised version of the
Bill no longer contains a comprehensive list of rights.


    Recommendation
    The Bill should be amended to include a comprehensive list of rights
for children, and these rights should be formulated in a way that fleshes
out the scope of the protection provided by the Constitution and that
clarifies each roleplayers’ obligations[4].


    The NASC also recommends that the following rights be included in the
comprehensive list of rights[5]:


    Education.
    Health care.
    Food and nutrition.
    Water and sanitation.
    Shelter.
    Social Security.
    Social Services.
    Property.
    Leisure and recreation.


    Submitted by the Early Learning Resource Unit (ELRU) and the South
African Congress for Early Childhood Development (SACECD)[6]
    ELRU and SACECD endorse the Children’s Institute’s submission calling
for the Child Rights Chapter to be reinstated into the Bill and support the
formulation of the rights proposed in that submission.


    Recommendation


    The Bill should include a comprehensive list of rights, particularly
including the right to social services, education and nutrition.


    Submitted by Disabled Children’s Action Group (DCAG)


    In the Children's Bill, coverage of children's rights is minimal.
Children's rights, as contained in the Bill of Rights of the Constitution,
are re-stated with no additional elaboration. One of the greatest concerns
with regard to the Children's Bill is the exclusion of specific reference
to the rights of children with disabilities and chronic illnesses. The
Integrated National Disability Strategy calls for a rights-based approach
to the development of services for children with disabilities and chronic
illnesses, in line with the recognition that disability is a human rights
issue.
    The rights of children with disabilities and chronic illnesses need to
be specifically addressed in the Children's Bill. This should refer to
rights of children with physical, sensory, neurological, intellectual or
psychiatric disability, as well as those with chronic illnesses, and should
ensure access to basic social services.


    In addition, a number of other specific rights need to be highlighted
with regard to their application to children with disabilities and chronic
illnesses[7]:


    Protection from unfair discrimination due to their disability or
chronic illness (including HIV/AIDS);
    Protection from abuse and exploitation;
    Prevention of disability through effective promotive and preventive
programmes (e.g. Antenatal care, reduction of malnutrition, road safety
campaigns);
    Access to quality ECD services;
    Access to a quality education;
    Social security - the need to fast-track the fulfilment of this right,
to improve efficiency of application and approval processes;
    Right to own property - a parent of a child with a disability may make
provision for them on the death of the parent. However, these provisions
may not be recognised for children with disabilities and chronic illnesses,
as they are considered to be "incompetent". In the absence of a will, the
child may have no other source of security and may not be in a position to
secure employment even when s/he reaches adulthood;
    Registration - every child with a disability or chronic illness has the
right to have a birth certificate and (at the age of 16) an Identity
Document. Home Affairs officials must do these sensitively and effectively,
even if the child has a severe and/or multiple disabilities.


    Recommendation


    The following are suggested amendments and insertions (underlined parts
are proposed insertions):



    “Unfair discrimination”



    (1) No organ of state, and no official, employee or representative of
an organ of state, and no other person may unfairly discriminate directly
or indirectly against a child on the grounds of –
          (a) the race, gender, sex, pregnancy, marital status, ethnic or
      social origin, colour, sexual orientation, age, disability, religion,
      conscience, belief, culture, language or birth of the child or of any
      parent, guardian, care-giver or family member of the child; or
          (b) the family status, health status, socio-economic status, HIV-
      status or nationality of the child or of any parent, guardian, care-
      giver or family member of the child.
    (2) Discrimination on any of the grounds listed in sub-clause (1) is
presumed to be unfair unless it is established by the respondent that the
discrimination is fair.


    “Child Participation”


1. Every child capable of participating meaningfully in any matter
   concerning that child has the right to participate in those proceedings
   in an appropriate way, and views expressed by the child must be given due
   consideration.
2. Children with disabilities must be supported where appropriate to enable
   participation



    “Name, nationality and identity”



    Every child has the right –
             to be registered promptly in terms of the Registration of
        Births Act, Act 51 of 1992); and
             to the preservation of his or her identity and nationality,
        subject to the other provisions of this Act.





    “Property”



    Every child who owns property or who is a dependent of a deceased
person who owned property has the right to the administration of that
property in the best interest of that child.

    “Maltreatment, abuse, neglect, degradation, exploitation and other
harmful practices”

     3. Every child has the right to be protected, through administrative,
        social, educational, punitive or other suitable measures and
        procedures, from all forms of torture, physical violence, mental
        harassment, injury, maltreatment, abuse, neglect, degradation and
        exploitation.
     4. Every child who has been tortured, maltreated, harassed, abused,
        neglected, degraded or exploited has the right to have access to
        recourse and social services including counselling and medical
        treatment at state expense.



    “Education”



    Please see the Education Law Project (CALS) and Children’s Institute
submission for the preferred formulation of this right.



    “Health Care”

    Please see the Children’s Institute’s submission for the preferred
formulation of this right.



    “Social security”



    Every child has the right to social security, including access to
social assistance if the parent or care-giver cannot or does not provide
for the basic needs of the child.
    Every child with a disability has the right to have access to social
assistance if such social assistance is needed to enable the child to
survive, develop and participate to their full potential.





    “Water and sanitation “



    (1) Every child has the right to have access to clean water within a
reasonable distance from his or her home.
    (2) Every child has the right to have access to sanitation services in
order to prevent infections and diseases


    “Environment “



       Every child has the right to an environment that is not harmful to
   his or her safety or health.



    “Social services”



1. Every child has the right to basic social services, including services
   that are aimed at:
     a. Assisting the child’s caregiver or parent to provide for the
        child’s survival, development and participation needs.
     b. Assisting the child and the child’s parent or caregiver to address
        social problems within the family and community that are violating
        the child’s rights.
     c. Assisting parents and caregivers of children in especially
        difficult circumstances to provide adequately for their children’s
        needs.
     d. Providing adequate alternative care for children whose parent’s or
        caregivers is unable or unwilling to care for them, or who have
        succumbed to HIV/AIDS.
     e. Providing adequate shelter and care for children living on the
        street or in child headed households.




    “Children with disabilities and chronic illnesses”


    (1) Every child with a physical, sensory, neurological, intellectual or
psychiatric disability and every child with a chronic illness have the
right
        (a)      to enjoy life in conditions which ensure dignity, promote
               self-reliance and facilitate active participation in the
               community; and
        (b)      to receive care support that contributes to and enhances
                the quality of life; and
        (c)      to receive financial assistance from the state to ensure a
                standard of living adequate for his or her development and
                equal enjoyment of his or her constitutional rights.


    Submitted by Children’s Bill Working Group (CBWG)


    According to the CBWG, the current version of the Bill has greatly
reduced this clause of the draft Bill. What is left is mainly a reiteration
of section 28 of the Constitution without the vital detail and
interpretation that was supplied in earlier drafts.


    Critical issues, which have been sacrificed in this process include:


    The rights of child refugees and undocumented foreign children, and of
children with disabilities and chronic illnesses.
    Educational rights and the right of children to appropriate services if
they have been maltreated have gone, likewise the right to social security.

    The right to proper administration of a child's property, crucial
particularly for the protection of children who have been orphaned.


    The redraft also resulted in:


    The removal of the chapter on funding, grants and subsidies, which
resulted in the loss of social security provisions; the provisions
recognising the need for the state to adequately support relatives caring
for orphaned children, the discretionary allocation of funds for prevention
and early intervention services, for shelters, for drop-in centres and for
child and youth-care centres, assistance to only a minority due to the
overstretched formal foster care system being incapable of dealing with the
number of children involved, and the scrapping of key provisions for the
financing of services.
    The removal of the provision for an intersectoral National Policy
Framework binding on all Government structures responsible for children,
and which would require that all of them plan for these responsibilities.
    The removal of provisions designed to address the issue of children in
especially difficult circumstances.
    The removal of far-reaching responsibilities for local authorities to
monitor the situation of children in their areas, and to plan for their
needs and undertaken prevention and early intervention services.
    The omission of the provision for an intersectoral mechanism to see to
the proper planning, resourcing and co-ordination of the child protection
system.
    The removal of crucial support measures for alternative care for
children who cannot live in their own homes.
    The downgrading of the proposed children’s court structure.
    The removal of the provision for a Children’s Protector to monitor the
implementation of the Act.


    Recommendation


    It is recommended that the omitted clauses of original SALRC Draft Bill
should be re-inserted.


    Submitted by the HIV/AIDS Sector


    The Bill omits some essential rights, which are critical in the context
of HIV/AIDS. In particular:


    Prohibition on unfair discrimination.
    The right to social security.
    The rights of children with disabilities and chronic illnesses.
    The right to social services.
    The right to family or alternative care.
    The right to education.
    The protection of property.


    Recommendation


    The HIV/AIDS Sector supports the call by the Children’s Institute for
the inclusion of a Child Rights Charter in the Children's Bill that:
    Is comprehensive (includes all relevant rights set out in the UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the African Charter);
    Is binding on all Government Departments;
    Elaborates on the rights in the Constitution using international law
adapted to South Africa’s particular circumstances and challenges and
supplements where the Constitution is silent;
    Obliges all national, provincial and local government departments to:
             Review their legislation, policies and programmes to ensure
        that the relevant rights are incorporated and adhered to.
             Conduct child impact assessments before making decisions with
        regard to policy, legislative or programme options.
             Draw up annual plans showing how they intend to promote and
        protect children's rights through their policies, plans, budgets
        programmes and actions.
             Report on the implementation of such plans to the Minister of
        Social Development using prescribed performance indicators
             Table the plans and reports in Parliament to be considered by
        the Joint Monitoring Committee on Children, Youth and Persons with
        Disabilities.
    Submitted by the South African Aids Vaccine Initiative (SAAVI)
    In terms of the proposed Chapter 3 (Children’s Rights), clause 13
provides that every child is entitled to confidentiality with regard to
their health status, “except when maintaining such confidentiality is not
in the best interest of the child”. SAAVI is concerned that children would
be discouraged from accessing vital public health services or participating
in research, where their right to confidentiality could be breached on the
basis described in the aforementioned clause.
    Recommendation


    The “best interest of the child” standard should operate in addition to
those existing provisions, rather than supplanting them.


    Clause 10: Child Participation


    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 


    With reference to the participation of children in decisions about
their lives, the submission raised questions about the procedure for a
child’s participation in such decisions, as well as a clearer definition of
“due consideration”. 

    Clause 12: Harmful social and cultural practices



    Submitted by the Commission on Gender Equality (CGE)


    The Promotion of Equality and the Prevention of Unfair Discrimination
Act, Act 4 of 2000, gives effect to section 9 of the Constitution, which
aims to preventing and prohibit unfair discrimination, as well as to
promote equality, and eliminate unfair discrimination. Section 8 of this
Act, prohibits unfair discrimination on the grounds of gender. Section 8(d)
prohibits any practice, including traditional, customary or religious
practice, which impairs the dignity of women and undermines equality
between women and men, including the undermining of the dignity and well
being of the girl child.


    Virginity testing clearly discriminates on the grounds of gender and
impairs on the dignity and wellbeing of the girl child.


    Clause 12(5)(a) of the Bill provides for virginity testing. No consent
is required to be subjected to virginity testing. This clause, however,
gives children the right to refuse to be subjected to virginity testing.
Clause 12(5)(b) states that every child has the right not to be subjected
to virginity testing.


    The following provisions with regarding virginity testing are of great
concern to the Commission:


 • Clause 12 provides for virginity testing by default.
 • No penalties are stipulated for non-compliance with hygienic virginity
   testing.
 • No procedure is stipulated in respect of virginity testing.
 • Virginity Testing is an invasion of the Constitutional right to privacy
   and bodily integrity.
 • The Bill does not provide for confidentiality in respect of the results
   of virginity testing.
 • Virginity testing is disproportionate in respect of gender.


    The CGE do, however, support clause 12(3), which outlaws female genital
mutilation and female circumcision as a cultural practice. The CGE feels
that this clause may to some extent seek to give effect to the standards
stipulated in Clause 11.



                            “Corporal Punishment”




      Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project



    The CLC pointed out that South Africa, by ratifying the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) in 1995, committed itself to
fulfilling all the obligations under the Convention. One such obligation is
to protect children from all forms of physical and mental violence as
outlined in Article 19 and this protection extends to corporal punishment
and what happens in the family. Similarly, provisions of the Constitution
also aim to protect children from neglect, maltreatment, abuse and
degradation, provides for the right not to be treated or punished in a
cruel, inhuman or degrading way, and provides that everyone has inherent
dignity and the right to have their dignity respected and protected.


    To date, South Africa has abolished the imposition of corporal
punishment as a sentence by the court and in schools. The Constitutional
Court has also ruled that corporal punishment of children infringes their
rights to dignity and their right to be protected from cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment.


    It was pointed out that, despite the existence of common law crimes
such as assault, assault with the intention of causing grievous bodily harm
and attempted murder in South Africa, parents charged with these crimes
against their children can raise the defence of reasonable chastisement and
avoid being held liable for physically punishing their children. This
situation denies children the equal protection of the law and provides
parents with the potential to violate their child’s bodily and physical
integrity and dignity.


    The submission also noted that the United Nations Committee on the
Rights of the Child has gone beyond the condemnation of "excessive"
chastisement by noting in its concluding observations that any corporal
punishment of children is incompatible with the UNCRC citing, in
particular, article 19. The Committee has criticised attempts by states
parties to draw a line between acceptable and unacceptable forms of
corporal punishment and has called for a clear prohibition of all corporal
punishment including in the family, in other forms of care, in schools and
in the penal system.


    Advocating from a children’s rights perspective, the Community Law
Centre submission argued that this version of the Bill did not comply with
international law standards nor did it comply with the Constitutional
provisions, among others, relating to human dignity and physical integrity.
It left the current situation and common law rights which parents have
unchanged at the expense of the rights of children.


    The submission did raise the question of criminalising parents.
However, it noted that experiences in most countries that have undertaken
law reform prohibiting corporal punishment has shown that the change in law
did not result in an influx of prosecutions of parents. Instead, it brought
to the fore the more severe forms of abuse of children that was already
occurring. In South Africa, prosecutors have the right to exercise
prosecutorial discretion and can decline to prosecute petty or trivial
incidents of corporal punishment. It is also doubtful whether every act of
corporal punishment will result in a charge being laid and a prosecution
being undertaken.


    The submission therefore recommended that the clause on corporal
punishment as contained in the SALRC version of the Bill be reinserted into
the Bill as this had the effect of prohibiting corporal punishment by
parents. The reinsertion would prevent parents who are charged with
assaulting their children from escaping liability for physically punishing
their children. In addition, it was recommended that an explicit ban on all
forms of corporal punishment, including that which is imposed by parents,
be included in the Bill. The prohibition should be accompanied with a
sanction in terms of the existing common law criminal offences such as
assault or assault with intention to inflict grievous bodily harm. The CLC
also recognised that to change public opinion concerning corporal
punishment in the home or by parents would require a long-term awareness
and information campaign. In addition, the public will need to be informed
of alternate disciplinary measures that could be used to discipline their
children.


    Clause 13: Information on Health Care


    Submitted by the Aids Law Project (ALP) and Human Rights Watch


    It is submitted that the current Bill is not sufficiently clear or
comprehensive to safeguard children’s rights to medical care and treatment.
In South African common law, parental consent or consent from a legally
appointed guardian is required before medical treatment can be administered
to a child. In cases where parental consent or consent from a legal
guardian cannot be obtained, the High Court, as the upper guardian of all
children, can be approached to provide consent. In terms of the Child Care
Act, Act 74 of 1983, children above the age of 14 years are permitted to
consent to receiving medical treatment without the assistance of a parent
or legal guardian. In the case of children under the age of 14, where the
consent of a parent or guardian cannot be obtained, the Minister of Social
Development can provide permission for a medical procedure if, in the
opinion of a medical practitioner, the procedure is necessary. In urgent
cases, the medical superintendent of a hospital can provide consent.


    The Child Care Act, enacted in 1983, did not anticipate that the
HIV/AIDS epidemic would leave large numbers of children without parents or
legal guardians. Nor did it anticipate that the dual epidemics of HIV/AIDS
and sexual violence would threaten the lives of so many South African
children. Consequently, the systems set up in terms of the Act are unable
to cope with the large numbers of children that require assistance. The
Aids Law Project (ALP) has found that, in practice, the current
requirements regarding consent pose a serious barrier to children’s rights
to life and to the highest attainable standard of health under the
Constitution and international human rights law. In some instances, the ALP
has had to resort to litigation to obtain consent for antiretroviral
treatment for children living with HIV/AIDS.


    Human Rights Watch and the ALP have found, however, that current
consent requirements impede children’s access to post-rape medical care,
including lifesaving PEP services and prerequisite HIV testing. Human
Rights Watch’s research found, for example, that problems in obtaining
consent on behalf of unaccompanied children and those whose parents or
guardians refused to consent to medical treatment barred some children from
receiving post-rape medical services, including lifesaving PEP. The ALP
also has found that the lack of clarity regarding whether HIV testing
constitutes “medical treatment” within the meaning of the Child Care Act
has impeded some children from obtaining HIV prevention and treatment
services. Some health care workers have declined to provide HIV testing to
children above the age of 14 years without parental consent. It is only
recently that the State Law Advisors have clarified in a legal opinion
sought by the Department of Social Development that HIV testing does fall
within the definition of medical treatment. It is, however, not clear
whether any steps have been taken to ensure that this has been brought to
the attention of health care workers providing services to child survivors
of rape and sexual violence.


    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 


    The submission argued that the child’s right to make decisions about a
range of health interventions may cause conflict between children and their
parents.




                               Recommendation



    It is proposed that the child’s maturity be taken into consideration
when determining what is in the best interest of the child. 

               Chapter 4: Parental Responsibilities and Rights

    Submitted by the Children’s Institute


    Although South African law has no single definition of “family”, the
“nuclear family form” based on the relationship of a married man and woman
and their biological or adopted children is predominant. However, this does
not reflect the reality of South African society where responsibility for
children is by no means only linked to biological parenthood.


    In reality, the nature of family life is far from static and is shaped
by the historical and socio-economic conditions in society, amongst other
things. In South Africa, the history of colonialism, the creation of a
migrant labour system, the complex system of apartheid laws, and more
recently the scourge of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, has had an enormous impact
on family life. It is common for children to live apart from their parents
in many types of family arrangements. The AIDS pandemic is likely to be a
causal factor for larger numbers of children living without their parents.
As a further consequence, children increasingly have to assume more
significant roles of responsibility. Though not a new phenomenon, more
children have to take care of younger siblings or other children while
caregivers are sick and dying or when they have died already. These
children have to perform all or some of the functions of a “primary care-
giver” in a family environment, including procuring food, preparing it,
dressing and feeding younger children, earning money and performing other
household chores. Accordingly, these considerations should be taken into
account when examining the Bill’s provisions relating to parental
responsibilities and rights (PRR).


    The new Children’s Bill will modernise South African Law as it takes a
child rights approach, promotes mediation rather than conflict and
recognises flexible and diverse family forms. These aspects converge to
provide a shift in emphasis from parental power to parental
responsibilities and rights (PRR). Parental power is historically rooted in
private law and was used more to reduce conflict between parents on
divorce; however this did not recognise the emerging self-determination of
the child and the varied roles of “care-givers” in the lives of children.


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    The submission indicated that the chapter relating to parental rights
and responsibilities was very progressive and would make strides towards
modernising South African law relating to the parent-child relationship.
However, it was felt that the Bill falls short of addressing many crucial
issues relating to parental rights and responsibilities. These would
include: parental rights and responsibilities in relation to child-headed
households, children in statutory care, children being cared for through
informal arrangements with relatives or others, as well as many issues
relating to customary law. In particular, the chapter appears to steer
clear of addressing issues that could potentially conflict with customary
law. According to the submission, an ideal opportunity to ensure that
children’s rights are not abused under the guise of customary practices has
been lost.


    Submitted by the HIV/AIDS Sector


    The submission voiced its support for the proposed clause 32 of Chapter
4 which, along with the definition of caregiver, is a significant
improvement on current legislative provisions, in the context of HIV/AIDS
where many children are currently denied access to treatment because of
requirements that parental consent or consent from a legally appointed
guardian is required before medical treatment can be administered.


    Submitted by Dikwanketla – Children in Action


    The submission contended that children expect all caregivers to care
for them in a manner that will promote their growth and development.


    Clause 21: Parental responsibilities and rights of unmarried fathers


    Submitted by the Children’s Institute


    A particularly controversial provision in the Bill is the parental
rights and responsibilities of unmarried fathers. The Bill provides for a
biological father to have rights and responsibilities over his child if he
is married to the child’s mother or if he was married to her at the time of
the child’s conception, the child’s birth or any time between the child’s
conception and birth. For those biological fathers who do not fall into the
above categories, clause 21 provides that unmarried fathers may acquire
parental rights and responsibilities in respect of the child, if the father
has lived with the child’s mother for a period of 12 months or more
consecutively, or for periods which together amount to 12 months; or if he
has cared for the child with the mother’s informed consent for 12 months or
more consecutively, or for periods which together amount to 12 months.


    Clause 22 further provides that unmarried biological fathers may
acquire parental rights and responsibilities by entering into an agreement
with the mother or with the person having parental rights and
responsibilities over the child.


    It is submitted that simply leaving the determination as to whether the
conditions listed in clause 21 exist up to the father and mother concerned
may create great uncertainty. It is argued that it is likely that the
father will simply make the decision as to whether the conditions exit or
not, thereby putting the burden on the mother to challenge the situation in
Court if she believes that the conditions do not exist.


    Recommendation


 • That a clause be inserted providing that the acquisition of parental
   rights and responsibilities by an unmarried father should be confirmed
   by a court order (in High Court, Divorce court or Children’s court).
 • That the unmarried father bears the burden of proof to show that he has
   satisfied the necessary conditions to acquire parental rights and
   responsibilities.
 • That the parties may approach the Children’s Court or Divorce Court (at
   present they have to go to the High Court), thereby making access to the
   Court easier and less costly.


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    The submission noted that while section 9 of the Constitution of South
Africa provides that there may be no unfair discrimination based on inter
alia marital status, gender or religion, the Constitution also provides in
section 28 that the best interest of a child should be of paramount concern
in decisions affecting the life of a child.


    Recommendations


          21. (1) The biological father of a child who does not have
      parental responsibilities and rights in respect of the child in terms
      of section 20, acquires full parental responsibilities and rights in
      respect of the child after the child’s birth—
         [(a)] [ if at any time after the child’s birth he has lived with
     the child’s mother—
          (i) for a period of no less than 12 months; or
          (ii) for periods which together amount to no less than 12 months;]
          [(b)] [ if he, regardless of whether he has lived or is living
      with the mother, has cared for the child with the mother’s informed
      consent—
          (i) for a period of no less than 12 months; or
          (ii) for periods which together amount to no less than 12 months.]
         (a) the mother of a child whose father acquires parental rights and
     responsibilities in terms of section 21(1), or any other interested
     person, may apply to the children’s court for an order terminating the
     father’s parental responsibilities and rights if such application is in
     the best interest of the child.
          (2) This section does not affect the duty of a father of a child
      to contribute towards the maintenance of the child.


    Submitted by the People’s Family Law Centre


    This clause provides that an unmarried father automatically acquires
parental rights and responsibilities if after the child’s birth he lives
with the child’s mother for a period of no less than 12 months (or for
periods together which amount to no less than 12 months). Alternatively, an
unmarried father can automatically acquire parental rights and
responsibilities if he has cared for the child for a period of no less than
12 months (or periods together which amount to no less than 12 months). In
both instances, the acquisition of parental rights and responsibilities is
automatic and does not need confirmation by a court order.


    The submission is that the clause begs disputes of fact and places the
mother in the position of having to disprove what the father is alleging.
It is submitted further that children’s rights and interests are best
protected by means of the certainty that a court order bestows.


    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 


    The Law Society argued that unmarried fathers should not have automatic
access or rights with regard to their biological children, but that this
provision should be harmonised with the provisions in the Natural Fathers
of Children Born out of Wedlock Act. The father should either have to apply
to the High court or Family court for access, although the submission noted
that the family court structure it proposes could be equipped to deal with
applications of this nature. The submission further questioned the
stipulation that the father acquires parental rights dependent on a
relationship that has lasted for at least twelve months, noting that
relationships are fluid, and that such a period may be arbitrary.


    Clause 22(3): Parental Responsibilities and Rights Agreements and
Clause 23(2): Assignment of Parental Responsibilities and Rights by Order
of Court


    Submitted by the Children’s Institute


    It is of great concern that the Children’s Bill retains the High Court
jurisdiction as upper guardian of all children. This means that any matters
related to the guardianship of children must be dealt with by the High
Court, which reduces the original aim of improving accessibility to the
courts for all. It is submitted that the High Court, divorce court and
children’s court have jurisdiction to assign and terminate all parental
rights and responsibilities, including guardianship.


    Recommendation


    That the following clauses be deleted:


    Clause 22
    [(3) Only the High Court may confirm a parental responsibilities and
rights agreement that relates to the guardianship of a child.]


    Clause 23
    [(2) Only the High Court may issue an order that relates to the
guardianship of a child.]


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    The submission welcomed the inclusion of parental responsibilities and
rights agreements. However, concern was expressed regarding the role of the
courts in bringing such agreements into effect, as well as the need to
revisit those instances where caregivers other than the biological father
seek to acquire some aspects of parental responsibilities and rights in
respect of a child in their care. This would provide caregivers (such as
grandmothers, aunts, uncles or non-relatives) with the opportunity of
entering into an agreement with the child’s mother regarding the exercise
of parental responsibilities and rights, and could be extremely useful in
instances where children are left behind in the care of relatives or
friends when the parents seek work elsewhere away from home.


    Recommendation


          22. (1) Subject to subsection (2), the biological father of a
      child who does not have parental responsibilities and rights in
      respect of the child in terms of either section 20 or 21, or the
      caregiver of a child, may enter into an agreement with the mother or
      other person who has parental responsibilities and rights in respect
      of the child, providing for the acquisition by the father or such
      caregiver of such parental responsibilities and rights in respect of
      the child as are set out in the agreement.
         (2) The mother or other person who has parental responsibilities
     and rights in respect of the child may only confer by agreement upon
     the biological father of the child, or the caregiver of a child, those
     parental responsibilities and rights which she or that other person has
     in respect of the child at the time of the conclusion of such
     agreement.
          (3) Only the High Court may confirm a parental responsibilities
      and rights agreement that relates to the guardianship of a child.
          (4) A parental responsibilities and rights agreement must be in
      the format and contain the particulars prescribed by regulation.
          [(5) Subject to subsection (3), a parental responsibilities and
      rights agreement—
          (a) takes effect only if—
          (i) registered with the family advocate; or
         (ii) made an order of the High Court, a divorce court in a divorce
     matter or the children’s court on application by the parties to the
     agreement; and
          (b) may be amended or terminated only by an order of the High
      Court, a divorce court or a children’s court on application—
          (i) by a person having parental responsibilities and rights in
      respect of the child;
          (ii) by the child, acting with leave of the court; or
          (iii) in the child’s interest by any other person, acting with
      leave of the court.]


    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 


    The submission argued that the authority before which a parental
responsibilities and rights agreement is registered, must be required to
ascertain that such agreement is in the child’s best interests before
registering it. In addition, it was noted that the role of the Family
Advocate in registering parenting plans should be clarified. 


    Clause 24: Certain Applications regarded as Inter-Country Adoptions


    Submission by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees


    The submission notes that refugee status protects non-citizens from
persecution by the authorities of their country of origin. The procedures
that accompany inter-country adoptions require that permission be obtained
from the country of origin. Thus, the submission expresses concern that the
procedures that accompany inter-country adoptions may expose refugees and
refugee children to personal danger or persecution from such a country.


    Recommendation


    Clause 24 should be amended to include a proviso exempting refugees
applying for partial or full responsibility of refugee children from being
treated in terms the laws relating to inter-country adoption.


    Submitted by Wybrow-Oliver Attorneys


    The submission pointed out that, in view of the gap in terms of
legislative provisions regulating inter-country adoptions, attorneys have
been approaching the High Court for the awarding of guardianship and full
parental rights to non-citizens. This effectively enabled those persons to
adopt the South African child in the country of the adoptive parent’s
origin or current residence. It was argued that clause 24, in providing
that all applications by non-South Africans for the assignment of
guardianship or full parental rights and responsibilities in respect of a
child must be regarded as inter-country adoptions, thereby removing the
application from the High Court, infringes on the High Court’s inherent
jurisdiction. However, clause 45(4) provides that “(n)othing in this Act
shall be construed as limiting the inherent jurisdiction of the High Courts
as upper guardians of all children”, which the submission suggests
represents a contradiction to what is provided for in clause 24.


    It was also argued that not all prospective applicants want to adopt
the child in respect of whom they apply for guardianship, but rather want
the permanency and security of guardianship while allowing the child to
retain his or her South African birthright. Therefore the submission
recommended that the presumption that all applications by non-South
Africans for guardianship or permanent transfer of parental rights and
responsibilities are deemed adoptions, be removed from the Bill. This would
enable the High Court to exercise its discretion as to what would be in the
best interests of a particular child.


    Clause 26 (1): Assignment of parental responsibilities and rights to
parent substitutes


    Submitted by the Children’s Institute


    The issue of passing on guardianship and custody through a document or
a formal will is also of grave concern in the context of many parents and
caregivers dying due to the AIDS pandemic. The provision in clause 26
allows for parental rights and responsibilities to be assigned to other
caregivers via a written document or as part of a will is thus welcome and
allows parents to plan ahead for the care of the children they will leave
behind in the event of their death. It is submitted that it is important
that caregivers may be appointed through a mechanism that is easily
accessible and does not require the intervention  of the courts. There is
however, an increased need for education of people in order to ensure that
they make provisions for their children upon their death. Mere legislation
is not enough.


    Recommendation


    That regulations provide that home-based caregivers and social workers
be instructed to make succession planning part of their duties when caring
for and attending to sick and dying parents.


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    Support was expressed for the inclusion of clauses relating to parent-
substitutes. However, the submission argued that the assignment of parent-
substitutes should also be allowed when both parents are still alive in
order for them to make a joint decision. This would protect children whose
parents die simultaneously or where the surviving parent dies without
having made such an assignment.


    The current draft of clause 26 implies that the acceptance of the
assignment is only made after the death of the sole natural guardian.
Should the parent-substitute decline to accept the assignment after the
death of the parents, the children would be left without a guardian. It is
submitted that acceptance of the assignment should be made prior to the
death of the natural parents to provide certainty as to the status of the
children after the parents death as well as to provide the parents with an
opportunity to appoint someone else should the parent-substitute decline
the assignment.


    The assignment by both parents may be revoked by one of the parents
after the other’s death if it appears that the assigned parent-substitute
is no longer suitable to act as the parent-substitute. However, the parent-
substitute assigned by both parents and who has accepted the assignment
when both parents were alive, may challenge the assignment of the new
parent-substitute by the surviving parent in a children’s court if it is in
the best interest of the child or children concerned.


               26. (1) A parent who is the sole natural guardian and who
           has parental responsibilities and rights in respect of a child
           or both parents jointly, may appoint a suitable person as a
           parent-substitute and assign to that person his or her parental
           responsibilities and rights in respect of the child in the event
           of his or her death.

        (2) An appointment in terms of subsection (1)—
        (a) must be in writing and signed by the parent or parents jointly;
        (b) may form part of the will of the parent or parents;
        (c) replaces any previous appointment, including any such
    appointment in a will, whether made before or after this section took
    effect; and
        (d) may at any time be revoked by the parent or parents by way of a
    written instrument signed by the parent or parents.
        (3) A parent-substitute appointed in terms of subsection (1)
    acquires parental responsibilities and rights in respect of a child—
        (a) after the death of the parent; and
        (b) upon the parent-substitute’s express or implied acceptance of
    the appointment.
        (4) If two or more persons are appointed as parent-substitutes, any
    one or more or all of them may accept the appointment except if the
    appointment provides otherwise.
        (5) A parent-substitute acquires only those parental
    responsibilities and rights—
        (a) which the parent had at his or her death; or
        (b) if the parent died before the birth of the child, which the
    parent would have had had the parent lived until the birth of the
    child.
        (6) The assignment of parental responsibilities and rights to a
    parent-substitute does not affect the parental responsibilities and
    rights which another person has in respect of the child.
        (7) In this section ‘‘parent’’ includes a person who has acquired
    parental responsibilities and rights in respect of a child.


    Clause 32: Care of Child by Persons Not Holding Parental Rights and
Responsibilities


    Submitted by the Aids Law Project (ALP) and Human Rights Watch
    It is submitted that clause 32 of the Children’s Bill, together with
the definitions of caregiver and primary caregiver, represents a
significant and welcome departure from the current law that will benefit
large numbers of children. The clause imposes an obligation on anyone who
cares for a child to safeguard the child’s health and well-being and
permits care-givers, including those who have no parental rights or
responsibilities in respect of a child, to consent to medical examination
and treatment of the child if such consent cannot be reasonably obtained
from the child’s parent or primary caregiver will remove major impediments
to medical treatment for children, including children living with HIV/AIDS
and child sexual violence survivors.


    However, concern was raised that neither clause 32 nor the current
draft of the Children’s Bill more generally are sufficiently clear or
comprehensive in safeguarding children’s rights to medical care and
treatment. It is submitted that many children are unlikely to benefit from
the provision of antiretroviral drugs, unless the definition of consent is
broad enough to address their needs. A prior version of the Children’s Bill
included several provisions regarding consent that expanded the definition
of consent. Although it is likely that these provisions will be included in
the section 76 version of the Bill, there is concern that if they are not
adequately addressed in the current Bill, some children will still not be
able to obtain access to potentially life-saving medication.


    Recommendation


 • That clauses of the 12 August 2003 version of the Bill (Consolidated
   Bill) pertaining to consent are enacted, together with clause 32, to
   ensure the protection of children’s rights to life and to the highest
   attainable standard of health as guaranteed by the South African
   Constitution and international human rights law. In particular, the
   following provisions of the consolidated Bill should be included:


             Clauses 135 and 237 of the consolidated Bill permit a hospital
        superintendent to consent to medical treatment in certain emergency
        situations, and on behalf of a street child or a child in a child-
        headed household.


             Clause 136 specifically addresses HIV testing. The clause
        states that consent to an HIV test may be given by a child over 12
        years, by a child under 12 years if the child is of “sufficient
        maturity to understand the benefits, risks and social implications
        of the test,” the child’s parents, care-givers or a designated
        child protection agency arranging placement of the child or a
        hospital superintendent in certain defined circumstances. A child
        and family court can also give permission for an HIV test if the
        consent is being unreasonably withheld or the child’s parent or
        caregiver is incapable of giving consent.
 • Clause 32 of the Bill, as well as the clauses contained in the
   consolidated Bill pertaining to consent, is enacted immediately to ensure
   that all children have access to PEP and antiretroviral medicines.


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    The granting of limited parental responsibilities and rights to persons
who voluntarily care for a child was welcomed. However, the submission held
that problems may arise with the interpretation of the requirement of
medical treatment being ‘reasonably necessary’, in which case is may be
best that the decision should either be left with the medical
superintendent of the hospital or with the person in charge of the
institution where the child is being taken care of.


    Recommendation


    The following deletions and insertions were recommended:


               32. (1) A person who has no parental responsibilities and
           rights in respect of a child but who voluntarily cares for the
           child either indefinitely, temporarily or partially, including a
           care-giver who otherwise has no parental responsibilities and
           rights in respect of a child, must, whilst the child is in that
           person’s care—

        (a) safeguard the child’s health, well-being and development; and
        (b) protect the child from maltreatment, abuse, neglect,
    degradation, discrimination, exploitation and any other physical or
    mental harm or hazards.
        (2) A person referred to in subsection (1) may exercise any
    parental responsibilities and rights reasonably necessary to comply
    with subsection (1), including the right to consent to any medical
    examination or treatment of the child if such consent cannot reasonably
    be obtained from the parent or primary care-giver of the child.
        (3) The medical superintendent of the hospital where the child is
    to be treated may decide whether the proposed medical treatment is
    reasonable or not.
        (4) A court may limit or restrict the parental responsibilities and
    rights which a person may exercise in terms of subsection (2).
        (5) A person referred to in subsection (1) may not—
        (a) hold himself or herself out as the biological or adoptive
    parent of the child; or
        (b) deceive the child or any other person into believing that that
    person is the biological or adoptive parent of the child.


    Part 3: Parenting plans


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project
    The submission noted that some of the formalities for the drafting of
the parenting plans appear to be unduly onerous and in some cases will
place a heavy burden on already under-resourced family advocates and social
workers. Families who have the financial resources may opt to seek the
assistance of a private psychologist and could thus be unfairly advantaged.
In addition, it was pointed out that the provisions relating to parenting
plans do not clearly set out the procedure to be followed when a parenting
plan has to be amended.


    Clause 33: Contents of Parent’s Plans


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    The submission recommended the following amendment:


               33. (1) If the co-holders of parental responsibilities and
           rights in respect of a child are experiencing difficulties in
           exercising their responsibilities and rights, those persons,
           before seeking the intervention of a court, must first seek to
           agree on a parenting plan determining the exercise of their
           respective responsibilities and rights in respect of the child.

        (2) A parenting plan may determine any matter in connection with
    parental responsibilities and rights, including—
        (a) where and with whom the child is to live;
        (b) the maintenance of the child;
        (c) contact between the child and—
        (i) any of the parties; and
        (ii) any other person; and
        (d) the schooling and religious upbringing of the child.
        (3) A parenting plan must comply with the best interest of the
    child standard as set out in section 6.
        (4) In preparing a parenting plan the parties [must] may seek—
        (a) the assistance of a family advocate, social worker or
    psychologist; or
        (b) mediation through a social worker or other appropriate person.


    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 


    The submission argued that when making decisions in terms of a
parenting plan, the child’s "cultural upbringing" and "generally anything
affecting the best interests of the child" should be included the list of
in matters considered while


    Clause 34: Formalities


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    The submission recommended the following amendment:


    34. (1) A parenting plan—
        (a) must be in writing and signed by the parties to the agreement;
    and
        (b) subject to subsection (2), may be registered with a family
    advocate or made an order of court.
        (2) An application for registration of a parenting plan must—
        (a) be in the format and contain the particulars prescribed by
    regulation; and
        (b) be accompanied by—
        (i) a copy of the plan; and
        (ii) may be accompanied by a statement by—
        (aa) a family advocate, social worker or psychologist contemplated
    in section 33(4)(a) that the plan was prepared after consultation with
    such family advocate, social worker or psychologist; or
        (bb) a social worker or other appropriate person contemplated in
    section 33(4)(b) that the plan was prepared after mediation by such
    social worker or person.


    Clause 35: Amendment or Termination of Registered Parenting Plans


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


               35. (1) A registered parenting plan may be amended or
           terminated only by an order of court on application—

        (a) by the co-holders of the parental responsibilities and rights;
        (b) by the child, acting with leave of the court; or
        (c) in the child’s interest, by any other person acting with leave
    of the court.
        (2) Section 29 applies to an application in terms of subsection
    (1).


    Submitted by the People’s Family Law Centre


    It is submitted that it appears contradictory that a parental rights
and responsibilities agreement relating to guardianship requires
confirmation by the High Court whereas, unmarried fathers can automatically
and unilaterally acquire parental rights without any court involvement.





     Clause 40: Rights of children conceived by artificial fertilisation



    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    The Community Law Centre agreed with the provisions relating to the
rights of children conceived through assisted conception. However, it was
submitted that the terminology ‘artificial insemination’ be used rather
than ‘artificial fertilisation’.


    Recommendation


    The following deletions and insertions were recommended:


               40. (1) (a) Whenever the gamete or gametes of any person
           other than a married person or his or her spouse have been used
           with the consent of both such spouses for the artificial
           [fertilisation] insemination of one spouse, any child born of
           that spouse as a result of such artificial [fertilisation]
           insemination must for all purposes be regarded to be the child
           of those spouses as if the gamete or gametes of those spouses
           were used for such artificial [fertilisation] insemination.

        (b) For the purpose of paragraph (a) it must be presumed, until the
    contrary is proved, that both spouses have granted the relevant
    consent.
        (2) Subject to section 290, whenever the gamete or gametes of any
    person have been used for the artificial [fertilisation] insemination
    of a woman, any child born of that woman as a result of such artificial
    [fertilisation] insemination must for all purposes be regarded to be
    the child of that woman.
        (3) No right, responsibility, duty or obligation arises between a
    child born of a woman as a result of artificial [fertilisation]
    insemination and any person whose gamete or gametes have been used for
    such artificial [fertilisation] insemination and the blood relations of
    that person, except when—
        (a) that person is the woman who gave birth to that child; or
         (b) that person was the husband of such woman at the time of such
     artificial [fertilisation] insemination.


    Clause 41: Access to information concerning genetic parents


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


               41. (1) A child born as a result of artificial
           [fertilisation] insemination or surrogacy is entitled to have
           access to—

        (a) any medical information concerning that child’s genetic
    parents;
        (b) any other information concerning the child’s genetic parents
    but not before the child reaches the age of 18 years.
        (2) Information disclosed in terms of subsection (1) may not reveal
    the identity of the person whose gamete or gametes have been used for
    such artificial [fertilisation] insemination or the identity of the
    surrogate mother.
        (3) The Director-General for Health or any other person specified
    by regulation may require a person to receive counselling before any
    information in terms of subsection (1) is disclosed.



    Chapter 5: Children’s Courts




    “Overall cohesion of the children’s courts chapter”



    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    It was the opinion of the CLC that Chapter 5 contained a combination of
the present provisions of the Child Care Act and some of the provisions of
the SALRC draft of the Bill. The SALRC version formed a comprehensive
structure for children’s courts. The attempt to include some of the
provisions therein in a chapter that is essentially the same as the present
Child Care Act court system has resulted in poor, illogical and incohesive
drafting.


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project



    Clause 42: Children’s courts and presiding officers



    The submission held that there are serious problems with the manner in
which Children’s courts currently function. These were summarised as
follows:


    training and appointment of Commissioners of Child Welfare


    training and appointment of children’s court assistants


    quality of service of social workers


    interpretation differences between Commissioners of Child Welfare


    section 11(2) removals and Form 4 removals


    legal representation of children


    The submission therefore expressed concern about the fact that a number
of provisions in earlier versions of the Bill have been omitted. These
include provisions relating to the appointment and training of presiding
officers, the power to decide on parental rights and responsibilities,
guardianship, age of majority, contractual and legal capacity of the child,
parent substitutes as well as the removal, departure and abduction of a
child from the Republic.


    The CLC recommended that the provisions concerning qualifications and
training for staff in Children’s courts be re-inserted into the Bill.


    It was argued that clause 58(1)(w) should not be included as it relates
to delictual claims and the adjudication of these matters would not only
overburden the children’s court’s roll, but are also more suitably dealt
with in the civil courts.



           Clause 45(1): Matters Children’s Courts May Adjudicate



    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    The submission pointed out that Clause 45 fails to contain certain key
matters that a children court should have the power to adjudicate on,
namely:


    The care or guardianship of or contact with the child


    The assignment, exercise, restriction, suspension or termination of
parental responsibilities or rights


    Artificial procreation of a child, excluding a dispute between
contraction parties regarding compensation


    Children in need of care and protection or in especially difficult
circumstances


    Domestic violence affecting a child


    The departure, abduction or removal of a child from the Republic


    A social security grant to or in respect of a child


    The age of majority or the contractual or legal capacity of a child


    Safeguarding of a child’s interest in property


    These matters, in terms of the present Bill (with the exception of
matters dealing with the child in need of protection), remain within in the
jurisdiction of the High Court. The submission argued that these provisions
would be best suited for a Children’s court in order to increase access to
justice.


    The Community Law Centre noted that chapter 10 of the 12 August version
of the Bill has been removed from Bill 70 of 2003 with the exception of
clause 150. it was argued that this is a critical error as the provisions
of chapter 10 deal directly with the functions and responsibilities of the
children’s courts in relation to children in need of care and protection.


    Submitted by the Lawyers for Human Rights (LHR)


    LHR submits that the Children’s Courts are best placed to serve as an
initial point of entry into the protection framework for foreign children.
This becomes particularly necessary in respect of issues relating to the
determination of the resident status of the children and, thereafter, the
departure and removal of children who are declared illegal foreigners in
terms of the Immigration Act, from the Republic.


    Recommendation


 • That the High Court should not have exclusive jurisdiction on matters
   relating to the departure and removal of a child from the Republic, as
   presently provided for by clause 45(3)(d) of the Bill.
 • That the Children’s Court’s authority to adjudicate matters, provided
   for in clause 45(1) of the Bill, be expressly extended to include:


          “Any matter which relates to the manner in which children, who had
      been declared to be illegal foreigners in terms of the Immigration
      Act, are detained and removed from South Africa”.


    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 
    The Law Society expressed concern about the manner in which Children’s
courts are envisaged in the Bill. With reference to the issue of child
support, the submission noted that it should be clarified what the
relationship would be between the Children’s court and the Maintenance
court in terms of jurisdiction. It further pointed out that the divorce
court does not have jurisdiction over the guardianship of any child, as
this is the exclusive purvey of the High court. This error in the Bill must
therefore be corrected.  


    Clause 46: Orders which Children’s Courts May Make


    Submitted by the Lawyers for Human Rights (LHR)


    It appears that foreign children are regularly detained pending their
removal from the country. This is in contravention of section 28 the
Constitution and the provisions of the Child Care Act, provide for the
protection of children in need of care, which are totally ignored when such
children are foreigners.


    Recommendation


 • That the following sub-clause be included as an additional order, which
   the Children’s Court may make:


             “An order instructing the circumstances when and the manner in
        which children, who had been declared to be illegal foreigners in
        terms of the Immigration Act are detained and removed from the
        Republic”.



    Clause 47: Referral of Children to Children’s Courts by Other Courts



    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 


    With regard to suspending proceedings in order to investigate whether a
child is in need of care and protection, the submission proposed that such
suspension of proceedings be valid for a period of no longer than fourteen
days. 



    Children in need of care and protection




      Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project



    The submission pointed out that the chapter on children in need of
special care and protection has been removed from the present Bill. It
noted that there are two groups of especially vulnerable children that
children’s courts should have jurisdiction to deal with, namely, children
affected and effected by HIV/AIDS and refugee children.



    Clause 50: Investigations




      Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project



    The submission argued that children could be highly traumatised when
being removed from a parent or caregiver, even where this is necessary.
Therefore it was argued that there needs to be a provision in this section
setting out that a social worker or police official should be mindful of
the child’s presence and vulnerability in exercising their power of removal
or entry into the premises by force and should exercise their power in such
manner that takes the child’s state of mind into account.



                 Clause 55: Legal representation of children



    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    Although the current legislation makes provision for the child’s right
to legal representation, it was pointed out that this often occurs only at
the discretion of the magistrate. The submission argued that earlier
versions of the Bill provided a comprehensive set of provisions allowing
for children’s representation in forums when children have a right to
participate and have a constitutional right to representation and are often
not in a position to exercise that right. The provisions gave substantive
guidelines to presiding officers to allow for such representation. Concern
was therefore expressed that this clause will not allow for the
constitutional right that is afforded to children and will result in many
children not having adequate representation in proceedings that go to the
heart of their rights contained in section 28(1)(b) and (d) of the
Constitution.



                               Recommendation



    The CLC recommended that the provisions regarding children’s legal
representation as in the original SALRC draft Bill be reinstated.



    Clause 60: Conduct of Proceedings



    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 



                               Recommendation



    With reference to the conduct of proceedings in the children’s court,
the Law Society proposed that the following be inserted as sub-clause 4
after clause 60(3):


          "The presiding officer has the discretion to refer any matter at
      any stage before or after commencement of proceedings for mediation by
      an impartial mediator or mediators. Such mediator(s) shall not have
      the power to make findings or recommendations, but shall be required
      to assist the parties to settle their dispute. The mediator(s) shall
      certify whether or not the dispute has been settled and if the dispute
      has been settled the mediator(s) shall summarise the terms of the
      settlement”. 



    Clause 63: Evidence




      Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project



    The submission noted that previous versions of the Bill allowed for
hearsay evidence, evidence of previous similar conduct and the power of the
court to dispense with any rule of evidence. This has been removed from
Bill 70 of 2003.


    It was argued that to remove the provisions relating to hearsay,
similar fact evidence and dispensing with the rules of court, runs contrary
to the move to make the court more user friendly. The submission therefore
recommended that the provisions of clause 86(1) of the SALRC version be
reinstated.



     Clause 67: Appointment or designation of clerks of children’s court



    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    The CLC pointed out that the provisions concerning the role and
qualifications of Children’s court assistants, clerks and registrars have
been changed considerably since the SALRC proposals were tabled. The
submission argued that it is essential is that the clerk, assistant or
registrar needs to have the proper qualifications and suitable training to
operate in Children’s courts. Therefore it was proposed that the provisions
of clauses 81 and 82 of the June version be incorporated into Bill 70 of
2003.



    Clause 73: Other Functions



    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 


    The submission also raised questions with regard to the qualifications
of persons appointed as Clerk of the Children’s court. 



                   Chapter 7: Early Childhood Development



    Clause 91: Definitional provision of Early Childhood Development (ECD)


    Submitted by the Early Learning Resource Unit (ELRU) and the South
African Congress for Early Childhood Development (SACECD)


    ECD is defined by all current Government policy documents as an
umbrella term, which applies to the processes by which children from birth
to at least 9 years grow and thrive physically, mentally, emotionally,
spiritually, morally and socially.


    The Department of Education focuses on children aged 5 and 6 years,
with grade R-provisioning as its key policy priority. Children aged 7-9
years are seen as part of the formal schooling system (grades 1-3). There
is a definite gap in ECD provisioning for children aged 7-9 years, as they
are not explicitly covered within current ECD policy. For many reasons,
most of them, related to poor socio- economic conditions, children 7-9
years may find themselves out of the formal primary schooling system (grade
1-3) and so not benefit from any ECD programmes. Similarly, even though
children in the 0-5 year category are covered in policy, many of them do
not have access to centre based ECD facilities.


    Recommendation


    The definitional provision of ECD in clause 91 of the Bill should be
changed to the following:


          91(1) Early childhood development, for the purposes of this Act,
      means the process of emotional, mental, spiritual, moral, physical and
      social development of children from birth to school-going nine years
      of age.
          91 (2)(b) provided by a person, other than a child’s parent or
      primary caregiver, on a regular basis to children up to school going
      nine years of age.


    Chapter 8: Protection of Children


    Submitted by Dikwanketla – Children in Action


    Recommendation


    All members of society should be obligated to report cases of child
neglect and abuse so that protecting children is a community’s
responsibility and that removing children from their environment away from
family and friends should be the last resort. In the event of a child being
removed, the first option for places of safety should be in the community,
enabling the child to attend the same school and to have the same friends.
In addition, support structures such as counselling and parenting classes
should be provided in cases of neglect.
    Other measures to protect children from abuse should include:
    Empowering children to look after and protect themselves, even though
the primary responsibility lies with the care-giver.
    Making court processes easier for children to access e.g. going to
court should be free.
    The court must stop abusive care-givers from seeing their children.
    Government must bring more social workers nearer to communities where
they are needed.
    Government must create a 24 hour toll free number in different
provinces (and different languages) where children can call to report
abuse.


    Submitted by the SA Society for the Prevention of Child Abuse and
Neglect (SASPCAN)
    The provision previously made for an intersectoral mechanism to see to
the proper planning, resourcing and coordination of the child protection
system has been entirely omitted. All of its tasks are now simply omitted,
without any attempt to reassign them. The lack of a secure basis in the law
for the financing and carrying out of these tasks creates a situation in
which the current disarray in the child protection system, with all the
harm it does to children, is liable to continue ad infinitum.



       Clause 123: Consequences of entry of name in Part B of Register



    Submitted by the National Alliance for Street Children


    While the NASC supports clause 123, read together with clause 126,
which ensures that a person whose name appear in Part B of the National
Child Protection Register may not be employed, operate or manage a
children’s or youth care facility, the NASC is concerned about whether the
office of the Registrar will have adequate resources to respond to request
for screenings[8].


    Submitted by the HIV/AIDS Sector


    The HIV/AIDS sector supports the important provisions (clauses 130, 132
and 133) but emphasise that they have obvious direct implications for
health workers.


    Recommendation


    The provisions should be mirrored or cross-referenced in relevant
health policy and legislation. It is also imperative that the provisions
for an integrated National Policy Framework (or equivalent) be reinstated.
    While the sector also supports the recognition within the Bill of child-
headed households as a family form in South Africa, there is not yet
consensus as to the appropriateness of the definition, given some of the
potential implications for children and their caregivers. If CHH include
households in which the parent or primary care-giver of the household is
terminally ill, how would "terminally ill" be defined, and what would the
adult caregivers roles or responsibilities be in this household?
Furthermore, there is no clarity as to whether the provisions for child-
headed households are only applicable to those households recognised as
such by a provincial head of social development. Another concern
highlighted by recent research indicates that child headed households,
while clearly existing in small numbers, are frequently a transitional or
temporary household form, existing for a period for example, just after the
death of an adult and prior to other arrangements being made for children’s
care. How would this impact on continuity of care and support for the
children within these households?
    Suggested amendment(s)


    136. (2) A child-headed household must function under the general
supervision of an adult designated by organ of state or non-governmental
organisation –
          (a) An organ of state or non-governmental organisation determined
      by the provincial head of social development; or
          (b) designated by a children’s court.
    (3) The organ of state or non-governmental organisation adult person
referred to in sub-clause (2) –
          (a) may collect and administer for the child-headed household any
      social security grant or other grant or assistance to which the
      household is entitled; and
          (b) is accountable to the provincial department of social
      development, or the children’s court, or to another organ of state or
      a non-governmental organisation designated by the provincial head of
      social development, for the administration of any money received on
      behalf of the household.
    (4) The organ of state or non-governmental organisation adult referred
to in sub-clause (2) may not take any decisions concerning such household
and the children in the household without consulting –
          (a) the child at the head of the household; and
          (b) given the age, maturity and stage of development of the other
      children, also those other children.
    (5) The child heading the household may take all day-to-day decisions
relating to the household and the children in the household as if that
child was an adult primary care-giver.
    (6) A child-headed household may not be excluded from any aid, relief
or other programme for poor households provided by an organ of state in the
national, provincial or local sphere of government solely by reason of the
fact that the household is headed by a child.
    (7) The Minister must include in the national policy framework [or
equivalent], a comprehensive and intersectoral strategy aimed at
identifying, assisting and promoting the best interests of children living
in child-headed households.



    Chapter 9: Prevention and Early Intervention


    Submitted by Dikwanketla – Children in Action


    The Children’s Bill rightfully states that there should be
interventions put in place to help children and their families before their
problems become too serious.


    Recommendation


    The Children’s Bill should state that an effective prevention service
would require Government service personnel such as nurses, psychologists,
social workers, educators and the police to work together with the
community, i.e., home-based care-givers, churches and non-governmental
organisations. It will also require the existence of support mechanisms
such as rehabilitation centres, parenting classes, community leisure
activities, such as play grounds, sports fields and transport facilities to
get people where they need to go to ask for assistance.


    Chapter 10: Children in need of Care and Protection


    Submitted by Dikwanketla – Children in Action


    Dikwanketla was convinced that removing children from their environment
away from family and friends should be the last resort and that only when
children are cared for by caregivers other than their biological parents
would it be logical to remove such children and take them to places of
safety. Children who have been neglected and abused must receive
counselling.


    Submitted by the Lawyers for Human Rights (LHR)


    A child is unaccompanied if no person can be found, either by law or
custom, to have primary responsibility for that child. It is submitted that
unaccompanied refugee and foreign children should be recognised as children
in need of care and protection and that they should therefore be dealt with
in terms of children’s court proceedings.


    Recommendation


    It is recommended that the following sub-clause be added to clause 150
of the Bill:


    “(j) is an unaccompanied foreign child”.


    Clause 150: Child in Need of Care and Protection


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    The submission pointed out that clause 150 only refers to clause 47 of
Bill 70 of 2003, namely referral of children to children’s courts by other
courts. It was argued that there should also be reference to clause 68,
namely, referral of matters to the children’s court by the clerk of the
children’s court and clause 46 relating to child protection orders and
alternative care orders. In addition, clause 166 of the SALRC version
provided for additional circumstances in which a child could be found in
need of care and protection. The CLC recommended that the provisions of
clause 166 of the SALRC version of the Bill be reinstated.


    Submitted by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees


    The submission notes that in accordance with Article 22(2) of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, refugee children whose parents or
family members cannot be traced must be treated as nationals would be in a
similar situation. Accordingly, the Government has an obligation to assist
such children in tracing their families, and in ensuring that they are
afforded the same treatment and status as nationals during their stay in
South Africa.


    Recommendation


    That clause 150 of the Bill is amended to include provisions protecting
foreign and refugee children whose families prove untraceable.
    That the Department of Home Affairs must provide refugee and foreign
children whose families prove untraceable with the necessary documentation
to regularise their stay in South Africa.



                  Chapter 12: Children in Alternative Care



    Submitted by the National Association of Child Care Workers (NACCW)


    The sector commends the Department of Social Development for much of
the contents of Chapters 12 and 14. It considers that these chapters lay a
strong and comprehensive foundation for effective services to children
placed in residential facilities. It particularly welcomes much of the
contents of Chapter 12 as limiting the power of the court and other bodies
to transfer children within the child and youth-care system. It also is
strongly in favour of much of the chapter on “Child and Youth Care
Centres”.


    The NACCW, however, raises a concern, which relates to the excision of
the provision for free state services to children in statutory care,
originally included in clause 188 of the SALRC draft of the Bill. Should
child and youth care centres be required to provide for such services,
funding for these services would need to be provided in addition to the
funding for the residential care. It must be noted that children placed in
child and youth care centres are by definition the responsibility of the
state, and it is the responsibility, therefore, of the state to provide
sufficient resources to enable legislative requirements to be met. If it
were incumbent on child and youth-care centres to fund educational and
health services for children in their care, this is likely to seriously
impact on their capacity to adequately provide for the requirements of the
legislation in respect of therapeutic programmes.


    Submitted by the HIV/AIDS Sector


    The HIV/AIDS Sector contended that while there are many orphans who, as
a result of abuse, neglect, abandonment or exploitation, are in need of
care and protection by the State, the vast majority of children who have
been orphaned are cared for by the extended family and kinship networks.
The legislation, therefore, needs to make adequate provision for children
who are being cared for in kinship or extended family networks and who
simply require financial support or poverty relief in order to maintain
their current care arrangements. Failing the full extension of the child
support grant to all children, it is likely that the provisions within the
Bill will lead to massive pressure on the courts and social workers to
process court-ordered kinship or foster care. The HIV/AIDS Sector argued
that, in addition to an effective formal child protection system, the best
way of ensuring blanket financial provisions for all vulnerable children is
the full and immediate extension of the Child Support Grant, with
additional needs met through the provision of free basic services and
special grants.


    Recommendation


    A provision within the Children’s Bill is recommended to allow for
amendments to the Social Assistance Act which, as it stands, fails to
adequately address the needs of children in the context of HIV/AIDS.



                  Chapter 15: Shelters and Drop-In Centres



    Submitted by Dikwanketla – Children in Action



                               Recommendation



    The Government should build places of care and safety in all
communities so that children have a place to go to when they need
protection and shelter. Also, Government must create a system of funding
the NGOs that run child and youth centres so that they are better able to
provide for children.




    Chapter 16: Adoption


    Clause 229(c): Purposes of Adoption


    Submitted by the Johannesburg Child Welfare Society


    Respect for cultural, ethnic and religious diversity is not in itself a
purpose of adoption, but rather a principle to be followed as far as
possible when arranging it. At times these considerations have to be made
secondary to other factors such as the availability of suitable adopters,
or pre-existing bonds between an applicant adopter and the child in
question.


    Recommendation


    It is recommended that the aforementioned clause be deleted.


    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 


    The submission argued that the purpose of adoption as a means of
conferring “rights and responsibilities on the adoptive parent and child”
must be spelt out in the legislation. 


    Clause 231: Persons Who May Adopt Child


    Submitted by the Johannesburg Child Welfare Society


    A glaring omission is that of provision for the child’s consent to be
required for his or her adoption, provided that he or she is capable of
understanding what is involved. The right of a child aged ten years or more
to give or refuse such consent has been in place for decades. It is
unthinkable that this should now be removed. The SALRC, in line with the
principle of participation by the child in decisions concerning him or her,
expanded this provision to cover all children capable of understanding the
implications of adoption and of the consent being given.


    Recommendation


    That the wording of clause 259(i)(c) of the SALRC draft Bill be added
to clause 231 of the current Bill.


    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 


    The Law Society stated that the reference to being "unsuitable to work
with children" should be spelt out in greater detail, stipulating, for
example, that persons whose names appear as perpetrators in a child
protection register would be considered unfit to adopt a child. 


    Clause 232: Consent to adoption


    Submitted by Robyn Shepstone


    The Bill makes no provision for a child ten years of age or older, to
consent to his or her adoption. Given that a child of that age has
established relationships, it is essential that he or she be involved in
any plans for his or her future. At present a great deal of weight is given
to the child’s view.


    Recommendation


    It is recommended that the relevant provisions in the Child Care Act,
Act 74 of 1983, requiring a child of ten years of age or older to consent
to his or her adoption be retained.


    Clause 232(5)(a)(i): Consent to Adoption


    Submitted by the Johannesburg Child Welfare Society


    The present Child Care Act requires that the consent to adoption be
signed in the presence of the Commissioner of Child Welfare (section 18(5)
of the Child Care Act, Act 74 of 1983). The Bill affords this
responsibility to the clerk of the court, a shift that is dangerous,
especially in a context where reports of parents being pressured or offered
incentives to consent, without necessarily understanding their rights, are
surfacing from time to time.


    Recommendation


    It is recommended that the words “clerk of the children’s court” in the
aforementioned clause be replaced with “presiding officer of the children’s
court”.


    Clause 233(4)(a): Freeing Orders


    Submitted by the Johannesburg Child Welfare Society


    This clause provides for a “freeing order”, which would enable a
biological parent to hand over his or her parental responsibilities to a
designated child protection organisation or an adoption social worker
pending the adoptive placement. This would apply in a situation where an
adoptive family has still to be found and relieves the biological parent
from having to continue to carry responsibilities for the child after
having made the immensely difficult decision to distance herself or himself
from that child. It is also designed to give the adoption agency or social
worker authority to make whatever decisions are required and to reduce the
insecurity experienced by adopters before the adoption order is finalised.
As it stands the clause provides that a freeing order will lapse if a
single application to adopt the child has been turned down. It is submitted
that other prospective adopters may be available, and it could defeat the
purposes of this clause to simply cancel the order.


    Recommendation


    It is recommended that this clause be replaced with the words “a
freeing order may be terminated by the court if after 12 months since the
issuing of the order there appears to be no reasonable prospect of adoption
of the child, and the order no longer appears to be in the best interests
of the child”.


    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 


    With reference to freeing orders, the submission argued that freeing
orders should only be permitted if the parent is replaced by a third party
as the person responsible for the child in law. The granting of a Freeing
order may be permissible where the obligations are placed on the adoptive
parent-to-be, prior to the adoption being finalised. There could be an
assignment of parental responsibilities or foster care rather than placing
the burden on the State while the child has not yet formally been adopted. 


    Clause 234(2)(c): When Consent is Not Required


    Submitted by the Johannesburg Child Welfare Society


    This clause provides that an unmarried father, who has been convicted
of raping the mother, which rape has given rise to the conception of the
child concerned, will not be required to give his consent before such a
child can be adopted. It is argued that it is of no use to include a
conviction of rape as a basis for removal of a biological father’s right to
prevent the adoption of his child. Conviction rates for rape are extremely
low and if they occur at all, this may be after several years. It is
submitted that this clause may lead to an appalling situation for those
women and girls who fall pregnant due to rape, and for the babies
themselves.


    Recommendation


    That the current requirement, as introduced by the Adoption Matters
Amendment Act, is for a finding by the court on balance of probabilities
that the child was conceived as a result of rape. This principle was fought
for very hard by NGOs delivering adoption services, and it is recommended
that the present clause be replaced accordingly.


    Submitted by the Law Society of South Africa 


    The Law Society indicated that consent to adoption should not be
necessary if the biological father of the child has not exercised parental
responsibilities in terms of sub-clause (1)(b). 


    Clause 235(1)(b) and (4): Gathering of Information of Proposed
Adoptions


    Submitted by the Johannesburg Child Welfare Society


    The aforementioned clauses require that the court take all reasonable
steps to establish the identity and whereabouts of any person whose consent
is not required to the adoption, and that a social worker who becomes aware
of such information must supply it to the court. This would in practice
apply to certain biological parents and unmarried fathers, who have
forfeited their rights.
    It is not clear why the court would have to do its utmost to obtain the
address of a person, who does not have to be notified of a pending
adoption. It is argued that there is merit in naming the person and giving
reasons why he or she does not have to be notified, but not for the court
to be required to insist on having further details. It is also not clear
why a social worker who is in confidence provided with information which is
not relevant to the proceedings, should be obliged to pass such information
on to the court.


    Recommendation


    It is recommended that the aforementioned clauses be deleted.


    Clause 248(1): Access to Adoption Register


    Submitted by the Johannesburg Child Welfare Society


    This clause provides for an adopted child over 18 years of age and the
adoptive parents, and in some circumstances the biological parents of such
a child, to access information contained in the adoption register. An order
of court is required to access such information for a person under 18 years
of age. It has, however, been pointed out that if such information is
required for medical reasons and if a medical emergency arises, the expense
and delay involved in obtaining a court order could have severe and even
fatal consequences for the child. Good adoption practice requires that all
available medical background information be obtained by the social worker
processing the adoption, and that this be handed over to the adoptive
parents, and that adoption agencies will generally supply such information
on request by the adoptive family. However, in situations where the
relevant information has not been recorded or is not being made available,
provision needs to be made for it to be obtained without delay.


    Recommendation


 • That a clause be added to stipulate that any pertinent medical
   information related to the biological parents that would have a direct
   bearing on the child’s health and well-being be made available to the
   adoptive parents at the onset of the adoption.
 • That a clause be inserted to provide that in case of a medical emergency
   where the health and well-being of the adopted child is at risk, the
   necessary medical information is accessible from the biological parents.


    Clause 249: No Consideration in Respect of Adoption


    Submitted by the Johannesburg Child Welfare Society


    This clause addresses the issue of “consideration” that change hands
during adoptions, especially those managed by private practitioners in
various disciplines. Although these “considerations” are illegal, the
meaning of the law is being distorted and many children’s courts appear to
be turning a blind eye to such practices. It is submitted that a number of
aspects of the present formulation are problematic.


    Recommendation


 • That clause 249 (2)(a)(i), which provides for compensation to be paid to
   the mother for loss of earnings due to pregnancy is deleted.
 • That clause 249 (2)(a)(ii), which refers to the payment of medical
   costs, is amended to establish one of more central funds which could be
   used to pay for medical expenses. Such a fund should operate without any
   linkage between a specific mother and a specific applicant, thus
   removing current perverse incentives both for the mothers involved and
   for practitioners in various disciplines. It is submitted that at
   present payment of medical expenses forms part of a package, which gives
   leverage to specific applicants in obtaining the consent of an
   identified mother to their adoption of her baby. A possible solution
   could be to provide for applicants to contribute, in accordance with
   their means, to a fund which the Department of Social Development or
   NGOs as well as accredited adoption social workers in private practice
   could use to assist women with reasonable medical expenses, whether or
   not they decide, after counselling, to give their babies up for
   adoption.
 • That clause 249(2)(b) be deleted


    Clause 250(1)(d): Only Certain Persons Allowed to Provide Adoption
Services


    Submitted by the Johannesburg Child Welfare Society


    The stipulation that inter-country adoption practice is restricted to
the Central Authority and designated child protection organisations is
strongly supported. It is believed that perverse incentives exist for
private practitioners in virtuous professions to arrange inter-country
adoptions when local options exist, and to engage in practices which are
not in keeping with the spirit of the Hague Convention on Inter-country
Adoption. This problem can be solved in a situation in which there can be
seen to be no link, either direct or indirect, between the income earned by
the practitioners involved and the decisions they make with regard to
applications to adopt children. It is suggested that this principle should
be further clarified, as there is concern that some individuals will form
loose arrangements with NGOs in order to be permitted to arrange inter-
country adoptions, while themselves collecting the fees paid by adoptive
parents.


    Recommendation


    It is recommended that a clause be included to the effect that all fees
with regard to inter-country adoptions be collected in their entirety by
the management of the accredited organisation, and that no payments be paid
by that organisation to any individual practitioner except in the form of a
standard salary.



    Standards of national adoptions



    Submitted by Wybrow-Oliver Attorneys


    The Wybrow-Olivier submission argued that the standard for all
adoptions be raised by making oral and affidavit evidence mandatory. It was
argued that the system followed by the High Court as upper guardian of
children required, inter alia, very rigorous investigations, detailed
affidavits made under oath and social workers’ reports relating to various
aspects of the lives of both the child and the adoptive parents. According
to the submission, judges with years of experience apply these rules
uniformly. The submission argued that the same rigorous standards did not
apply across the board in the Magistrates courts, as the majority of
Children’s Commissioners do not have the necessary experience. This results
in placements that are not in the best interest of the child, and, as
suggested by the submission, abuse of the system.


    Therefore the submission recommended that local adoptions be dealt with
in the Children’s Court, national adoptions in the Regional Court and inter-
country adoptions in the High Court. This recommendation does not take into
account that neither the current legislation nor the Children’s Bill
provides for a distinction between “local” and “national” adoptions; nor
does the submission clarify what the distinction would be. It was further
proposed that the standards in the Children’s Courts and the Regional
Courts be substantially raised, and that detailed evidence on affidavit
must be required from all relevant parties, in addition to those parties
having to be present in the court to provide oral evidence.


    Chapter 17: Inter-Country Adoptions


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    The submission argued that, as South Africa has recently acceded to the
Hague Convention on Inter-country Adoptions, it was imperative that
mechanisms be put in place to give effect to the Hague Convention as a
matter of urgency in order to afford those children affected by these types
of adoption the necessary protection. For this to be successful, the
necessary resources (both human and financial) need to be provided to the
Central Authority to ensure the adequate protection of children affected by
inter-country adoption. Furthermore, the submission cautioned that the
processing of inter-country adoptions not be viewed by opportunists as a
potentially lucrative trade, and expressed support for the inclusion of
clauses relating to accreditation of persons or organisations processing
inter-country adoptions. It was noted, however, that excluding attorneys
from performing inter-country adoptions would result in a vast resource of
expertise being lost. The submission recommended that these requirements be
clearly spelt out with a similar list of requirements to be applied to
applications by attorneys and social workers.



                      Vulnerability of foreign children



    With regard to unaccompanied refugee children, the submission noted
that these children might easily be targeted for adoption. Although it is
always desirable that a child is placed within a family structure, the
placement of refugee children pose added dilemmas. Within the debate of
inter-country adoption of refugee children, international agencies advocate
a ‘hierarchical approach’ to permanent placement. Inter-country adoptions
are seen as a last resort for the long-term placement of a child. The
question of whether an adoption is in the best interest of an unaccompanied
minor must also be viewed in the context of the cultural, religious and
ethnic background of the child to be adopted. As far as possible, attempts
should be made to place such a child within an environment that is familiar
to him or her lest extensive psychological harm result. Placing a child
within a family structure with values, norms and cultures alien to this
child should be considered only when it is in the best interest of that
particular child which should be considered on a case-by-case basis.


    Currently, s19(b)(ii) of the Child Care Act allows a Commissioner to
approve an adoption order without first ascertaining parental consent. The
submission held that the Children’s Bill needs to address this issue
explicitly by conforming with Article 22(2) of the UNCRC which mandates
Contracting States to trace the family members separated by conflict.


    Submitted by Wybrow-Oliver Attorneys


    The submission by Wybrow-Oliver Attorneys argued that the permanent
placement of a child through the adoption process changes the child’s legal
status, and that it was therefore advisable that legal counsel should be
involved in every adoption. It was not adequate, the submission argued, to
rely on the legal expertise of the judge or magistrate hearing the matter,
because by the time the matter reaches the court, a number of processes
involving the child and the prospective family have already taken place.
Halting the adoption at that stage because of unforeseen legal issues would
be detrimental to the child. The submission argued that inter-country
adoptions especially involved complex legal processes, and the presenter
noted a number of legal issues that come into play in inter-country
adoptions. These include:


    immigration laws in both the sending and receiving countries
    legal status of the parents (biological, foster and adoptive)
    the status of the child in terms of medical and social security
benefits in the receiving country
    whether the consent of the biological parent/s may be legally dispensed
with
    the appropriate wording of the Court order so as to fully comply with
the laws in the receiving country.


    In view of these issues, it was argued that specialist attorneys could
play a very important role in the inter-country adoption process. In
addition, it was argued that it would be both discriminatory and
unconstitutional to refuse specialist attorneys the right to apply for
accreditation to perform adoption services.


    In support of its argument for the accreditation of attorneys to
provide adoption services, the submission points out that Article 10 of the
Hague Convention on Inter-country Adoption would make such accreditation
advisable. The Convention, which is binding on South Africa, stipulates
that accreditation should be granted only to bodies that demonstrate their
competence to carry out properly the tasks with which they may be
entrusted. According to the submission, there are a number of specialised
attorneys who have experience in local and inter-country placements and who
have demonstrated their competence in this area, and who should therefore
be granted accreditation to perform adoption services. The submission also
argued that all inter-country adoptions should be dealt with in the High
Court.


    During the discussion after the presentation, Members expressed concern
about the increase in the number of inter-country adoptions in recent
years, noting that is appeared at least in some cases that such adoptions
were becoming a lucrative business. It also appeared that children from
particular communities were being “exported” to particular types of
countries. Members asked whether the argument for the inclusion of legal
professionals in the process of the inter-country adoptions meant that
children needed extra protection in this process, and exactly what
percentage of the process would have to be dealt with by a lawyer. The
presenter was also asked to explain what implications would be for the
process if lawyers were included, especially in light of reports that
exorbitant fees were being charged for such adoptions. Members also asked
whether the proposal intended lawyers to be added to the list of persons
accredited to offer adoption services, or whether the presenter felt they
should replace the list in the Bill.


    In response to the questions, the presenter argued that it was in the
best interest of the child to ensure legal representation at every step of
the adoption process. It was exactly because of the complexities at play in
inter-country adoptions that the presentation proposed that inter-country
adoptions be dealt with in the High Court. In relation to the relationship
between the different role-players involved in the adoption, the presenter
argued that the adoption should be dealt with by a multi-disciplinary team.
While the social worker probably does 20% of the work, the bulk of the
process had to be managed by lawyers who should play a coordinating role.


    It was also noted that national guidelines on fee structures for
adoption services could provide the necessary safeguard against people
abusing inter-country adoptions as a “source of easy money”.


    In follow-up questions, members noted that the 1997 amendments to the
Childcare Act (Act 74 of 1983) was aimed at ensuring that a social worker’s
report be required before any adoption was disposed of. This did not negate
the role that lawyers would play in the process; however, does the
presentation suggest that lawyers should be allowed to recommend adoptions?
Another member asked whether adoption agencies currently made use of
lawyers, and what the effect of the proposal would be on the Bill.


    The presenter said that agencies sometimes do make use of lawyers, but
the point of the presentation was that by the time a legal problem arises
in court, the process has advanced considerably, and expectations on the
side of both the child and the adoptive family have been raised. In
addition, the presenter argued that if the Bill ruled out an active role
for lawyers, this would mean that lawyers would not be able to approach the
High Court in order to facilitate placements. The intention was not for
lawyers to replace social workers in the adoption process, but rather to
allow lawyers a role in facilitating the complex process of inter-country
adoption.


    Clause 257(1): Delegation of Functions


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


               257. (1) The Central Authority of the Republic may in terms
           of section 303 delegate any powers or duties of the Central
           Authority under the Hague Convention on Inter-country Adoption
           to an officer of the rank of Director or higher in the
           Department.

        (2) Any powers or duties of the Central Authority in terms of
    Articles 15 to 21 of the Convention may, to the extent determined by
    the Central Authority, be performed by –
        (a) another organ of state; or
        (b) a designated child protection organisation accredited in terms
    of section 258 to perform inter-country adoption services.


    Submitted by the Johannesburg Child Welfare Society


    The submission notes that the official in the Department of Social
Development, who would be responsible for the management of the Central
Authority dealing with inter-country adoptions, was specified in the SALRC
Bill as being at least of the rank of Director – now he or she is merely
“an official”.


    Recommendation


    It is recommended that the wording as in clause 284(1) of the SALRC
draft Bill be restored.


    Clause 258: Accreditation of Child Protection Organisations for Inter-
Country Adoptions


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


        258. (1) The Central Authority may, on application by a designated
    child protection organisation or attorney–
        (a) accredit the organisation or attorney to perform inter-country
    adoption services; and
        (b) approve adoption working agreements contemplated in section
    259, provided the prescribed requirements are met.
        (2) The Central Authority may accredit a designated child
    protection organisation or attorney to perform inter-country adoption
    services for such period and on such conditions as may be prescribed.
        (3) A designated child protection organisation or attorney
    accredited in terms of this section to perform inter-country adoption
    services –
        (a) may receive the prescribed fees and make the necessary payments
    in respect of inter-country adoptions; and
        (b) must annually submit audited financial statements to the
    Central Authority of fees received and payments made in respect of
    intercountry adoptions.



    Submitted by Robyn Shepstone




    The burgeoning AIDS epidemic has given rise to large numbers of
orphaned or abandoned children, particularly so in KwaZulu-Natal (the
Province in which the presenter carries out her work). The response from
welfare authorities, especially in the case of orphaned children, has been
to try to arrange foster care with extended family members or other members
of the child’s community. Placing abandoned children in foster care with
extended family members or other members of the children’s communities is
less easily achieved. It is submitted that while the principle of trying to
preserve family ties, wherever possible, has resulted in many successful
placements, there are placements that are not in the child’s best
interests. Where foster care placements are not possible, these children
are placed in places of safety of orphanages for lengthy periods of time.
It is submitted that no matter, how good the care is in an orphanage,
children are better off being raised in a loving and nurturing family to
whom they belong.



    It is also submitted that State Departments have not traditionally been
involved in providing services for very young children, and that social
workers employed by the Department seldom arrange adoptions. In addition,
child protection organisations in KwaZulu-Natal scaled down specialist
services such as adoption. Thus, private social workers with adoption
experience have to a large extent filled the gap left by the transformation
of traditional adoption agencies. Consequently, it is submitted that child
protection agencies have few social workers with the necessary expertise
and experience of adoption wok. In addition, huge staff turnovers mean that
social workers seldom remain in these organisations for long enough to
build the necessary skills. Neither the Department nor child protection
organisations in KwaZulu-Natal perform inter-country adoptions.


    Since inter-country adoptions became legal in July 2000, private
accredited adoption social workers have been at the forefront of this work
in South Africa. They have contributed to setting standards and procedures
in adoption practice in accordance with the Hague Convention, and for some
time several private accredited adoption social workers have had working
agreements with licensed inter-country adoption organisations in counties
that are signatories to the Hague Convention. It is submitted that if
private accredited adoption social workers are excluded from performing
inter-country adoptions in the future, their skills, expertise and the
networks that they have established will be lost to the profession. It is
further submitted that as the formal welfare sector has been unable to
fully service the needs of its potential clients, this is an opportunity
for the Department of Welfare to work with the private sector, thereby
meeting the needs of those children who would benefit from inter-country
adoptions.


    In conclusion, adoption is never the first option when placing a child
but that for some children it is for the best. Once it has been established
that adoption is the best permanency plan for that particular child, it is
imperative that the placement is arranged without undue delay. Should same-
culture and local placement prove unsuccessful, cross-cultural and inter-
country adoptions are regarded as a preferred option to institutional care.


    Recommendation


    It is recommended that private accredited social workers be permitted
to apply for accreditation to perform inter-country adoptions.


    Clause 259: Entering Into Adoption Working Agreements and
    Clause 261: Adoption of Children from Republic by Persons Working in
Non-Convention Countries


    In the SALRC draft Bill there was provision for agreements only with
agencies in Convention countries, or in “prescribed overseas
jurisdictions”. This was changed to allow for adoptions by persons from
African countries, including neighbouring states, as although these are not
Convention countries, they could be regarded as destinations preferable to
countries on other continents for purposes of maintaining a child’s
identity and heritage. It is submitted that there should not be
restrictions; otherwise the Hague Convention loses its teeth. In addition,
the field is left open to countries where questionable practices are
common. Perhaps there could be a reference to “prescribed foreign
jurisdictions” and a system for designating countries from or to which
children may move for purposes of adoption, or at least a system for
excluding a country where circumstances so indicate.


    Recommendation


    That clause 259 be expanded to include provision for working agreements
with “a prescribed foreign country”, subject to regulation, and that the
words “non-Convention country” be replaced with “prescribed foreign
country”.
    That such restrictions need not apply in the case of children who are
to be adopted by family members or by the spouse of a biological parent.
    That a procedure for the prescribing of non-Convention countries and
the development of the necessary regulations be added to the Bill.


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


               259. (1) A designated child protection organisation or
           attorney accredited in terms of section 258 to perform inter-
           country adoption services may enter into an adoption working
           agreement with an accredited adoption agency in [another] a
           prescribed foreign country.

        (2) A child protection organisation or attorney referred to in
    subsection (1) –
        (a) must provide the Central Authority with certified copies of all
    adoption working agreements entered into by that child protection
    organisation or attorney for approval thereof; and
        (b) may not act in terms of any such adoption working agreements
    before it has been approved by the Central Authority.


    Clause 267: Recognition of inter-country adoption of children from non-
convention countries


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


        267. (1) The Central Authority may issue a declaration recognising
    the adoption of a child in a non-convention country if –
        (a) the adoption is in accordance with and has not been rescinded
    under the law of the country in which the adoption order was made;
        (b) the adoption in that country has the same effect it would have
    if the order was made in the Republic.
               (i)     A children’s court may, on application by an
           interested person, refuse to recognise an adoption to which this
           section applies if the procedure followed, or the law applied in
           connection with the adoption-
    involved a denial of natural justice or of a person’s fundamental human
rights; or
    did not comply with the requirements of substantial justice.



    Clause 268: Effect of recognition of inter-country adoption



    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


          268.    If the adoption of a child is recognised in terms of
      section 265 or 267, the adoption has in the Republic the effects as
      set out in section 240.


          Order terminating legal relationship between child and parents


         XXX. If the laws of a country do not provide that the adoption of
     child terminates the legal relationship between the child and the
     persons who, immediately before the adoption, were the child’s parents,
     a children’s court may, on application by any of the parties to the
     adoption, make an order terminating the legal relationship between the
     child and those persons, if-
    the child was or is habitually resident in that country
    the child was adopted by a person who is habitually resident in the
Republic;
    an adoption compliance certificate issues in the country is in force
for the adoption;
    the child is allowed to enter the Republic and to reside permanently in
the Republic; and
    in he case of a refugee child, sufficient provision is made for the
child to retain ties with his or her family, tribe, and country of origin.


    Chapter 18: Child Abduction


    Submitted by the Community Law Centre – Children’s Rights Project


    The submission recommended that the issue of trafficking for the
purpose of inter-country adoption be dealt with in the separate legislation
around trafficking in general that would deal with penal sanctions imposed,
etc, although the Children’s Bill should make it clear that trafficking for
the purposes of inter-country adoptions is unlawful and would be subject to
the sanctions imposed by the trafficking legislation.


    Submitted by the People’s Family Law Centre


    The submission notes with concern the following omissions from this
Chapter:


    Clause 273 states that a purpose of the Chapter is “to combat parental
abduction”, yet the Chapter provides little guidance to the Courts, SAPS,
etc. as to how to deal with parental child abductions within the country.


    A clear definition of abduction or, in the terminology of the Hague
Convention, on International Child Abduction, “an unlawful removal or
retention of a child” is required. The Hague Convention defines the
unlawful removal or retention of a child within the parameters of
“custody”. However, the Children’s Bill has introduced the concept of
parental rights and responsibilities in a departure from the traditional
concept of “custody”.


    Furthermore, the Bill needs to provide recognition that a holder of
parental rights and responsibilities can in fact “abduct” his or her
children from a caregiver. In addition, children are vulnerable to being
snatched by one and then the other parent in circumstances where the
parents are separated and no court order exists that states with which
parent the children should live.


    Recommendation


 • That the Chapter provides the Courts, SAPS and others with clear
   guidelines as to how to deal with parental abductions occurring within
   South Africa.
 • That a clear definition of abduction that accords with the terminology
   used in the Bill relating to parental rights and responsibilities rather
   than the traditional concepts of custody and guardianship is included.
 • That the concept of a primary caregiver is introduced in this regard.



                      Chapter 22: Administration of Act



    Submitted by the National Alliance for Street Children


    Clause 305 makes provision for the outsourcing of services. The NASC
welcomes this provision, however stresses that currently the State does not
have a realistic uniform financing model. In most instances, services
provided by the sector are under-funded[9].


    General


    Submitted by the Johannesburg Child Welfare Society


    The SALRC draft Bill provided for an application to a court to
terminate the relationship between a child and his or her biological
parents in the country of origin if this had not already transpired in
terms of the law of that country. This clause also provided for sufficient
provision to be made for refugee children to retain and foster ties with
family, tribe and country of origin, which is a concern that arises in some
of the literature pertaining to foreign children.


    Also omitted from the present Bill are clauses 297 and 300(3) of the
SALRC draft Bill. The first provides for the adoption of a child from a
prescribed jurisdiction to be recognised in SA, and the second allows for
placements to be refused by a court if a denial of natural justice or a non-
compliance with the requirements of substantial justice has occurred, even
if the relevant procedures have been followed.


    Recommendation


    It is recommended that clauses 295, 297 and 300(3) of the SALRC draft
Bill be reinstated.


    The overall thrust of the original draft as it relates to foster care
and kinship care has been significantly altered, with very negative
consequences. Relevant changes include the following:


 • Provision for a grant accessible to all children in need has been
   deleted. This removes a key primary preventive measure, which would have
   helped keep children who need support in their own homes out of the
   formal child protection system.
 • The entire concept of informal kinship care has been removed, along with
   provision for a grant for children in such care. This means that poorer
   kinship caregivers are thrown back on the children’s courts and the
   relevant social work services in order to obtain financial assistance
   and the right to function in a parental capacity. Not only does this
   create heavy and expensive bureaucratic burdens for the families
   concerned, it also keeps them dependent on a system that simply does not
   have the capacity to accommodate more than a minority of them. Further,
   it continues the present pattern in terms of which social work services
   needed by severely abused children are not delivered, because those
   concerned are swamped with cases in which the central issue is poverty.
 • Provision for an adoption grant has been deleted. This means that many
   children who could have the benefit of adoptive placements would, for
   purely financial reasons, have to remain in less secure forms of care,
   which also drain the scarce resources of the state and the relevant
   NGOs.
 • There is no longer provision for free and subsidised state services for
   children in any form of alternative care. Thus, a major disincentive to
   families, who would otherwise be able to come forward to care for
   children, remains in place.
 • The proposed powers of the children’s court to create permanency for
   children in foster care and court-ordered kinship care have been gravely
   weakened, because the power to confer, transfer or terminate parental
   responsibilities has been limited to the High Court, the divorce court
   and eventually the family court. Almost none of the children in
   question, or of the organisations assisting them, have access to the
   High Court due to the prohibitive costs involved. The family courts are
   likely to take many more years to come into being, and are unlikely to
   be present in all areas.
 • Provision for an intersectoral National Policy Framework to ensure
   coordinated planning and provisioning for children, and for an
   intersectoral mechanism to coordinate the child protection system, have
   been removed. These measures were critical to the proper functioning of
   all aspects of children’s services, including foster and kinship care.
   Without these measures the present dire circumstances of the child and
   family welfare service network is unlikely to improve, and the children
   who depend on such services will continue to be failed by them.


    Recommendation


 • That the following clauses from the South African Law Reform Commission
   (SALRC) draft Bill are reintroduced: clauses 1, 5, 59(1)(i), 113A, 188,
   207-9, 341, 343 and 344
 • That clause 45(3) of the present Bill, dealing with parental
   responsibilities and rights, is deleted, at the very least where
   children in statutory care are concerned. These children’s affairs are
   the focus of the children’s court, and should not be fragmented by being
   handed over in part to the High Court.
 • That there is urgent consideration of the role which a universal grant
   for children, along with a package of free public services could make in
   preventing the need for children to come into care in the first place,
   in facilitating informal kinship care for those who cannot remain in
   their own homes, and in promoting adoption of those children for whom
   this is the most appropriate option.


    Submitted by Vivian, a member of the public, on Surrogacy


    The submission focused on the fact that while egg donation is
encouraged, it should be borne in mind that hormone treatment and drugs
used for fertilisation are dangerous and may even cause cancer in later
life. There is a lot of misinformation on the issue of surrogacy, which has
now become “big business” in South Africa. Currently, there are no checks
and balances on this phenomenon in South African law. In the meantime,
Internet fertility safaris are undertaken advertise “the baby business” as
a commercial one, and there are even cases of sex selection. This calls for
controls since it has now become possible to buy human life. The submission
contended that if a human carriers triplets, for instance, it could be
regarded as a human rights violation, because women are not baby factories.
In some instances, surrogacy promotes human trafficking, for example in
East European countries.


    Submitted by Save the Children Sweden


    The submission by Save the Children Sweden argued that corporal
punishment breaches the fundamental human right to respect for human
dignity and physical integrity. The submission noted that the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC), to which South
Africa is a signatory, protects children from all forms of mental and
physical violence, and that this protection extends to corporal punishment.
Similarly, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
prohibits all forms of mental and physical abuse of children.


    In support of its argument, the submission further pointed out that the
United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child, which monitors the
implementation of the UNCRC, has recommended that South Africa takes
effective measures to prohibit by law the use of corporal punishment in the
family. In addition, the Committee has recommended that such a provision in
law be accompanied by campaigns aimed at raising awareness and educating
parents and caregivers on positive discipline. Save the Children Sweden
also noted that a similar provision in Swedish law does not carry any
penalty, but is believed to have had a positive impact on changing
attitudes among Swedish parents and caregivers.


    It was noted that South African law already prohibited corporal
punishment of children in schools, in care institutions, foster care and in
the juvenile justice system. The proposals contained in the draft Bill
produced by the SALRC did not prohibit corporal punishment explicitly, but
addressed the issue of parents invoking the defence of “reasonable
chastisement” in cases where they are charged with the assault of their
children.



    Recommendation



    The submission strongly recommended that the Bill provide for the
prohibition of corporal punishment in all forms. The provision should also
reiterate the prohibition that already applies to all schools and care
facilities. Even if the explicit prohibition was not linked to a penalty
for violating the law, it must give a clear message that corporal
punishment is not an acceptable way of child rearing. In addition, the
provision could, provide a clear legal basis for awareness raising and
training. The submission further recommended that the clause abolishing the
defence of reasonable chastisement be reinserted into the Bill, thus
preventing parents charged with assaulting their children from escaping
liability for physically punishing their children.


    Intersectoral implementation of the Act (The National Policy Framework)
and strategies for children in especially difficult circumstances


    Submitted by the National Alliance for Street Children


    Chapter 2 of the South African Law Commission’s (SALRC) draft bill,
provided for a legislated intersectoral National Policy Framework that was
aimed at guiding the implementation of the Act by all Government
Departments.


    The SALRC also envisaged that the National Policy Framework (NPF) would
provide an intersectoral umbrella policy for the various strategies aimed
at protecting the different categories of children in especially difficult
circumstances. Street Children were one of the categories of children that
were singled out for special protection and a dedicated strategy in chapter
16. The SALRC Draft Bill specified in clause 232 that the strategy must be
aimed at:
    Preventing children from leaving their home environment to live and
work on the streets.
    Providing street children with access to basic nutrition, basic health
care services and shelter, including drop-in centres.
    Providing outreach programmes for and counselling to street children,
rehabilitating them and reunifying them with their families.
    Integrating street children into the education system that includes
both education and other services to meet the needs of street children.
    Providing impoverished children free access to primary and basic health
care services, including at shelters and drop-in centres and through the
use of mobile clinics.
    Providing impoverished children with free primary and secondary
education.
    Setting out the responsibilities of and participating roles for
municipalities and provincial organs of state in the development and
implementation of programmes and projects giving effect to those
strategies.
    Promoting the engagement of non-governmental organisations in the
development and implementation of programmes and projects giving effect to
those strategies


    Recommendation


    Chapter 2 and 16 of the SALRC Draft Bill should be reincorporated into
the Children’s Bill.


    Submitted by the Early Learning Resource Unit (ELRU) and the South
African Congress for Early Childhood Development (SACECD)


    Most of the problems in the ECD sector are due to the lack of
intersectoral collaboration. The SALRC Draft Bill addressed this problem by
including a chapter aimed at ensuring better intersectoral co-ordination
through the introduction of the NPF which would co-ordinate and bind all
Government Departments and all civil society organisations providing
services to children. Furthermore, the SALRC Draft Bill included a clause
[106(A)] in the ECD chapter that called for a national intersectoral ECD
strategy aimed specifically at ensuring better co-ordination and resourcing
of ECD. This strategy would fall under the umbrella of the NPF.


    Recommendation


    The chapter(s) in the SALRC Draft Bill dealing with the NPF  should  be
reintroduced. Also, clause 10 106A (1)  should  be  reintroduced  so  as  to
replace clause 92 of the Bill, which would read as follows:


          92  The  Minister,  after  consultation  with  the   Minister   of
      Education, must include in the departmental strategy  a  comprehensive
      national strategy aimed at securing a properly resourced, co-ordinated
      and managed early childhood development system.
    Insert:
          (1) The Minister, in consultation with the Minister for Education,
      must include in the National Policy Framework a comprehensive national
      strategy aimed at securing  a  properly  resourced,  co-ordinated  and
      managed early childhood development system, which must include –
          (a) mechanisms for the planning, development and implementation of
      designated early childhood development services and programmes;
          (b)  strategies  for  expanding  the  range  of  early   childhood
      development services and programmes;
          (c) criteria for the selection and designation of early  childhood
      development services and programmes;
          (d) minimum standards for early childhood development services and
      programmes;
          (e) mechanisms to ensure impartiality in the provisions  of  early
      childhood development services and programmes; and
          (d) measures to ensure that budgetary requirements and  procedures
      are complied with to secure adequate funds for the provision of  early
      childhood development services and programmes.


    Submitted by the Disabled Children’s Action Group (DCAG)


    Provision for an intersectoral NPF has been removed from the Children's
Bill. Such a framework (as proposed by the SALRC), would be binding on all
government structures with responsibilities for children and are critical
to ensuring co-ordinated and holistic approaches to the issues faced by
children. The removal of the integrated framework is a serious threat to
increased provision of services. In addition, responsibilities for local
and traditional authorities to monitor and address the needs of children in
their areas have been removed.


    In keeping with an intersectoral approach, and under the umbrella of
the NPF, the SALRC had recommended that municipalities be required to:


    Keep statistics of children in the area (including children with
disabilities and chronic illnesses)
    Monitor their location and socio-economic conditions.
    Conduct a needs analysis at least every 3 years.
    Submit these statistics to provincial and local government and use the
statistics and needs analysis to budget for services, including access to
basic nutrition, shelter, health care and social services.


    It is a matter of great concern that the provisions for a needs
analysis and monitoring of the protection of the rights of children with
disabilities and chronic illnesses have been removed from the Children's
Bill.


    Recommendation


    Chapter 2 of the SALRC Draft Bill, containing the NPF should be re-
incorporated into the Bill and the clauses obliging local government to
monitor and do needs analyses must be re-inserted into the Bill.



    Submitted by the HIV/AIDS Sector



    Recommendation


    It is recommended that the provisions for the NPF be reinstated to
guide the implementation, enforcement and administration of the Act and to
ensure that responsibility for the well-being of children is shared across
relevant departments.




    Strategies for children in especially difficult circumstances


    Submitted by the Disabled Children’s Action Group (DCAG)


    The Bill does not contain provisions designed to address the situation
of children in especially difficult circumstances. Both the clause
identifying children with disabilities and those with chronic illnesses as
being those in especially difficult circumstances, as well as specific
strategies concerning these children, which were to be included in a
National Policy Framework, have been omitted from the Bill. The SALRC draft
Bill contained a chapter on Children in Especially Difficult Circumstances
(Chapter 16). This Chapter defined certain categories of children as being
especially vulnerable. It further contained a list of strategies aimed at
providing for these children’s needs. The chapter identified
vulnerabilities of each group that are specific to South Africa’s situation
and then specified that strategies would need to be drafted and
incorporated under the umbrella of the National Policy Framework to ensure
intersectoral coordination and service delivery.
    Chapter 16 identified children with disabilities and chronic illnesses
as one of the categories of children in especially difficult circumstances
and then specified that the Minister of Social Development must draft
strategies to provide for the needs of this category of children. These
include strategies aimed at –


    Assisting children with disabilities or chronic illnesses to have
access to educational, rehabilitation and health care services and
empowering them to develop their self-reliance and potential.
    Empowering parents or care-givers of children with disabilities or
chronic illnesses to care for their children in the home environment and
educating parents or care-givers of such children on matters affecting
their children.


    The Bill no longer contains this chapter and therefore removes the much-
needed provisions and strategies that would have helped ensure a more co-
ordinated and intersectoral approach to delivering services to children
with disabilities and chronic illnesses.


    Recommendation


    The strategies and provisions to address children in especially
difficult circumstances should be re-inserted into the Bill.



    4. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on Study
Tour to France, dated 6 September 2005:




                                 Background



       The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation undertook a study
   tour visit to France in order to gather more facts in preparation of the
   2010 World Cup. The Committee intends to vigorously play a vital role as
   watchdog over the entities they practice oversight on with valuable and
   informative facts. The visit took place from 1 to 10 June 2005, dated 6
   September 2005.


    2.      The main objectives were:


    How France succeeded in 1998 World Cup and the spin-offs remained as
the legacy so that even South Africa would be able to identify and learn
from.
    Role-played by government and private sector towards preparations.
    Effective legislation and kind of security that could prevent and
provide the safety at stadium and widespread of the games.
    The benefits/gains experienced by the community after the event.
    Effective method used to mobilize local community support and buy-in.



          Composition of the multiparty delegation was as follows:



    Mr. B M Komphela ANC (Chairperson and leader of delegation)
    Mr. M M Dikgacwi (ANC)
    Mr. C T Frolick (ANC)
    Ms D M Morobi (ANC)
    Mr. T D Lee (DA)
    Mr. B W Dhlamini (IFP)
    Rev M S Khumalo (ACDP)
    Mr. R B Bhoola (MF)
    Ms N Mbuqe (Committee Secretary)





                      4.       STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT



          The report reflects the activities undertaken by the delegation in
      relation to the objectives with various presentations made to the
      delegates by the various stakeholders, site visits, formal
      interactions and experiences identified by the Committee during the
      visit. Two-day activities were affected by the referendum results that
      caused the delegation not to have fruitful programme.


       The delegation met with the South African Embassy officials to
   determine amongst other things political issues so that the delegation
   should be aware of exactly where the delegation needs to thread during
   the visit. The delegation sketched the objectives of the visit and sought
   information on how to sensitize issues politically especially after the
   referendum. The officials present were:  Mr. Enrico Kemp the counselor;
   Mr. Seraki Matsebe, 3rd Secretary on bilateral affairs; Mr. Mvuyisi
   Matiwane 1st secretary; Ms Pule Bosilong, 1st secretary on multilateral
   affairs and Mr. Ronnie Kubjane 1st secretary on consular affairs. The
   counselor apologized on behalf of the Ambassador who was engaged in
   mission affairs.


       The delegation promised not to compare South Africa with France
   taking into account that SA is a developing country that is not at the
   same level as France in terms of economy. Mr. Kemp sketched a brief
   scenario of the past successful event indicating that France is the
   largest 5th economy member of the European Union. It was also indicated
   that SAFA proposed cooperation with French federations. Mr. Kemp also
   noted that the team that won the French World Cup was prepared for 5
   years in advance. Zinedine Zidane also suggested that if Tsetse Flies
   could be trained by a good soccer academy they would build a good team.


       During the meeting with the officials from the Ministry of Sport and
   Youth, the delegation was advised on the role of the ministry in
   preparation of a major international event. The Ministry officials also
   noted that sport policy is divided into three (i) the state (ii) local
   entities and (iii) sport movements and national Olympic committee. The
   role of the state is to orientate and give directions. The main business
   of the federations is to educate and train elite sport.



    4.1          Questions/concerns



    What type of incentives is given to federations and clubs?
    What happens if there is no development after money has been given for
assistance?
    How does government make sure that Lotto fund is allocated?



    4.2     Response



    The state is involved three years in advance in organizing events
    especially the international ones.
    The second main reason of deficit is the TV broadcasting rights
    especially because those unpopular sport codes and national leagues not
    associations manage them.
    The ministry has a good relationship with federations and every
    federation is bound by legislation so even the wealthy clubs abide by
    the rules.


      The Ministry thought that in 2002 youth should belong to Education
      but changed in 2004 after noticing that 55% of all clubs consist of
      youth so the Ministry that changed the department to Ministry of
      Youth, sport and voluntary clubs. The Budget is €497m Euros including
      the Lotto funds and the allocation is as follows:
    €290 m is for promotion of sport of 15 million for mass participation
    €126m is for elite sport with 6 000 people
    €54 m – for education and training of civil servants e.g. managers
    €27m – for prevention and protection of athletes i.e. antidoping


    5.      STATE INVOLVEMENT IN BIDDING PROCESS


      France has an experience in organizing big events; the state was
      involved during the bidding that created private and public entities
      in terms of funding. This was the situation also in 1998 on what FIFA
      designed that the government was not satisfied of the terms and
      regulations. FIFA asked for certain standards and equipment but the
      state had no problem as they were looking at investing and also to
      host more events with perfect infrastructures.


 6.   DISTINCTION BETWEEN FRANCE AND SOUTH AFRICA IN
      THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY


      The Vice President of the National Assembly, Mr. Eric Raoult and Mr.
      Gerges Colombier briefed the delegation. In preparation for the World
      Cup, France had eight years to plan, organize and implement. France
      had four good localizations and had four years to decide as to where
      to build stadiums. Some identified a stadium next to the airport but
      after serious discussions the question of transport and security was
      taken into consideration. So there were different decisions taken for
      different reasons.


          One of the choices was Sandoni, the city where the King resides.
      The departments and all involved had to work together on the choice of
      the site. Mr. Raoult emphasized that the stadiums were built in very
      poor suburbs and they had to find interest from the poor people and
      youth to be involved in building those stadiums. He further explained
      that during Stade de France construction all cities and departments
      were involved so that all monies could be distributed to all. The
      building amounted to €400 million.



    7.      Role of Members of Parliament during preparations



          It was clearly noted that Members of Parliament don’t have
      specific role but were to be opened to ideas of allocation of
      benefits. They participated in their constituencies by networking and
      advertising the event.



    8.      Youth involvement



          Two years was dedicated to find spirit of the Cup from the people.
      The youth were invited to the renovations and construction of the
      stadiums that made them felt important and owned the facilities so
      they could not bother of being in the field during the match.  Also
      the community around the facilities felt the spirit of ownership.



    9.      Benefits of the event for the youth



    Young people could identify themselves with the players that were very
encouraging after the event. Social and ethnic values were encouraged and
people were more united after the games. The most interesting and
encouraging thing was to see the flag lifted even by those coming from the
poor areas and the tone was high when France won the Cup.



    10.     School involvement



    The schools were also involved with national operations of exhibitions
on the question of the World Cup. They had stamps exhibiting football and
other things. All schools made preparations with drawings on challenges
about the event. The delegation was notified that during preparations for
the event was not for money but for the people and schools to have an idea
about the event. During interaction the delegation noticed that the tickets
given to France were only for the organizing committee and big screens were
available for young kids and poor communities who could not afford tickets.
There was strong mobilization from schools that took place six months
before the event to shift the focus on ticket prices and that worked very
well.



    11.     Benefits of the event to the community



    Spin-offs continues and small villages still have money from the event.
Benefits would be for all and if there were deficit then it would be left
for the state.


    12.     Key challenges for the success and problems experienced by
clubs and coaches.


    Mr. Jacques Lambert, the director-general of the French Football
Federation and the president, Mr. Escalettes presented on how their
football structures are formulated. Mr. Lambert further briefed the
delegation on intensive training course developed that has been recognized
as one of the best. French programme and is not automatically transferable
to other countries but have to think of how to reinforce training in other
countries that are interested.


    The delegation had questions and concerns after being briefed such as:


    Is the management of football association able to make football
successful or is there any problem experienced with coaches. What problems
are there when calling national players? Is national team popularized as
being the national asset?
    What are key challenges as far as infrastructures; level of interaction
and legislation expected from FIFA? In the operations of the World Cup what
were possible pitfalls/dangers to deal with the challenges/expectations?
What were the real benefits?
    Were there specific programmes to develop the current stars?


    12.2    The response was as follows:


    The president noted that there are problems in relation to players who
are playing abroad. The country then identified with the national team that
the national team is very important but it is not a problem for France
players to come back for national games. Also playing abroad has made some
of the players became stars because of the experience they acquire from
outside the country. Jacques elaborated with more details on the
preparations for 1998 event on technical, financial and market related
issues. The three key challenges were:


    Quality of stadiums
    Professional organization of the national team
    To make the event national interest


    He mentioned lots of changes imposed by FIFA after 1998 on federations
but it will differ with SA because FIFA has even imposed tougher
conditions.  Jacques advised the delegation that SA government and
federations should remain firm with FIFA because the requirements from FIFA
are increasing and SA must look at its own interest e.g. finances.


    On security, France had difficulty in controlling the hooligans from
the neighbouring countries. Specific provisions were made and there were
minimal violence incidents.
    The pitfall is financial risk and government should be very careful
because most of benefits go to FIFA. The only benefit France gained was the
image of the country.


    There was no need for legislation. Regarding communication, it should
be a joint venture with the federation, government and relevant role
players. The sites need to be visited 18 months before to show the media
the venues and how security operates and work together to showcase the good
image of the country.



    12.3    Resources and infrastructures



    The delegation visited Stade De France the national stadium built
during the event that invited lot of publicity and involvement of the
community. Mr. Michel Poussau presented on the construction until the
completion of the infrastructure. It’s a multipurpose stadium with 18
entrances, 3 levels of stand; 67 bars and foodstalls. The lowest level have
25 000 movable seats. France was chosen in 1992 to host 1998 16th Soccer
World Cup. The construction began on 30 April 1995 and finished in December
1997. There were 5 000 people employed.


    Stade de France accommodates 2 500 journalists; security centre with
120 video cameras that can zoom in during suspicious acts. One exit
evacuates 1000 people but for the whole stadium it takes 8 minutes to
evacuate in 80 exits, gates open automatically by the security in cases of
emergency.


    13.     Meeting with the organizer of the World Cup event.


    Lattes Deon-Lichel noted that the major stadium is called Stade
Toulouse owned by local authority in an island in the middle of the river.
The major interest is that it is isolated for security reasons. The problem
is that it cannot be easily accessed. Important games during the World Cup
were organized and played there.



    13.1    Methods used during organization



    All actors participating were gathered i.e. state representatives;
sport federations and local participants comprising authorities, district
and regions.


    First aid is done by police services and complimentary services are for
marketing.


    Only bus shuttles go to the venue because it was easy to manage buses
better for traffic and security reasons.
    The first meetings are gathered 18 months in advance to determine where
the system is failing and be tested on small games like quarter finals.
    The key point is to manage gathering of all participants to work
together. The participation and integration of public transport is vital
because the event depends on it.
    Communication programme needs to train personnel well in advance and
the drivers became the organizers of the event through certain training.
    Seven years later they are still talking about the event and imagined
their jobs as very important. The drivers now are doing their jobs with
pride. They had dedicated lane on the road and itinerary was done well in
advance and had to conform to it.


    The roadblocks were conducted by traffic, national police, municipal
and state officials in charge. The cars had special stickers for
identification.


    14.     Conclusion


    The delegation appreciated the hospitality and support given by the
South African Embassy in France, specifically Mr. Matsebe, 3rd Secretary on
Bilateral Affairs in Paris. There were many other lessons learnt by the
delegation that are stated on a detailed report to be discussed by the
Committee and provincial counterparts.


    15.     KEY FINDINGS


    Constant change of regulations by FIFA for the hosting country is a
concern.
    The issue of tight security and working relationship with other
government departments is a dire need.
    Preparations for the World Cup should be communicated through all the
people of the country including disadvantaged communities for buy-in and
ownership of the event. The event would focus mainly on bringing the
country together.
    The creativity of the youth and their involvement during construction
of facilities should be one of the main focuses.
    The country should look at building and training of a good team that
would mean that a national academy would play a vital role.
    Sport in France has a mission to get federations to develop sport with
the assistance of local authorities.
    Release of players to play for national team, a player is entitled to
refuse when called by national team as long as it is not within the
agreement or within the calendar of IRB.
    Gambling and Lotto is contributing 5% taxation to sport.
    Department of Education develops kids at school until they are ready
for professional level and have already left high school.
    Coverage of the game by big screens for poor communities and those who
cannot afford tickets.


     16.    RECOMMENDATIONS


    The Committee therefore recommends that:


    List of co-operation agreements signed by French Government and some
municipalities in South Africa should be pursued by the Committee to
facilitate its implementation.
    A need exists for overarching policy and legislative formulation for
sport. Legislation at this nature will guide all stakeholders in sport to
realize the constitutional imperatives on social cohesion, nation building
and patriotism. The Committee thus recommends a legislative framework for
sport in South Africa.
    When the stadiums are announced for hosting the event the Committee
should oversee the adherence of safety standards and proper access control.
    The plan France had during the World Cup on youth development to
involve children at school level should be embraced.
    Schools must be mobilized to support the 2010 World Cup campaign, which
must include visits during the construction phase of stadia.
    The Committee should engage the department to explore ways of involving
France NGO, Sport without Boundaries in South Africa’s rural areas.
    Proposal for partnership by European Business Women with South African
women in business should be pursued.
    Taxation on all gambling and lottery entities should be pursued in
South Africa; the role of the Ministry of Sport and Recreation in processes
with relation to disbursement of such proceeds must be discussed further.


    Report to be considered.


    5. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on
Northern Cape Oversight Visit, dated 6 September 2005:



    A multiparty delegation of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and
Recreation undertook an oversight visit to Northern Cape from 31 January to
02 February 2005, dated 6 September 2005.


    1. Purpose


    The purpose of the visit was:


    To liaise with the Head of the Department on the programmes of the
Department
    To be briefed about information on mass participation programmes
    To be briefed on plans of school sport and how those plans relate to
the
         Department for Education’s plans
    The Department should brief the Committee on key federations active in
         the province and meet with USSASA officials
       To meet with CBOs i.e. local sport council on what they have for
        rural areas
    To find out what plans the province has for indigenous sport
    To meet with municipalities to intensively discuss issues of
monitoring,
         maintenance and building of facilities
    To meet with Metro and local government Chairperson of EXCO dealing
         with sport matters
    To look at one or two completed built facilities completed and how are
   they utilized


    2. Composition of the delegation


    The multiparty delegation was composed as follows:


    Mr Frolick (ANC)
    Mr Reid  (ANC)
    Mrs Ramakaba- Lesia  (ANC)
    Mr Dlamini (IFP)
    Mr Herandein (NNP)
    Ms N Borotho (Committee Assistant)




    3. Meeting with MEC and the Head of the Department


    Ms T Madikane, MEC of Sport, Arts and Culture welcomed the delegation.
    Mr. Frolick, leader of the delegation introduced the members of the
    delegation and made some introductory remarks.  He then briefed the MEC
    about the purpose of the visit.


    The MEC made a presentation on the program, priorities and other
    challenges of the Department.  She explained that the Department has
    done an audit of all facilities in the province, preparing for the 2010
    World Cup and submitted the audit report to the SAPA office.  She
    mentioned that the team from FIFA was supposed to come to their
    province for inspection of facilities between 30 December 2004 to 29
    January 2005 but there were some delays.  She also mentioned that part
    of the department’s mandate was to develop a plan on how to deal with
    the issue of facilities.


    Ms Madikane mentioned that the most important aspect was that their
    province was the small province and was disadvantaged primarily because
    they do not have the provincial team.  She noted that they have a
    soccer stadium in Galeshewe.  The stadium’s capacity is eight thousand.
     She also mentioned that their province was not really a soccer
    province.  She mentioned that the Department and the stakeholders would
    work together for the province to stand a chance for the 2010 event and
    that would give FIFA or SAFA a reason to go to Northern Cape.


    Ms Madikane further mentioned that the department had put aside money
    to build a stadium.  The Department had identified a site, but they
    were still negotiating with Debias for a site to build the stadium on.
    She also mentioned that the ABSA stadium was privately owned by the
    rugby fraternity and had a capacity of twenty thousand.


    Ms Madikane mentioned that they had two programmes, namely Sport and
    Culture.  However, the department had combined these programmes because
    of the remoteness of the province and for the area to benefit.  In
    2004, the province launched  sport council and discovered that the
    regions were not ready.  The Department had also opened the stadium in
    Kgalagadi region and was planning the mass participation launch to be
    held in Kgalagadi.  The department had a project that identifies all
    problems in facilities, maintenance and the utilization of facilities.




    Challenges


    The department’s biggest challenge was that of connecting the
feasibility study and making sure that the identified land was suitable.
    There are no stadiums with enough capacity
    The province has very remote areas
    Lack of transport
    Mining Houses problems have not been attended to by the department
    High fees charged for utilizing the facilities
    Lack of personnel
    Lack of sport equipment
    Little budget for school sport


    Mr Esau, Head of the Department, mentioned that the province was
    prepared and ready for inspection regarding the 2010 event.  He also
    mentioned that the biggest concern in the province was the budget.  The
    province was in the process of cutting the budget for 2004/2005 which
    stood at R6.4 million.  The budget was cut down to R5.9 million.  The
    estimate budget for 2005/2006 was R8.3 million and R1.46 million was
    for personnel expenditure.


    He mentioned that the department had built facilities which became
    white elephants.  Physical study is very important in the province, and
    the mass participation program is reaching the rural areas.  They have
    one sport commissioner in each region, and they would be appointing
    more officials in April 2005.


    Successes
    The department has transformation programmes
    There is a committee responsible for school sport
    They have mass participation programmes that also address social
problems in the communities.  The mass participation funds were from the
national department’s conditional grant
    They have training for Sport and Recreation coordinators.  They have
increased the number of committee coordinators and coaches.  They intend
signing incorporating agreement
    They have the Facility Audit Project, which assists the department with
the municipality and privately owned facilities.  This project had also
assisted the department in identifying the problems regarding the
facilities
    They signed co-operative agreement with municipalities involved with
the usage of sport facilities
    They had successfully launched the mass participation national
programme that was inaugurated by the Minister
    They have thirty-three activity coordinators and they had exceeded the
required targets stated in the blue print of Sport and Recreation
    The activity coordinators went to the national training in various mass
participation sport codes, the training was conducted jointly with national
federations and the department
    They had also conducted courses for the coaches and referees.  The
federations in the province assisted in the process
    They had established clubs in the communities where there were no clubs
existing.  They introduced those clubs to organized sport structures and to
the federations
    The equipment tenders were done nationally and were not done
successfully, and in 2005 were given to the province
    They had a committee coordinator appointed for basketball in Siyanda
and the coordinator managed to get the sponsorship from the sport shop
    In 2005/2006 financial year they would increase the number of
coordinators from thirty-three to seventy and would also include the three
sporting codes in the existing code, which would be: street volleyball,
street netball and street baseball.
    In the current financial year the department of sport had an agreement
with the Department of Education that sport involving both departments, eg
winter and summer games divide the payment
    They have school sport and sport officials working together, preparing
for SA Games and they also worked together in launching the rural and farm
school programmes
    One-on-one meeting with the federations namely Rugby, Soccer, Cricket,
Hockey, Swimming, Netball, Athletics and Boxing were held.
    The department has a good relationship with cricket.  Cricket is the
only federation reaching the rural areas.  Cricket has developing officers
in Namaqua land
    They have the amateur league in the province, the women sport and a
large number of women participating in sport, especially in rural areas


    The department urged the Committee to raise the issue of schools sport
    budget with the national Department


          4.  Meeting with sport federation


    Mr Frolick welcomed the federations and expressed concern on the issue
    of Mayors who were not present at the meeting.  He briefed the
    federations about the purpose of the visit.  He then gave an
    opportunity to the federations to share their views, challenges and
    successes.


    Soccer Challenges/Successes
    The district was running the soccer leagues, but not all of them were
             functioning due to lack of sponsorship
    The regional office was also running the SAFA Castle Regional
             League sponsored by SAB and the SAFA Regional Woman ‘s League
             without a sponsor.
    There was a SAFA Vodacom Provincial League and its offices were
             at the Galeshewe stadium.  This League was played throughout
             the entire Northern Cape
    They have a good relationship with the department
    Teams’ major problem is lack of transport
    The region has a bus that is only used for the developed teams
    Facilities in town are not accessible are charged a fee of R200 per
             day to utilize the facility
    Racism is a problem
    There are eighteen district associations, and each has a district
             league running


    Boxing Challenges/Successes
    They have a good relationship with the Department and other
             federations.
    There are only two facilities that are accessible for boxing and have
             started with female boxing.
    Lottery had assisted with funds for equipment
    Most boxers are in Frances Baard Municipality
    They have training programme for woman boxing, coaches, referees
             and administrators
    Lack of transport
    The main problem is USSASA that takes their established boxers
    A tournament was held in 2004, five medals were won


    Athletics Challenges/Successes


    They have a good relationship with the Department but lacks
             transport
    They have a problem with coaches and officials who attend the
             training course and then disappear
    They established clubs in the regions
    They have training programme for athletes


    Cycling Challenges/Identify Success


    Problem of exorbitant fees paid to the traffic department to host
             events every weekends
    Lottery had granted them 54 bicycles for the development of
             previously disadvantaged areas.  These bicycles are worth
         R5000.00
             each.  They were insured for R180 per month each.  However, it
         is
             difficult to afford this as the riders, the clubs and the
         provincial
             bodies do not have the necessary funds
    Their province was the only known province to host interclub events
             at the different club levels throughout the province
    Transportation of the development riders
    Most of the development riders are from the underprivileged
             communities
    Lack of funding
    They have consulted the local traffic department for funds but were
             unsuccessful


    Cricket Challenges/Successes


    The taking away of Professional Cricket in Griqualand West and the
             Northern Cape by the United Cricket Board due to the awarding
           of
             six franchises throughout the country (2 in Gauteng; 1 in the
             Western Cape; 1 in the Eastern Cape; 1 in KwaZulu-Natal; 1 in
           the
             Free State)
    The lack of funding for Amateur Cricket from the United Cricket
             Board due to the awarding of the franchises
    Loss of sponsorship for both Professional and Amateur Cricket due
             to the fact that there is no professional brand to attract
           sponsors
    The drop in interest in club/schools cricket due to the fact that these

             cricketers no longer have a professional team in the province
    Difficulty in sustaining Amateur/Development programmes due to
             lack of funding
    Potential retrenchment of staff and subsequent curtailment of all
             amateur/development programmes due to lack of funding
    Vast distances and shortage of facilities in outlying areas
    Rated by the United Cricket Board to have the best Development
             Programme in the Country
    Very positive report from National Transformation Monitoring
             Committee, chaired by Mr John Smith
    Overwhelming support and buy-in from Provincial and Local
             Government
    A very successful and sustainable development programme
    All representative teams in the province have met and surpassed the
    National Transformation targets as set by the United Cricket Board
             of SA, ie. all teams are chosen on merit
    Locally produced players constitute in excess of 75% in both
             Amateur and Professional teams
    Highly successful Amateur and Professional team results over the
             past five years
    Facilities are of international standard (for professional cricket - De

             Beers Oval) and first class (Amateur -Yorkshire Cricket Oval –


             Galeshewe)
    More black teams in Premier League than white teams - totally
             merit


    Rugby Challenges/Successes


    They have six regions
    They have a council dealing with transformation issues
    They received funds from lottery to build a multipurpose facility
    Their facilities were accessible and they charge low fees
    Their problem is security in facilities, especially during big matches
    They were negotiating with soccer to renovate the stadium that fit
             40.000-50.000 people


    Comments and Questions


    The delegation expressed its concern about the absence of the
              Mayor and the rugby federation at the meeting
    The delegation sought clarity on the issue of lack of transport and
             also on what was SAFA doing to assist other than sponsoring
             one bus
    There were no disabled sport mentioned by the federation and there
             were no facilities for the disabled


    Responses
    Cricket caters for the disabled and blind, and they are preparing for
             blind cricket tournament
    The deaf people who were interested in playing soccer approached
             soccer federation


    The delegation proceeded to visit the cricket facility.


    Day Two - 01 February


    1.   Meeting with Sports Academy


      Mr. Reid, member of the delegation welcomed members from the sport
      academy and briefed the meeting about the purpose of the visit.


      Mr. Coetzee, the Manager of Sport Academy mentioned that the Academy
      is situated in the Department of Sport, Arts and Culture.  The Academy
      has signed an agreement with the National Institution for Higher
      Education for a suitable location. In the past two years they had the
      rough time because of the resignation of managers.  The Academy has
      thirteen priority codes but only seven codes are actively involved.


      Mr. Coetzee mentioned that the satellites would be situated in the
      following regions; Frances Baard (Kimberley), Siyanda (Upington),
      Pixley Ka Seme (De Aar) and Namaqua (Springbok).  Meetings were also
      held in Siyanda and Namaqua for the establishment of the satellites.
      Municipalities were requested to provide a co-ordinator to assist in
      establishing satellite academies and no response was received from
      these municipalities.  Follow-up meetings are scheduled to fast track
      the matter.


      The satellite will work with the schools, local clubs and regional
      sport structures and will be a feeder to the provincial academy.  The
      provincial Academy will concentrate on the elite athletes.  He also
      mentioned the issue of service providers; he said this was still a
      challenge in the province.  The academy makes use of the testing
      center in Free State, but is in a process to register local
      professional people as service providers, as well as the SANDF.


    Mr Coetzee stated that the academy board was in a process of
    establishing Financial Committee, which will deal with all the
    financial matters of the academy.  The funders of the academy are:  The
    National Lottery Board, Department of Sport, Arts and Culture and South
    African Sport Commission.  This committee will also help to secure
    funds and sponsorship for the academy.


    He also mentioned the role of the following stakeholder:


    Federations:
    They have to identify and provide the respective squads for the
academy.  These
    squads will receive service from the academy as is spelled out in the
Blue Print.


    School Sport and Department of Education:


    This component should provide athletes to the satellite academies.  All
relevant
    services will be provided to these athletes.  This process of
establishing these
    satellites has already started.


    National Lottery Board:
    This is the head funder for the academy.  At this stage Provincial
Department of
    Sport, Arts and Culture helps also with the funding of the academy e.g.
the
    administration and certain programs like disabled and women sport


    South African Sport Commission:
    The Sport Commission gives strategic direction to the academies and
monitoring
    the progress of the academies.  It also assists with the funding of the
academy.


    The following questions were raised:


    Which six codes were not actively involved?
    Which programmes are in place?
    What was the participation of women?
    Did they involve the private sector to assist them with funds?


    Responses
    The non active codes were Hockey, Netball, Tennis, DISSA,
             Amateur Golf, Table Tennis
    Programs and services are in place for the seven active codes
             namely, Athletics, Boxing, Cricket, Gymnastics, Rugby, Soccer,


             Table Tennis
    They had women soccer, squash and most codes are 50/50 male and
             female
    Yes, they did contact private sector for assistance but they were
             unsuccessful




       Recommendations
    The government (the Premier and MEC’S) should meet with service
             providers and request them to provide the academy with
          equipment
    They should get the cooperate sector on board
    They should work with the Department to solve the problem of
             transport
    The Portfolio Committee should have a joint meeting with the
             Portfolio Committee on Labour to deal with the issue of mining


             houses
    The MEC should form the sub-committee to deal with the critical
             issues in sport including the issue of racism and facilities
          in the
             province


    2.  Meeting with the Provincial Interim Sport Council


    Mr Reid, the leader of the delegation welcomed the members present and
    briefed them about the purpose of the visit in the province.


    Findings


    Each town in the province has a sports council and the town sports
council was elected by the sports clubs and schools
    Their funding was taken because of financial constrains of the province
    They are funded by the sports academy
    They are working very closely with the schools in sport
    They had elected the provincial sports council on the 25 February 2005
    The province would be hosting the Sport Award on the 26 February 2005
    They are in the process of formulating the constitution policy and they
had compiled the constitution of SASCO, NEC and Sport Council to assist
them
    Lack of funding
    Lack of Transport
    Lack of governing body
    Lack of equipment
    They had indigenous programmes in schools
    They had training programmes for teachers to train children
    The facilities in the mining houses were not utilized


    It also came to the attention of the delegation that there are mass
    participation programmes throughout the province at all levels.


    3.   Meeting with Phokwane Municipality


    The Mayor welcomed the delegation and Mr Reid briefed the meeting about
    the purpose of the visit


    Findings


    Lack of closed ground in schools
    Stadiums were utilized by school children
    Lack of office structure
    Their schools were not part of USSASA
    The community participate in the budget
    Facilities are maintained by the municipality
    The fee charged for the facilities was agreed by the community and
             the municipality
    They had only six sporting codes, namely soccer, netball, rugby,
             cricket, baseball and volleyball
    They have programmes of integrating and transformation
    They have only two integrated sport codes, namely karate and
             basket ball and most teams are integrated in schools
    Last year the lady from London (Score) had a program to mobilize
             people in sport but people were not interested
    Youth participate in sport and they were in the process of mobilizing
mothers and grannies
    They had applied for lottery fund but were unsuccessful
    They had requested funds from the district municipality for lights
             and tracks in the stadium and they were unsuccessful
    They had one facility that was vandalized, namely Ice Water
    There was no progress in swimming and facilities for swimming
             were not accessible
    They do not have the indigenous sport
    Facilities in town are available, but there is racism




    Day Three


 1.   Meeting with Karoo District Municipality and Umsombunvu Municipality


    The Mayor welcomed the delegation and introduced members. Mr Reid
    briefed the meeting about the purpose of the visit.


    Findings


     They do not have sports council
     Soccer is the main sport played
     In schools, all sporting codes are played and the district is
     affiliated to USSASA Rugby is played but only in white areas
     The De Aar golf course is developed but due to lack of funds, is not
     developing
     They had boxing and consists of white and black
     They had soccer and netball played in one place
     They had cricket but only at school level
     They had no indigenous sport
     They had received funds from lottery and they built cricket pitch but
     not completed
     They are in the process of transforming the white sporting codes
     Sport was not a priority
     They had developed a relationship with Love-Life to interact in sport
     and to assist them to make sport their priority
     Facilities are accessible
     They had spent R400.000 to renovate the multipurpose center
     They had a programme of going to the community to listen to their
     problem
     They was no progress with DISSA
     They had a good relationship with the Department
     They had a problem of responsibility and accountability
     Lack of transport
     The department does not participate in their forum meeting
     They had a sport activity coordinator


     Recommendations


     There is lack of transport for disabled persons as well as capacity
     building.
    Department of Provincial and Local Government together with Sport and
    Recreation South Africa in the advent of the new dispensation of
    Municipal Infrastructure Grant that a special reservation be made for
    building basic facilities. MIG must be able to tell how many facilities
    are built in the country and the funds meant for building must be ring
    fenced.
    National department must assume responsibility that rural areas
    especially poverty stricken areas are provided with resources
    Prioritization of sport codes should be biased to the disadvantaged.




    Report to be considered.






-----------------------
[1] This submission has not been received by the Committee Section.
[2] This submission has also been endorsed  by  other  organisations,  i.e.,
Gauteng Alliance for Street Children, Western Cape Street Children’s  Forum,
Kwa-Zulu Natal Alliance for Street Children, East Rand Alliance  for  Street
Children in Gauteng, Tshwane  Alliance  for  Street  Children,  Johannesburg
Alliance for Street Children, Sedibeng Alliance for Street Children,  Member
Organisations in the Regional Alliances for  Street  Children,  Ons  Plek  –
Cape Town, National Health and Welfare Council of Full Gospel Church of  God
in S.A., RAPCAN, SASPCAN, Molo Songololo, and Children’s Institute.


[3]  This  submission  has  also  been  endorsed  by  Autism  South  Africa,
Childline South Africa,  Epilepsy  South  Africa,  RAPCAN,  Sunshine  Centre
Association, South African National Council!FK×          P    ’
É
Ê
Ë
å
æ
ç
6
<
=
>
æ:ç:#;%;l;m;n;q<§=·=¸=ùR-SS for Child Welfare, Centre for Early Childhood
Development, Johannesburg Child Welfare, Children’s Institute, Molo
Songololo, and SASPCAN.

[4] The NASC supports the specific formulations of the rights as set out  in
the submission of the Children’s Institute.
[5] This would ensure that families  are  better  able  to  care  for  their
children, and it would also protect children living without caregivers.
[6]  This  submission  has  also  been  endorsed  by  New  Beginnings  Early
Childhood Development Training Project,  TREE,  Johannesburg  Child  Welfare
Society, RAPCAN, SASPCAN, Children’s Institute, SA  Training  Institute  for
ECD (SATIED), and KZN ECD Consortium.
[7] These right were contained in the SALRC Draft Bill, but have
subsequently been excluded from the current version of the Bill.
[8] Clause 126 obliges shelter managers to screen all prospective employees
to ensure that their names do not appear in the Child Protection Register.

[9] Currently, the Government is funding less than 50% of the cost  incurred
at a children’s home.


