---
title: 'National Assembly - 06 April 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-04-06
---

WEDNESDAY, 6 APRIL 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                                ANNOUNCEMENT


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I wish to inform the House that by agreement,
notices of motion and motions without notice will not be called for today.


                        TRIBUTE TO POPE JOHN PAUL II


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Somlomo, ndiphakamisa ukuba:

    Le Ndlu –
    (1)     iqaphele udaba lokusweleka kukaPope John Paul II ngoMgqibelo
          umhla we-2 kuApreli walo nyaka sikuwo emva kokugula ixesha elide;



    (2)           recognises the Pope’s role in the pursuit of global peace,
           development and co-operation among the world’s nations;


    (3)     ikhumbule ukuba udlale inxaxheba ebambekayo nebonakalayo
          ekhokelele ekuphuculweni kwamalungelo abantu;


    (4)     acknowledges the role that he played in the support of Africa’s
          development and renewal;


    (5)     believes that he leaves behind good memories of his views
          regarding respect for human life;]


    (6)     joins the Catholic Church and the entire religious community
          throughout the whole world in mourning the loss of a great
          religious leader.
(Translation of Xhosa draft resolution follows.)

[Madam Speaker, I move without notice –

     That the House –


    (1)     notes the passing on of Pope John Paul II on Saturday, 2 April
          2005, after a long illness;


    (2)     recognises the Pope’s role in the pursuit of global
          peace,development and cooperation among the world’s nations;


    (3)     remembers the significant role that he played as a champion of
          human rights;


    (4)     acknowledges the role that he played in the support of Africa’s
          development and renewal;


    (5)     believes that he leaves behind good memories of his views about
          respect for human life in all its forms; and


    (6)     joins the Catholic Church and the entire religious community
          over the whole world in mourning the loss of a great religious
          leader.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, the 20th century, which
achieved unprecedented advances in science and technology, was also a
century in which terrible darkness fell upon the world. We are here today
to pay tribute to one of the brightest lights that shone against that
darkness, Karol Jozef Wojtyla, who later became known as Pope John Paul II,
the 263rd Roman Pontiff and certainly one of the most consistent moral
authorities of his age, which is also our age.

Pope John Paul II lived in two realms, the earthly one, which everybody in
this Chamber gets paid to serve, and the supernatural one. In his second,
higher realm, Pope John Paul - like all religious leaders, be they
Christian, Muslim or Jewish, or other - was dealing with the eternal truths
of his faith with doctrines and beliefs that endure for all time. This must
be clearly recognised by us, who only deal with a lower realm in which
fashions, expediency and compromise all play their part; often, alas, too
great a part.

John Paul II was the first non-Italian Pope in 400 years. His country of
origin was of deep significance. Poland was the crucible of two supreme
evils of the 20th century, the national socialism of Hitler and the
communism of Stalin.

It was here that Hitler perpetrated, to its most hideous degree, perhaps
the worst crime in history. It was from here that Stalin subjugated the
whole of Eastern Europe. In 1939 the two dictators invaded Poland, one
moving from the west, the other from the east, plunging it into tyranny and
starting World War II.

Hitler was overcome by a combination of forces, using moral force as well
as tanks, battleships and long-range bombers. Communism was overcome in a
different way by a different type of man using moral force alone.

In 1979, a year after becoming Pope, John Paul returned to his homeland in
bondage. There he attracted and addressed one of the biggest crowds ever
seen anywhere in the world. Before two million people in his hometown of
Krakow he declared, “there is no need to be afraid”. Only 10 years later
communism was gone from Europe.

Appropriately, shortly after the fall of apartheid, Pope John Paul II
visited our country. Because of the gracious generosity of President
Mandela I had the great privilege to meet him briefly
and be blessed by him. And that was the Pope’s great gift; he could indeed
reach out to all, Catholic, non-Catholic, Muslim, Jew and everyone.

Even to those who were not religious it was crystal clear that Pope John
Paul was pious, holy and devout. His righteousness shone from him. He
seemed to achieve the deep simplicity that is the goal of all holy people.
He combined integrity with great humility, and he was very gentle.

He was true to the most difficult Christian teaching, forgiveness, and
forgave the man who shot him in 1981. But Pope John Paul II could be
implacable in central aspects of his papacy. Indeed, they attracted much
controversy, especially his doctrinal conservatism. Indeed, on major issues
he would not budge an inch, but he was also one of the most powerful voices
for tolerance.

He travelled the world trying to heal ancient rifts between religions. He
condemned racism. He preached justice. He praised liberty. He visited
countries that had never seen a Pope before and brought a message of love
and understanding among all people.

His moral positions were very difficult. He attacked the tyranny of
communism and the hedonism of capitalism. He believed that the life of an
unborn baby and the life of a murderer were both sacred and, therefore,
opposed both abortion and capital punishment.

He was against the American invasion of Iraq. I don’t know a single
political party that shares all of these views. But, of course, he was not
a politician; he was a man of God and a man of profound conviction.

In his last years he bore the pain and humiliation of his dreadful
affliction, Parkinson’s disease, with dignity and good cheer. The will
inside his old and failing body sometimes seemed superhuman. But, as he
would be the first to point out, he was never more than a man, even if a
glorious example of one.

He seemed to be offering his suffering to all of us in the ancient
traditions of his faith. Now he has gone to his Father. The Catholic Church
he led for 27 years must now find a successor. This man will have to deal
with many difficulties facing the church in future, but he will have the
great advantage of the wise and holy work done by Pope John Paul II.

The world he has left behind is much better for his life in it, and we
thank him for that. [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President, fellow
Catholics, members of other religious denominations, hon members . . .

Isililo ngokwedlula emhlabeni kukaPhapha u-John Paul II sekuzwakale kuwona
wonke amagumbi omhlaba. Ngokwesintu noma-ke ngithi ngokwesiZulu, kuye kuthi
uma kushone umuntu oseneminyaka engangekaPhapha, iminyaka engama-84, siye
sithi ugodukile noma sithi uphumule uma ngabe ubesegule isikhathi eside.
Kepha uma ngikhuluma ngokwedlula emhlabeni kukaPhapha, akulula ukusho
ngiqokothise ngithi ugodukile noma ngithi uphumule ngezizathu eziningi.
Okokuqala, uPhapha ubeyinhloko yezigidigidi zamaKhatholika okumanje
asagongobaliswe usizi lokuhamba kwakhe. Okwesibili, kulezi zigidigidi
zamaKhatholika ubeyinhlansi yethemba ezikhathini ezinzima emhlabeni
odidekileyo noguquguqukayo.

UPhapha ubengumxhumanisi. Siyazi thina maKhatholika ukuthi kuke kwaba khona
isikhathi lapho uMkhatholika engadlelani khona nalabo thina maKhatholika
esibabiza ngokuthi amaPhrothestani. Sibonile nokho uPhapha elwa nalokhu
ngempumelelo enkulu. Njengamanje sekukhona ukubuyisana phakathi kwamahlelo
ehlukene amabandla. Umholi we-IFP uDkt Buthelezi owabonana noPhapha
izithuba ezimbili khona nalaphayana e-Vatican City, e-Rome, emazwini akhe
okulila uchaza uPhapha kanje: (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[The lament on the passing on of Pope John Paul II has been echoed in all
the corners of the world. According to Zulu tradition if a person of the
same age, 84 years, as the Pope has died, we say that person has gone home;
and if he or she has been sick for a long time we say he or she has gone to
their rest. However, when I talk about the passing on of the Pope, I cannot
say he is gone or resting, for many reasons. Firstly, the Pope was the head
of millions of Catholic worshippers who are still shocked by his death.
Secondly, to these millions of Catholic-faith worshippers he was a gleam of
hope in difficult times in a world that is confused and ever-changing.

The Pope was a co-ordinator. We, as Catholic worshippers, know that there
was once a time where there was hostility between the Catholics and those
we call Protestants. We noted that the Pope fought this successfully. At
present there is reconciliation between different religious groups. The IFP
leader Dr Buthelezi, who met the Pope on two occasions in the Vatican City
in Rome, in his expression of condolences described the Pope as follows:]

       He was a giant symbol of light and hope in a fragmented and often
       confused world.


Sizomkhumbula-ke uPhapha njengendoda emadodeni. UPhapha omele futhi
wavikela imfundiso yamaKhatholika kwaze kwaba sezinsukwini zakhe zokugcina.
Siyakhumbula ukuthi kulezi zimfundiso besekukhona umsindo wokuthi
abefundisi bakithi emaRomeni kufanele manje baganwe. Siyazi ukuthi uPhapha
ume ushaye phansi ngonyawo wathi imfundiso yamaKhatholika ayime njalo.
Siyethemba-ke futhi siyakhuleka ukuthi sengathi umoya ocwebileyo ungehlela
phezu kwesigungu soKhadinali uma sebehlanganela ukukhetha uPhapha omusha.
Sengathi ibutho le-Maserafime nelama-Kherobhime angavuthela uthando
ezinhliziyweni zethu sonke ukuze sithande futhi silandele zonke izinto
uPhapha asishiyele zona lapha emhlabeni. Amen! [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
Zulu paragraph follows.)

[We shall remember the Pope as a man amongst men. The Pope represented and
defended the doctrine of the Catholic faith until his last days. We
remember that among some of these doctrines there was one that provided
that our Roman Reverends should be married. We know that the Pope insisted
that the Catholic doctrine should be upheld at all times. We hope and
believe that the Holy Spirit will be upon the Council of Cardinals when
they meet to elect the new Pope. May the Maserafime and Kherobhime inspire
love in our hearts so that we love and subscribe to all the things that the
Pope left us on earth. Amen! [ Applause.]]

Mr M DIKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, at the outset allow me to
extend the UDM’s deep and sincere sympathy to the South African and
international Catholic family. Our thoughts are with you as you mourn the
profound loss of a person who acted as the custodian of your church and
faith.

We appreciate the fact that this is a difficult period that extends beyond
the mourning of the Pope’s death, but also to the process of selecting a
new Pope.

The hon Holomisa, leader of the UDM, had the privilege of a private
audience with the Pope in the late 1980s to discuss the political situation
in South Africa. The hon Holomisa has endorsed the views of many others,
that the late Pope was a person of extraordinary compassion who tirelessly
campaigned to reduce suffering wherever it manifested itself in the world.
The late Pope, therefore, showed a keen interest in bringing about an end
to apartheid and actively opposed repression all over the world.

In the course of his long and distinguished service the late Pope showed a
remarkable willingness to engage and confront the realities of the world.
His was not a leadership confined to closed offices within the Vatican,
thereby demystifying the role of the Pope and of leadership in general.

He set an example to all leaders that to truly lead people you need to be
out there in the real world, at the coalface of reality, confronting
oppression head on.

His extraordinary courage was dramatically displayed when an attempt on his
life was made. Despite this threat to his life, the Pope still continued
with his public activities in the fight against oppression. He even forgave
the man who attempted to kill him and spent many hours speaking and
corresponding with him.

For these exceptional qualities he will be remembered and mourned by
millions, Catholic and non-Catholic alike. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C B JOHNSON: Madam Deputy Speaker, to humanity, which is sometimes lost
and dominated by the power of evil, selfishness and fear, the Lord has
given us the gift of His love, which forgives, reconciles and reopens the
soul to hope. This was the very last message of Pope John Paul II to the
world.

Karol Wojtyla was born in 1920 in Krakow, Poland, and was ordained as a
priest in 1946. He became the youngest person to become head of the
Catholic Church, at the age of 58, in 1978.

Pope John Paul II passed away on Saturday. As a leader of the Roman
Catholic Church he provided global leadership to more than a billion
Catholics worldwide. The news of his death touched not only members of the
Catholic faith, but also millions of people of other religions and even
those of us who are not religious.

He will be remembered as a man who travelled the world tirelessly,
determined to preach to those who needed him. He will be remembered for his
compassion to the world’s most vulnerable. He will be remembered as a man
who dedicated his entire life to peace, unity, human rights, and probably
more than anything else, forgiveness. The most telling example of this was
when he met the Turkish gunman, after the failed assassination attempt on
his life in 1981. He also took a particularly keen interest in the
wellbeing and development of the African continent.

For me personally there are two things that I will remember about Pope John
Paul II. Being raised in a home where one parent is as much Roman Catholic
as the other is Protestant, I was reminded at a very early age of Pope John
Paul’s teachings on religious tolerance and the importance of having
respect for other people’s religion, even though it differs from your own.

Secondly, one sometimes realises when one looks at people such as Mother
Theresa, Gandhi, the Dalai Lama and, in this case, Pope John Paul, that
there are very special human beings amongst us from various religions who
have an enormous capacity to do good things; and that should be an
inspiration to us all.

The people of South Africa are greatly saddened by the Pope’s death. He was
a spiritual leader to members of the Catholic faith, as well as a moral
compass to people of all religions. May he rest in peace. And as we mourn
his death, let us remember his very last message to the world, when he said
that love for fellow man converts hearts and will give us peace. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr V C GORE: Madam Deputy Speaker, today, on behalf of the ID, I would like
to bid a formal farewell to one of the most influential people of all time,
particularly in modern history. In an historical period of turbulent
political change and moral confusion Pope John Paul II has been labelled a
conservative. He has been labelled a liberal. But what he was not was a
politician seeking a popular vote.

His teachings were always grounded in love, prayer and humanity, which
reflected the whole range of human need and of spiritual, social and
political justice. He was indeed the rock of the church, a focal point of
consistency, resolution and moral goodness in a world that badly needed
stability and forthright honesty. He was a true father.

His whole life of 26 years as reigning pontiff and his relationships will
elevate political, spiritual and intellectual leaders, as well as ordinary
people, and bear testimony to the love and esteem in which he was held.

He touched Catholics, yes, but he has also touched countless others:
Christians, Muslims, Hindus, Jews and even those who did not believe in
God. Through him all life and all people were sacred, and the tributes
pouring into the Vatican bear witness to his ability to breach all sorts of
divides and to bring the world closer through love, forgiveness, humility
and respect for human dignity.

His work for peace and social justice was tireless, and here I would like
to quote from one of his biographies. It tells of the Pope rebuking those
who exploited the workers, urging governments and industrialists to
safeguard the workers’ right to a just wage, social security and the
opportunity to improve people’s lives. This was said in Mexico during his
first years as a pontiff, and was indeed significant then, as it is for us
today.

He called apartheid in South Africa a deplorable system, and many South
Africans will recall with amusement his very unscheduled landing at Jan
Smuts Airport in 1988, and also the jubilant welcome he received on his
first official visit here in 1995.

We thank God for his life. We thank God for one of the servants of God, for
his lifelong unwavering leadership of inspiration and faith, morality and
guidance. The world could sleep a little easier knowing he was praying for
us. And today we say, “Hamba kahle” [Farewell] to Pope John Paul II, and,
“Nkosi Busisa le nkonzo” [“God bless this service”] as the world begins to
elaborate on filling those big, fisherman’s shoes. I thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President, on behalf of the
ACDP I would like to express our most sincere condolences to the family of
Pope John Paul II and the millions of Catholics around the world. Pope John
Paul II has left behind a remarkable legacy. He was a visionary leader who
demonstrated to a sceptical world that political, economic and social chaos
had its roots in moral degeneration.

He shared in the Polish anticommunist struggle, and campaigned for
international debt relief for poor communities. He was a fearless advocate
of peace and democracy, and a staunch supporter of the anti-apartheid
struggle. His commitment to Biblical morality, and his conviction that
abstinence from premarital sex and faithfulness in marriage are the main
keys to preventing new HIV infections won him many friends.

My fondest memory of him stems from an occasion when former President
Nelson Mandela introduced his guests and party leaders to the Pope during
his South African visit in 1995. When introducing me, Mr Mandela said to
the Pope: “This is Rev Meshoe, the leader of the Christian opposition
party.”


[Interjections.] The Pope gave me a serious look, and said: “So, you oppose
the President.” In my defence I said to the Pope: “No, Your Excellency, I
do not oppose the President, but I oppose abortion on demand.” The
expression on the Pope’s face changed. He patted me on the back and said:
“Oh, then God bless you!” [Interjections.]

Pope John Paul II was a man of compassion, who cared for the poor, the
downtrodden, the suffering and the suffering of the world. [Interjections.]
He worked tirelessly for unity and world peace, particularly in areas of
conflict. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

Rev K R J MESHOE: They don’t want to hear that I was blessed. I am blessed!
[Interjections.]

The ACDP highly values his contribution to improving relations between Jews
and Christians. Professor Milton Shain, a director of the Isaac and Jessie
Kaplan Centre for Jewish Studies and Research at UCT, wrote an excellent
article regarding Pope John Paul II in the Cape Times of 5 April this year.
He wrote that in 1996 the Pope visited Rome’s central synagogue, a first
for a Pope, and told the congregation that, and I want to quote the Pope:

  The Jewish religion is not extrinsic, but in a certain way, intrinsic to
  our religion. You are our dearly beloved brothers, and it could be said
  that you are our elder brothers.

His visit demonstrated his sincerity to rectify centuries of Christian
antagonism and hostility towards the Jews. Four years later the Vatican
called on the church to repent of anti-Semitism that had found a place in
past Catholic thought and conduct. To his credit, Pope John Paul II also
oversaw the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Vatican and
Israel, and visited the Holy Land in 2000.

We in the ACDP pray that the Holy Spirit will comfort his family, his
friends, the Catholic leadership and the faithful followers worldwide. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, namens die VF Plus, steun ek
graag hierdie mosie. As ek die geskiedenis van leiers lees, lyk dit vir my
of mens breedweg twee soorte leiers in die geskiedenis kan onderskei.
Sommige leiers word in die geskiedenis genoem en onthou; ander leiers word
nie net in die geskiedenis genoem en onthou nie, hulle maak die
geskiedenis.

Pous Johannes Paulus II val onder die tweede kategorie. Hy het geskiedenis
help maak. Op 16 Oktober 1987 is Kardinaal Karol Wotjyla tot Pous verkies.
Hy aanvaar die naam Johannes Paulus II. Met sy verkiesing in 1978 gaan die
wêreld die laaste fase van die Koue Oorlog binne. Enigiemand wat die val
die kommunistiese bewind in Pole wil bestudeer, en die gebeure wil verstaan
wat daarna tot die val van die Berlynse Muur gelei het, sal dit net kan
verstaan deur die belangrike rol wat die Pous, as oorspronklik ’n Poolse
kardinaal, daarin gespeel het, insluit. In hierdie opsig het die Pous
geskiedenis help maak, en so sal hy onthou word.

Ook op persoonlike vlak is daar nou reeds versoeke dat daar eerder gepraat
word van Pous Johannes Paulus die Grote, in plaas van die Tweede. Hoekom?
Hoekom is daar tans wêreldwyd so ’n reaksie rakende hom? Hoekom is daar so
’n oorweldigende reaksie, ook as ons kyk in die media? Ek dink, as
Christen, dit is omdat hy as ’n Christen integriteit gehad het. Ek
definieer “integriteit” as dat dít wat jy glo en dít wat jy verkondig ook
in jou dade deur die mense daarbuite elke dag gesien kan word. Dis nie
elkeen van ons wat daarby kan kom nie.

Die liefde en Christelike vergewensgesindheid wat die Pous verkondig het,
het hy ook in sy daaglikse lewe uitgelewe. Neem byvoorbeeld sy optrede
teenoor die persoon wat hom probeer doodskiet het. Kom ek bewoord dieselfde
idee in Bybelse terme, Lukas 6:44-45 sê:

  Want elke boom word geken aan sy eie vrugte . . . Die goeie mens bring
  uit die goeie skat van sy hart te voorskyn wat goed is . . .


Die Pous was so, en ook mense wat nie geglo het nie kon nie anders as om
die vrugte raak te sien nie. Die Pous het nie gehuiwer om te midde van die
wêreld se sedeloosheid streng te bly by dít wat hy glo moreel reg en
regverdig is nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the FF Plus, I gladly
support this motion. When I study the history of leaders, it would seem to
me that one could broadly identify two types of leaders in history. Some
leaders are mentioned and remembered in history; other leaders are not only
mentioned and remembered in history, they make history.

Pope John Paul II falls into the second category. He helped to make
history. On 16 October 1978, Cardinal Karol Wotjyla was elected as Pope. He
assumed the name John Paul II. On his election in 1978 the world entered
the last phase of the Cold War. Anyone who wishes to study the fall of
communist rule in Poland, and who wants to understand the events that
followed, which led to the fall of the Berlin Wall, will only be able to
understand it if the important role played in it by the Pope, who was a
Polish cardinal originally, is included. In this regard the Pope helped
make history, and that is how he will be remembered.

Also at a personal level there are already requests that reference should
be made to Pope John Paul the Great instead of “the Second”. Why? Why is
there this current worldwide reaction concerning him? Why is there such an
overwhelming reaction, also when we look at the media? I think, as a
Christian, it is because he had integrity as a Christian. I define
integrity as when that which one believes in and proclaims can be seen in
one’s actions by the people out there every day, because it is not every
one of us that can achieve that.

The love and Christian willingness to forgive that the Pope proclaimed, he
also lived out in his daily life. Take for example his conduct towards the
person who had tried to shoot him dead. Let me put the same idea in
biblical terms; Luke 6:44-45 goes:

      Every tree is known by the fruit it bears . . . The good person brings
      out of the treasure of good things in his heart . . .

The Pope was like that, and also people who did not believe could not but
see those fruits. The Pope did not hesitate, in the midst of the world’s
immorality, to remain strictly true to what he believed to be morally
correct and just.]

I am convinced that there is no significant example in history before our
time of a society successfully maintaining moral life without the aid of
religion, no society as far as I could gather.

The Roman Catholic Church is very strong, for example, in Uganda. I am
convinced that the role of the church and the influence of the Pope played
an important part in the successful campaign against Aids in Uganda.

In 1900 there were 9 million churchgoing Christians in Africa. Today there
are 390 million churchgoing Christians in Africa, and the projection is
that there will be 600 million churchgoing Christians in Africa in 20
years’ time. As far as I am concerned, the heart of Christianity is slowly
moving, from the empty churches in Europe, towards Africa and the
developing world. I am convinced Pope John Paul II played a major part in
this, as well.

Fransiscus van Assisi sluit een van sy gebede soos volg af:

  God gee dat ek nie soseer sal soek
  om getroos te word nie, as om te troos;
   om verstaan te word nie, as om te verstaan;
   om bemin te word nie, as om lief te hê;


  Want dit is deur te vergewe dat ons vergewe word.
  Dit is deur te sterwe dat ons ewige lewe gebore word.

Ek dink dit was ook die Pous se benadering. As Christene, sluit ek af, glo
ons dat hierdie wêreld slegs ons tydelike tentwoning is. Hiermee ons
simpatie met die Katolieke Kerk met die afsterwe van die Pous, en met sy
vertrek na die ewige lewe. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Francis of Assisi concludes one of his prayers as follows:

   Oh Divine Master,
   grant that I may not so much seek
   to be consoled as to console;
   to be understood as to understand;
   to be loved as to love.


   For it is . . . in pardoning that we are pardoned.
   It is in dying that we are born to eternal life.


I think that this was also the Pope’s approach. As Christians, I want to
conclude, we believe that this world is only our temporary tent dwelling.
We herewith convey our condolences to the Catholic Church on the passing
away of the Pope, and his departure to everlasting life. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Rre B E PULE: Rona re le UCDP ra re, a mowa wa gagwe o robale ka kagiso mme
rona ba re setseng re je boswa jwa ditiro tsa gagwe tse di molemo. O
amusitse lefatshe kagiso. O amusitse lefatshe kagisano. O amusitse lefatshe
kgothatso. O amusitse lefatshe tsholofelo. A botlhe ba ba amegang, bogolo
kereke ya Roma, e gomotsege. Modimo o ba fe motlhatlhami yo o tla ba gogang
ka tlhotlheletso ya Mowa o o Boitshepo. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation
of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[Mr B E PULE: We as UCDP want to say: May his soul rest in peace. May we,
whom he left behind, enjoy the legacy of his work. He enriched the world
with his neighbourliness. He enriched the world with peace. He enriched the
world with comfort. He enriched the world with hope. We would like to
convey our condolences to those who have been affected by his passing,
especially the Catholic Church. God will give them a successor who will
lead them with the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Deputy Speaker, Comrade Deputy President, comrades and
hon members, the PAC joins the House, South Africa and the world in
mourning the passing away of the head of Catholicism, Pope John Paul II.

The stature and standing of Pope John Paul II in the world is undoubted, as
his passing away has affected every corner of the world. As head of the
oldest and largest denomination, his voice and concerns for humanity always
transcended the confines of the Catholic Church. He consistently and
relentlessly raised his voice against the violation of human and national
rights the world over - from Palestine to Iraq, Bosnia to Rwanda - all the
time without wavering.

The world has indeed lost one of its treasured voices of conscience.
Perhaps Africa has lost a leader, a father and a friend. He has been
described, correctly so, as the one Pope who had a particular compassion
for Africa, its people and its glorious and tortured history. He is one of
the few leaders who has acknowledged the holocaust visited on Africans
through centuries of slavery and colonialism.
As we mourn this great leader, the PAC wishes to join the rising chorus
that is calling on the Catholic hierarchy to seriously consider an African
successor to Pope John Paul II in recognition of the wealth of talent that
emanates from the continent and, indeed, in recognition of the fact that
Africans are not the poor cousins to the rest of the Catholic family, but
full members with full opportunities to contribute and lead. May his soul
rest in peace. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President and hon
Ministers: “He showed us how to live, how to suffer, how to love and even
how to die.” These are the words from Sister Simone from Austria spoken of
the beloved pious, late John Paul II.

We join in the mourning of Roman Catholics around the world on the loss of
the wise, compassionate and pious pontiff, Pope John Paul II. This loss and
mourning is extended and shared by persons from all persuasions,
backgrounds and religions.

Departing from this world at an admirable age of 84 years, Pope John Paul
II was a blessing to the quality and fabric of the human race.
Great persuasion and conservative teaching strengthened the moral
regeneration, often at loggerheads in opposing beliefs on certain societal
norms protested against by strong religious beliefs.
In an age of science and technology, people are tempted into evading the
morals and values inculcated in our socialisation from the very beginning
of mankind. This abandonment is often substantiated by a claim of old,
narrow-minded, orthodox beliefs; but with time changes come and an
adjustment is necessary. Those beliefs and values are everlasting, and it
is morals and values, such as, “Thou shalt not kill”, that shall preserve
and protect a quality in people that we so yearn for.

It is magnificent being such a respected, great Pope as John Paul II, who
symbolised and motivated moral regeneration to preserve such a state among
people.

Our holy pontiff, Pope John Paul II, we thank you for years of service to
the Lord and our people. Your strong beliefs, morals, values, not
forgetting your aspiring heart and commitment - especially for the poor and
marginalised - is admired, gratifying and encouraging. We share in the
prayer of Cardinal Eduardo Martinez Somalo, the Cardinal Chamberlain of the
Vatican. May You grant him a term of rest, Lord, and shine your light on
him for eternity.

The MF conveys its heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and all
followers of Roman Catholicism all round the world. May you rest in peace,
Amen! [Applause.]

Prof S M MAYATULA: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon members,
the ANC wishes to express its sincere and heartfelt condolences to the
Catholic community of South Africa and the world on the passing on of His
Holiness, Pope John Paul II on Saturday evening, 2 April 2005. We believe
that he has created a space for changes within the Catholic Church and
successfully used his status as a pioneer Pope, appointed outside of Italy.

Throughout his tenure as Pope, he championed human rights for all
humankind. He believed in meeting with as many ordinary people as possible,
particularly those who lived under oppressive regimes. He challenged
political leaders from both the First and Third World to refocus their
attention on the welfare of the people they were supposed to lead. He was a
courageous man, ready to defend his beliefs - be they conservative or
otherwise.

His papacy was dominated by a series of firsts, not least of which was to
set the precedence of visiting more countries than any of his predecessors.
He was the first Pope to visit South Africa. He did not hesitate to meet
with rulers from those nations that had diverse views on both Christianity
and Catholicism. This was made more evident by his attempt to meet with
leaders of Judaism, Eastern Orthodox churches and Islam. To all humanity,
Catholic and non-Catholic, Christian and non-Christian, young and old, rich
and poor, believers and nonbelievers, communists and noncommunists, he was
a living example of tolerance and how different races and religions should
relate to each other.

The following are testimony to this statement: He was the first Pope to
enter a mosque, and he was the first Pope to participate in a Hindu
function in India by lighting Diwali lamps. Maybe some of us, as
Christians, must even ask ourselves: Have we been in any mosques? Do we
know what this lighting of lamps is all about? When the leader of the Roman
Catholic Church is able to do that, I think, let us take that as a lesson.

He stood boldly against apartheid. I know of some of us who even don’t want
to talk about other religions, even in our curriculum, but the Pope has
given us a way.

Like a true Christian, he loved his enemies. This he displayed by showing
love and forgiveness to the very person who tried to assassinate him. This
was a practical implementation of one of Jesus’ statements on the cross
when he pleaded for his killers and said:

“Bawo baxolele, kuba abayazi ento abayenzayo.” uYesu waye ngelogqwetha
lababulali, wayengumntu ozakubulawa. Esithi ababulali bakhe mabaxolelwe.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[“Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.” Jesus
was not a lawyer for the murderers; He was the one who was going to be
murdered. He said His murderers should be forgiven.]

He was a man of peace.

Ebengumuntu woxolo, ebethobekile, ekhathalele abacinezelekileyo. [He was a
Person of peace, He was humble, and cared for the suppressed.]

He was humble, and lived for the downtrodden. He was an inspiration to all.

Ebengumzekelo omhle, okhuthaza uluntu luphela.[He was a good example, who
motivated everybody.]

His Holiness Pope John Paul II is dead. His Holiness Pope John Paul II will
never die. His teachings and influence will live with us forever. He is
personified in a statement by John Balfour who said:


  The best thing to give to your enemy is forgiveness;
  to an opponent, tolerance;
  to a friend, your heart;
  to a child, a good example;
  to a father, deference;
  to your mother, conduct that will make her proud of you;
  to yourself, respect;
  to all humanity, charity.


The best way we can remember him is contained in the Book of Hebrews 12:1.
It reads:

    Therefore, since we are surrounded by such a great cloud of witnesses,
    let us also lay aside every weight, and sin which clings so closely, and
    let us run with perseverance the race that is set before us.

His passing away has left a gap in the spiritual leadership of the world,
and the Conclave of Cardinals will be hard-pressed in the next two weeks to
find someone to fill his shoes.

We wish to express, as the ANC, our sympathy to the Catholic community in
South Africa and internationally. May his soul rest in peace! [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon members. In mourning the sad demise of
His Holiness Pope John Paul II, we do not only mourn the passing of the
Holy Father as head of the Roman Catholic Church, but also as head of
state, the Vatican State, with which the Republic of South Africa maintains
full diplomatic relations. The condolences of the House will be conveyed to
the Vatican.

The House adjourned at 14:43.


