---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 17 March 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-03-17
---

THURSDAY, 17 MARCH 2005
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 17:30 in the KwaMhlanga Government Complex, Nkangala,
Mpumalanga.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000


                        CELEBRATING COMMONWEALTH DAY





                             (Draft Resolution)


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

     That the Council –

     (1)    notes that -
         (a)     the Commonwealth  Parliamentary  Association  has  observed
              Commonwealth Day on 14 March;


         (b)     the event entails a two-day  international  celebration  in
              London, from 14 to 15  March,  with  the  theme  “Education  -
              Creating Opportunity, Realising Potential'';  and


         (c)      this  theme  reflects  the  Commonwealth's  commitment  to
              education by promoting efforts to  achieve  universal  primary
              education, eliminate gender disparities, improving quality  in
              education,  using  distance  learning  to  overcome  barriers,
              supporting education in difficult circumstances and mitigating
              the impact of HIV and Aids in education;


       2) acknowledges the contribution of  the  Commonwealth  Parliamentary
          Association   in   strengthening   parliamentary   democracy   and
          interaction among members of Commonwealth Parliaments; and


     (3)    joins the rest of the Commonwealth Parliaments in observing this
          event and wishes the participants fruitful celebrations.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                          DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL


       (Consideration of Bill and of Report of SC on Finance thereon)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Chairperson, the Chairperson sitting on
another chair, hon members, our friends in the gallery, locals of
KwaMhlanga, good afternoon to all of you. The intergovernmental fiscal
relations arrangements are always very difficult. To get a sense of the
degree of difficulty, a study of countries with complex intergovernmental
relations makes for interesting reading. Of course, it’s a wide subject,
it’s a subject on which many people have earned either doctorates or at
least masters degrees. The one thing that is very clear about
intergovernmental relations is that there clearly is no “one size fits
all”. It’s a bit more like Frank Sinatra’s “My way”, because there are so
many different ways.

But it’s an understanding that we might come closer to understanding the
complexities that are created in our Constitution, which asks us to do a
number of things, and it’s important in looking at this Bill, detailed as
it is, to ask whether we have performed the task that the Constitution has
set for us. This Bill is also very different from almost any other piece of
legislation in Parliament, because every year there is an entirely new
Division of Revenue Bill, a new one, not an amendment to last year’s Bill,
but a new Bill that serves every year, and therefore we need to approach
the legislation with fresh eyes every year.

The way we have been able to do this over the past nine years somehow
became the envy of many countries. It’s important, in recognising that
others are looking to us for guidance, that we firstly see the role of the
Financing Fiscal Commission as very important. We don’t adopt a formulaic
approach. The FFC helps us, for instance, to ensure that there is equity
between the nine provinces. It would make suggestions about the vertical
division, but those are not as forceful as the way in which we divide
between the nine provinces, or indeed between the 284 instances of local
government.

But the FFC can only go so far. For the rest I think we go back to the
Constitution. We also will look to a piece of legislation that soon will
serve before the NCOP, called the Intergovernmental Relations Bill, and the
essence of that Bill is co-operative governance. How can we, through the
arrangements, certainly at national government with our colleagues in the
provinces - and I am glad to see the local MEC for Finance, MEC Coleman, is
here with us, she’ll be able to attest to this - structure these relations.
How do we prevent conflict and fall-out between ourselves? When we get
together, national, provincial and local government, in what we call the
Budget Forum, how do we ensure that we can reach agreement also with Salga
and its provincial components?

It is in trying to understand the impact of co-operative governance that we
should perhaps pause and ask what it is that this Bill does, because what
this Bill asks us is to respond to that imperative in the Constitution that
says that you must equitably share nationally raised revenue, and then it
says that you must share this nationally raised revenue between 294
different governments. So, what do you do? Do you take the amount of money
that you have raised and divide it by 294 and then say the smallest
municipality equals the national government?

No, in fact, it asks of us to evaluate the fact that each of these 294
instances, that is one national, nine provincial and 284 local governments,
have different mandates, different responsibilities, different capacities,
different needs, different revenue-raising capabilities, and in
understanding that we can then arrive at the set of agreements that allows
us to respond to how we share equitably a single sum of money between 294
entities.

This is what the Division of Revenue Bill does, and in placing it before
this Council, after it has been considered and somewhat fast-tracked in the
provinces, we are saying, you be the judge of whether we are responding to
that equitable division of revenue. That’s what we are doing now. We can
merely divide the resources we have, but later this year we must come back,
we must come back with the same passion and intensity into this House and
then look at what the money has actually bought, because as we speak here,
and I address myself through the Chair to MEC Coleman, we can only in good
faith accept that you tabled a budget in the provincial legislature,
answering the same needs within the province, in good faith.

Later this year we want this House to engage in detailed discussion in an
intergovernmental fiscal review that looks, line-by-line, column-by-column,
at what the money does. That engagement with an intergovernmental fiscal
review must then assist us with next year’s Division of Revenue Bill. Are
there areas in which we must improve on our performance system? What we
know from a province like Mpumalanga - and I am sure that the public
hearings that we have all engaged in in taking Parliament to the people
here in KwaMhlanga have informed us - is that it has difficulty in
attracting sufficient health professionals.

 I recall from last year’s intergovernmental fiscal review that the
province is very well endowed with not just doctors, but other health
professionals: occupational therapists, physiotherapists, dentists and
pharmacists. That would impact on the quality of health services that can
then be rendered.

So, part of what we need to answer is what we do together, what this House
does in its decision-making to facilitate the work of the MEC for finance
in this province, so that she too can attract a better cadre of health
professionals to ensure that people in Mpumalanga are at least as well off,
in respect of health services, as people in provinces like Gauteng and the
Western Cape, which are clearly better endowed.

So, the Bill today, and the link into that review that we must come to
later in the year, is important, and when we introduce that discussion, I
shall remind hon members of the NCOP of this discussion we had here this
afternoon.

This Bill, interesting as it is, has at its heart seven schedules. The
first one does what it should do: it takes R417,8 billion and divides it
between national, provincial and local governments. That is what schedule 1
does. It is straightforward: Does it answer the question of an equitable
division? That is what the debate this afternoon should inform us about.

Of this amount, the national government receives R273,5 billion, which
includes R53,1 billion which we use to service our debts. Provinces and
municipalities receive conditional grants in the amount of some R74,6
billion and R7,5 billion respectively, and we keep a contingency reserve of
R2 billion which we will allocate, maybe in October, that will deal with
whatever we have not been able to plan for.

Schedules 2 and 3 allocate the equitable share component to provinces and
municipalities. In the new fiscal year, which starts on 1 April, the
equitable share allocated totals R134,7 billion to provinces and R9,6
billion to municipalities.

It is important that the House notes that the 2005-06 division of the
equitable share among the nine provinces and the 284 municipalities is
effected through two new formulae. This is a new approach we have taken as
of now, which is explained in Annexure E of that other document which all
members are familiar with, the Budget Review. Among the shifts that have
taken place is a different measure for poverty between the nine provinces.

Schedule 4 sets out allocations to provinces and municipalities to fund
infrastructure and hospital services. I am sure that in the discussions
here, in the public hearings, there have been big debates about
infrastructure. Why are our roads in the state that they are? When is the
province going to improve on Moloto Road? Why is this hospital that started
out as a community health facility falling apart? All of those are issues
that you would have heard. The allocations to Mpumalanga set out in
schedule 4 will deal with that. The provincial and municipal infrastructure
grant also supports the Expanded Public Works Programme.

Schedules 5 and 6 further allocate specific purpose conditional and other
grants to provinces. This amounts to some R65,5 billion to provinces and R1
billion to local government. In schedule 5 there are three conditional
grants for HIV and Aids programmes in health, in education and in social
development. It is quite important that we remind ourselves that some
people in the press think that there is no money for these programmes, but
it is there. I am sure hon members who are engaged with these schedules
would know that the money is there.

Some of the major changes to the provincial fiscal framework for the year
are worth mentioning. Firstly, the conditional grant framework has been
revised to take into account the social security function, which now shifts
to national government. It is a conditional grant that exists in provinces.
Hon members would be aware that this used to be funded out of the equitable
share in provinces. Now it is a conditional grant. My colleagues in
national government are not happy. They say the agency will be established,
but if there is an overrun it will be our problem. We no longer have a say,
but why cannot the provinces look after this issue.

It is thus very important to realise that the shift is starting, so it’s a
conditional grant, because until further notice the provinces will still
manage it on an agency basis. So, the equitable share takes account of the
fact that we have taken away this money so that we can pay all of the
grants necessary.

Secondly, there is a new conditional grant to finance the further education
and training colleges. These have now been combined, but they need money,
and we must ensure that young people who are not in the academic stream
have access to those colleges for vocational training.

Thirdly, arising certainly out of a discussion you had this afternoon on
housing, the housing conditional grant takes account of the new housing
policy, which also, of course, includes the enlarged subsidies. But this
new conditional grant shifts responsibility for housing, as we proceed
forward, to accredited municipalities, particularly metropolitan and major
urban category B municipalities.
It no longer has to just be in the provinces, because local government is
right at the cutting edge of the delivery of services like housing. So,
that is also reflected.

The 2005 MTEF provides for further deepening and consolidation of social
services. The allocations to provinces further reinforce spending to reduce
poverty and vulnerability.

Of the additional funds, R43,4 billion is allocated to the provincial
budget framework over the 2005 Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, and this
is where I try and confuse everybody, because I can now talk about
allocation for one year and allocations for three years, and people don’t
always know what the big number is, is it for one year or three years -
which is okay.

The sum of R22,3 billion is added over baseline for social security grants
over the next three years. Over the three years then we would spend R181,6
billion on social security transfers. It is a huge amount of money, some
would even say too large, because already there are 10 million recipients
of social grants.

R6,9 billion is set aside over the next three years to implement pay
progression for educators. We want good quality teachers in rural schools,
capable of teaching maths and physics and we must ensure that they are
remunerated so that they stay there and do not move off to the private
sector. [Applause.]

We have added R2 billion to the housing subsidy programme over the next
three years. This will bring the housing subsidies to R17,4 billion over
the next three years.

R1 billion has been allocated to recapitalise further education and
training, R1 billion to the provincial infrastructure grant over the MTEF
to speed up the delivery of social infrastructure, raising the total
allocations for provincial infrastructure to R13,2 billion over the next
three years, and R540 million to the National Tertiary Services grant. This
is to try and improve on the quality of services rendered in the tertiary
hospitals, where they exist in provinces.

Turning to local government: Over the next three years, municipalities will
receive R58,3 billion, or an additional R5,4 billion. The substantial
increase in the local government share is mainly targeted towards the
provision of free basic services; the extension of services to areas not
presently serviced and job creation through investment in labour-based
infrastructure programmes. In total, R31,5 billion over the 2005 MTEF is
made available for water, electricity, refuse removal, and sanitation
through the unconditional local government equitable share. I think that
all of us hope and pray that this money would actually be used for service
delivery, not for huge salaries in municipalities whilst the streets are
crumbling.

This is the big challenge: the quality of service and the quality of
democracy measures that we need in place; and that is what tests our
commitment to democracy and our people. So, we say that part of the test
for an equitable sharing of revenue is whether this money places
municipalities in a position to deliver the services, especially those that
are classified as free basic services. They should be delivered, the money
is there, and now what is the excuse? [Applause.]

Funding for free basic services flows through local government. That amount
rises from R9,6 to R11,4 billion. This unconditional share grows to 56% of
national transfers to local government in the first year, compared to nine
years ago when it was only R1,5 billion. It would have increased seven fold
to R11,4 billion in the third year of this Medium-Term Framework.

 The process of consolidating infrastructure grants into the municipal
infrastructure grant, the single Mig, will be completed in the first year.
This is difficult, because we are taking money for water, for sanitation,
for electrification, for other infrastructure, like roads and so on, and
putting it into a single grant. It is a larger grant now, hopefully more
easily accessed by poor municipalities, but it is going to require some
pretty tough management, with an additional R1,7 billion in municipal
infrastructure grants to municipalities, totalling some R21,6 billion over
the next three years.

This includes R1,2 billion that we put into the Budget now for the next
three years, ring-fenced, it can’t be used for anything else, except the
termination of the bucket sanitation system, not the removal, because the
removal should happen daily. [Applause.] No, it is for the ending of the
bucket system, replaced, hopefully, in all instances, with water-borne
sanitation.

This allocation will go a long way in reducing backlogs in municipal
infrastructure, thus extending free basic services to our people. The
review of the provincial and local government fiscal frameworks has
highlighted a number of matters that need special attention. Firstly, we
need to improve the quality and reliability of municipal and provincial
sectoral data to inform decision-making; and secondly, we will need to
determine what effect the restructuring of the electricity industry will
have on local government equitable shares going forward. These are issues
to take into account for future Budgets.

Most importantly, we should endeavour to improve on the quality of spending
in all spheres of government. The Bill this year introduces new provisions
to improve intergovernmental co-ordination and performance.

While I believe that most provinces are striving to improve their
administration over budget planning, execution and implementation, there
remain significant weaknesses that require specific corrective steps in a
number of areas. The overspending experienced in education and health
suggests that there may be a mismatch between the expenditure requirements
and the budgets of these sectors. Are we putting enough money in?

We know in education we need to build classrooms, infrastructure needs to
be separately accounted for, and there is a new way of accounting for that
through this. Then there would be teachers’ salaries, and we know that
teachers’ salaries will increase over the next three years. We need to
provide adequately for that. Then there would be learner support materials,
and then new changes to education to ensure that the poorest learners would
have access to free education.

If we are underbudgeting, we will overspend, and that is something we will
have to look at when we deal with the intergovernmental fiscal review later
this year. It is very important that provinces ensure that the social
services like health and education are adequately funded, so that no child
should learn under a tree and each child has the necessary learner support
material to ensure that quality learning takes place.

These learner support materials should not be delivered in the second or
the third term, they should be available on the first day of school. That
is what happens in rich model-C schools, why should it not happen where the
poor have to send their children? That’s a challenge, that’s not about how
much money you avail, that’s the quality of management, that is the
oversight function that Parliament has to play, and my job is to try and
motivate Parliament to ensure that that oversight role is adequately
played.

It is equally important that our health system be bolstered to deal with
the health challenges facing the country. In their budgets tabled during
the past two weeks, some provinces have made substantial allocations toward
growth and development funds. While this is welcomed, it shouldn’t be done
at the expense of the core government functions like education, health and
social development, and it shouldn’t fund functions that should otherwise
be funded by a different sphere of government.

It is also important that allocative efficiency be attained through the
alignment of allocations to the ability to spend, particularly in the
preparation of capital budgets. Government continues to increase
allocations to reduce backlogs in social and economic infrastructure.
Provinces will have to take steps to improve infrastructure planning and
delivery, and are therefore invited to take part in the infrastructure
delivery and improvement programme managed by the National Treasury.

Just before I sit down, the deputy director-general in the Treasury for
intergovernmental fiscal relations has been doing this job since we sent
him there in 1994. He wanted to come here today. I had to plead with him
not to come. He became a father for the first time this morning. He assured
me that if it was a daughter he would have named her Dora, but it was a
son, and I think we all wish him, his wife, Yasmin, and the baby well.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr T RALANE: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, the Speakers of
Limpopo, Mpumalanga and the Northern Cape legislatures present here, MECs
and all protocol observed, the 50th anniversary of the Congress of the
People and the Freedom Charter is the highlight of this first year of the
second decade of our democracy and our liberation.

It is an occasion that challenges all patriotic South Africans to reassess
the current phase of the liberation struggle in the light of the ideas of
the Freedom Charter, the revolutionary programme of our movement. It is an
occasion to cast our minds back over the past half century to see how and
why the Freedom Charter has been and still is a beacon to the Congress
Movement and an inspiration to the people of South Africa, in the words of
our former President, Comrade Nelson Mandela. It is an occasion to draw
from this historic document fresh guidance and renewed dedication to the
task which history lays on us of uniting and mobilising all our people in
our country, in order to reconstruct and develop.

The Congress of the People convened jointly by the ANC, the SA Indian
Congress, the Congress of Democrats and the SA Coloured People’s
Organisation, expressed more profoundly and authentically than any single
event, the common aspirations of the overwhelming majority of South
Africans, both black and white, to live in peace in the country of their
birth, to shape its future and to share its fruits, to put an end to the
centuries of colonial domination, racist tyranny, exploitation, misery and
humiliation.

The Congress of the People built on the militant spirit of the Youth
League, the programme of action of 1949. It consolidated the unity and
action achieved in the campaigns of the 1940s and topped by the defiance
campaign of 1952. It gave cohesion, clarity and direction to the liberation
movement, it laid the basis for further development of our national
development and is one of those outstanding events, which made our movement
what it is today.

The Freedom Charter synthesised the many and varied strengths of our
people’s tireless assertions of their will to self-determination. It
reflected and will always reflect our undying opposition to the fascist
monster that had disfigured our country and mutilated generations of our
people. It is because the Charter embodies the heroic traditions and sacred
aspirations of the people that it lives today and gains fresh vitality with
every step forward on the road to the reconstruction and development of our
country.

The clarity and the correctness of the Freedom Charter, testified with the
revolutionary maturity of those responsible for its creation to the people
of South Africa. The Charter has stood the test of time, outlived its
critics and defeated every attempt of the enemy to brand it as treason. It
demonstrates the rich heritage of the struggle of our people, the justness
of our courts and the necessity of the Charter as the definite expression
of the goals of our national liberation.

The Division of Revenue Bill before us today is a tool that consolidates
all the ideas of the Freedom Charter. Government remains committed to
eradicating social exclusion, to creating more employment opportunities, to
reducing crime, to addressing HIV and Aids, to developing an efficient
Public Service and nation-building. Each of these is a key contributor for
all South Africans.

Since programmes to meet these goals cut across the three spheres and often
even cut across departments, they are most appropriately guided by the
policies set by the democratic government, which in turn is guided by the
goals and objectives of the Freedom Charter. Broad-based programmes in the
national interest introduced by government, include the prioritisation of
the social sectors, education, health and social welfare, expansion of the
social safety net, nutrition, food security, housing, sustainable
infrastructure development at both provincial and municipal levels and
rural development.

One of the key reforms introduced in the national interest is a change in
the way social grants are funded by centralising their funding from the
national equitable share. For sure, any new arrangements will produce new
challenges. In this regard I should like to mention two examples: The first
relates to the administration of the three different HIV-Aids conditional
grants. A different national department, namely the Departments of
Education, Health and Social Development, administers each of these grants.
Of necessity, each department lobbies for additional funding in order to
administer its own HIV and Aids grant. The point is, however, these
departments do not adopt a holistic view of the measures taken by one
department in contributing to the national effort in combating the Aids
epidemic. The synergy is greater than the contribution of the individual
department to the national assault on the epidemic.

This brings us to the second concern: While government programmes are
neatly demarcated into clusters, in practice a department does not work in
active collaboration with the other departments belonging to the same
cluster. Moreover, a department belonging to the social cluster, for
example, would argue that more financial resources are required. We propose
that the House supports the Division of Revenue Bill. [Time expired.]

Mrs E M COLEMAN (Mpumalanga): Thank you very much, Deputy Chairperson. Hon
Chairperson of the NCOP, the hon Minister of Finance, hon members,
colleagues in the executive council, members of the provincial legislature
of Mpumalanga who are here, all protocol observed, the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa requires the three spheres of government to work
co-operatively for the promotion of economic and social programmes for all.


The country’s fiscal arrangements aim to ensure that the responsibilities
of each sphere are carried out in the spirit of co-operation, fairness and
efficiency. In the end the welfare of each individual citizen and equity
among them, wherever they reside, is the ultimate objective of decisions on
fiscal arrangement.

The national government has the overriding responsibility for economic and
fiscal affairs and national programmes such as defence and security. It
shares responsibility with the provinces for the provision of basic social
services and provinces are responsible for delivering services such as
education, health and welfare. Municipalities, on the other hand, must
provide essential local infrastructure and services as per schedules 4 and
5 of the Constitution.

With regard to changes to provincial fiscal frameworks, major changes
informed the 2005 MTEF in this regard. Firstly, the conditional grant
framework has been revised to take into account the social security grant
function shift that moves to the national sphere of government as from 1
April 2005. The social security grant function shift has implications for
the vertical and horizontal division of revenue and the Budget Council
agreed that 24% be shifted from the provincial to the national equitable
share. This does not deal with the administrative implications of the
function shift but looks at its implications on the intergovernmental
fiscal arrangements moving forward. We, however, acknowledge the fact that
the function shift reduces the burden from the provincial budget. It
further deepens and consolidates social services and reinforces spending to
reduce poverty and vulnerability.

Since the shift of the provincial social security grants, the provincial
equitable share has now decreased in Mpumalanga to 66%. This is a 23%
decrease of the total provincial revenue, compared to the 88,3% in the
current financial year’s budget. On the other hand, the conditional grants
have increased to 31,8% and that is a 23% increase of the total provincial
revenue, compared to the 8,8% in the current financial year.

As the province, we want to agree with the national Cabinet on the new
provincial equitable share formula and its key elements, that is in
education, health, both institutional and basic, and their respective
weights and subcomponents. We acknowledge that the new provincial equitable
share formula is pro-poor provinces such as Mpumalanga.

Previously the formula included the poverty weight in the welfare
component. However, the new formula allocates a specific weight to the
poverty component, which to us is quite a positive move. The formula also
takes into account the population of the province and information on
health.

The information on health will include people with medical aid and those
without. In education, information will include the number of school-going
children and so on, based on the 2001 population census. However, our
concern is that the time lapse between the census and the implementation of
policies poses a challenge on the accuracy of the data, which then ends up
distorting the equitable allocation of funds. The hon Minister did allude
to this.

I also want to say that in the province, we have allocated sufficient funds
to the health and education sectors. To the health sector we allocated over
R6 billion of our R15,1 billion allocation and we have also allocated over
R5 billion to education. If you add that up, you will realise that it goes
a long way in addressing the disparities that we were talking about earlier
on.

As from 1 April 2005 the provincial equitable shares will be transferred to
the corporation for public deposits accounts of the province held at the SA
Reserve Bank, according to the payment schedule agreed to between the
national and provincial treasuries. This will reduce the costs and minimise
the risks associated with commercial banks.

However, we feel that there must be flexibility in this new move. We refer
to sections 4 and 32(2) of the Division of Revenue Bill of 2005, which
provides that National Treasury can amend the payment schedule for
allocations listed in schedules 2,3,4 or 6 on notification. The implication
of this section is that National Treasury can amend the payment schedule
without consultation. We hope that this is not the case and hope that there
will be discussions with the provincial heads of Treasury before such
actions can be undertaken.

During 2004, the local government fiscal framework was subjected to a two-
part review. The first part focused on the local government equitable share
formula, while the second part covered matters pertaining to local
government taxes, among other things. Although the reform of the local
government equitable share formula is now completed, there are still
challenges that need to be addressed.

National transfers to local government are divided into three major
categories, namely the equitable share grant together with the water
operating grant, the infrastructure conditional grant and the capacity-
building and restructuring conditional grant. The equitable share gives
support for operational expenditure on basic services for poor households
and the municipal infrastructure grants support the rollout of
infrastructure for the poor to have access to basic services.

However, the equitable share should take into account a change in
population over time. This is the problem that relates to data collection.
We feel that currently the available data at municipal level is difficult
to obtain. In conclusion, we would like to support the Division of Revenue
Bill of 2005 as we have no doubt that the allocation will go a long way in
addressing the challenges of poverty and underdevelopment. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms D ROBINSON: The Division of Revenue Bill before us today was tabled in
an environment of relatively low inflation, improved business and consumer
confidence and a large tax revenue windfall. This has given the Minister
space to announce a mildly expansionary budget, which increases both the
provincial and local government shares quite significantly.

Despite limited growth in some sectors of the economy due to the strong
rand, the economic prospects for 2005-06 remain positive provided that the
global economy remains healthy and crude oil prices stay affordable.

The two main trends in provincial expenditure are a rapid increase in
welfare and infrastructure expenditure. In terms of the new formula of the
equitable share, it must be noted that the social services component –
namely health, education and welfare - now makes up 78% of the formula.

Over the past 10 years, the composition of provincial spending has shifted
in favour of social development, plus 7% and away from health, -2% and
education, -5% as well as away from economic infrastructure services such
as transport and agriculture. These are worrying trends, which need to be
firmly arrested. The relative decrease in education spending is of concern,
bearing in mind the skills shortage facing South Africa and the
implications that this has for growing the economy.

I trust Minister Manuel will bear in mind my requests and those of
countless others and also of local schools here in Mpumalanga, for more
funding for libraries, resource centres to assist learners in their studies
in preparation for a full and productive life.

Further thought needs to be given to the relative weights for economic
activity and the newly introduced poverty component in order to determine
the appropriate trade-off between poverty and economic activity. With
regard to welfare, we query the government’s partial implementation of the
FFC’s recommendation to convert the welfare component of the formula into a
conditional grant. From our perspective, it would be well justified and
should be implemented fully as soon as possible.

With regard to infrastructure, of particular concern is the financing of
the Expanded Public Works Programme - government’s main initiative to
create work. We are told that the Municipal Infrastructure Grant, MIG,
which replaced the old Consolidated Municipal Infrastructure Programme, is
the main funding source for the Expanded Public Works Programme. It is my
understanding, however, that the old Consolidated Municipal Infrastructure
Programme money was previously spent on water, transport, electricity and
rural development.

Beyond the increases in the allocation of about R1 or R2 billion per year
and the proportion of these services which could be provided in a more
labour-intensive way, I fail to see how the MTEF allocation of R21 billion
for the MIG, could be used to fund the entire EPWP without impacting on the
provision of water, transport, electricity and rural development. This
means that either the utility provision in the municipalities is set to be
seriously underfunded or perhaps that the EPWP will not be all that it’s
cracked up to be.

We are also concerned about the municipalities’ capacity to maintain and
finance new infrastructure built under the EPWP. There appears to be no
mechanism in place for this or to ensure that the municipalities have the
capacity to utilise the funds fully. The time spent at the public hearings,
listening to the complaints of our citizens about the lack of service
delivery, poor water, roads and schools, inadequate attention to the
disabled, and the corrupt officials for whom money comes first, not Batho
Pele, has given us ample evidence that capacity needs to be built, that
better management and supervision are vital.

The original MIG documentation refers only briefly to the fact that the
municipality must prove that it has the capacity to manage the
infrastructure. Surely this is insufficient. These questions make the FFC’s
recommendation to dedicate a portion of the economic activity component of
the provincial infrastructure share to the maintenance of social and public
infrastructure, even more relevant. We urge government to implement the
changes recommended by the FFC and increase the weighting of the economic
activity component.

Monitoring is seriously needed. The failure of some departments to monitor
conditional grants properly is alarming and we fully support the
recommendations of the select committee to strengthen the Audit Committee
and internal audit. In addition, it is clear that the deficit of adequate
data at local government level is also holding back development.

The direct negative effect of the lack of data is seen in the reporting on
the Comprehensive HIV and Aids Grant which provides no information on the
number of South Africans receiving antiretroviral drugs. I reiterate our
call for a list to be published of those who are not responding to requests
for data. It is imperative that the competencies and resources of this
vital area are enhanced to enable Treasury, Parliament and ordinary South
Africans to make well-informed decisions regarding the Bill.

Whilst acknowledging the current data limitations, we urge haste in
establishing a revised health expenditure formula to take into account the
gender and age profile of the population, which the FFC has recommended.
Time constraints prohibit any further points. The DA supports the Division
of Revenue Bill. [Applause.]

Mr B MKHIZE: Deputy Chairperson, Minister of Finance, hon T Manuel,
colleagues and members, on the equitable share and Division of Revenue Bill
there is an instrument that we recognise is meant to ensure that as far as
possible national standards are taken into considerable when we devolve
moneys to the provinces, the national government and the local government.
As a province we would, however, wish that the discussions on the equity
Bill – proposing an equitable sharing formula - were done in such a way
that other factors that are unique to particular provinces are taken into
consideration, for example in our case our economic contribution to the
national output.

I know that many a time Gauteng and the Western Cape have lost this
argument in the negotiations towards budget processes. However, it is
important to note that such a contribution cannot be ignored. Secondly, the
assumption that poverty only exists in other provinces and not in Gauteng
is not correct. As a result it is important that even measures of poverty
and levels of poverty that exist in that province and other provinces
similar to it should be taken into consideration in adjusting or
reformulating the formula.

As a province we welcome the Bill, but wish to place before the House the
following issues: That the division of revenue should not in the long term
be seen as a management tool, but should remain a mechanism of revenue
sharing throughout and that accountability by provinces and departments to
national linked departments should be ensured.

The specific issues that we wish to raise also relate to welcoming the fact
that municipalities will receive accreditation for housing delivery over
the MTEF, but we wish that these be accompanied by capacitating at that
level to ensure that such delivery is not hindered and funds continue to be
lodged in spite of a lack of delivery. Secondly, also related to this is
that it is clear that through these proposals of the Bill the
municipalities will take greater responsibility for the management of funds
allocated to them. We reiterate the fact that it is important to build
capacity of these municipalities at all levels when moneys are devolved to
them without undermining their capacity to spend. But it is of concern to
us that large chunks of funds are devolved to municipalities without
necessarily taking into consideration their capacity to spend these moneys.

There is also a need to introduce national standards on finance reporting
to do away with the problems of classification of expenditure which
characterise problems around reporting. We note that the budget reforms
have actually catered for and provided for reporting but we still feel that
it is important that these be reformed further to ensure that current
expenditure is not classified for example as capital expenditure and vice
versa.

We would also like to see a clear and predictable process on how the social
security function will devolve to the national government. In other words
that over the MTEF period it must be clear at what point and in what phases
the national government will assume this responsibility ultimately and
accompanying this must be the need to ensure that national government also
assumes the risk associated with fraudulent applications for grants. In
other words we are saying if national government takes over the
responsibility it must take it over voetstoots.

It is also our view that in order to allow provinces to engage
substantially in the division of revenue, it is important that adequate
time be allocated for public hearings and engagements. The manner in which
the Division of Revenue Bill this year was fast-tracked disabled us to make
the necessary engagements with the public so that we could hear what their
views were.

In this regard our proposal is that even if national government feels that
we must fast-track the consideration of the Bill, it must be done in such a
way that consideration is given to the fact that legislatures have lives of
their own and at times require to engage with the Division of Revenue Bill
much more intensively because conditional grants that are devolved at that
level require much more scrutiny and therefore time becomes important in
this regard. We support the Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr D J BOTHA: Hon Minister, Chair, colleagues, my brief is to comment on
infrastructure spending in relation to the Division of Revenue Bill. The
delivery of social infrastructure in the provinces is central to achieving
the national government’s development goal. Provinces and municipalities
are required to actively contribute to the goals of the Expanded Public
Works Programme and promote projects that lend themselves to increased
labour intensity.

To speed up infrastructure delivery and ensure active spending, national
government has allocated almost R40 billion to the capital budget of
provinces over the next three years. Some of the provincial priorities for
the 2005 medium-term expenditure are as follows: implement a pay
progression system in education to improve the salary packages of
educators; implement a new housing strategy which aims to upgrade informal
settlements; increase rental housing stock; speed up delivery of social
infrastructure such as classrooms, health facilities, water sanitation,
schools and welfare.

Municipalities will receive additional allocations of just over R5 billion
to provide free basic services to those who cannot afford them and upgrade
extensive municipal infrastructure. I think the Minister also referred to
the fact that in 2005 an additional R2,2 billion in municipal
infrastructure grants will be allocated to replace the bucket system.

National government has also announced further supplementary allocation
which is not included in the 2005 Budget but will be gazetted later during
the year; R3 billion for community infrastructure which is allocated but
not transferred to the municipality through the municipal infrastructure
grant; and R3 billion for public transport infrastructure which is not
allocated but will be transferred to municipalities which have stadiums
that will be used for the 2010 Soccer World Cup.

The Select Committee on Finance was informed during the recent briefing by
National Treasury that national and provincial departments’ spending on
conditional grants in the current financial year ending March 2005 does not
comply with the Division of Revenue Bill. The reason for that is
underspending. The select committee has been informed that the departments
have spent in the following manner: education has spent 55% of their
infrastructure budget; health department 49% of their capital budget; and
roads 68%. We are approaching the end of the fourth quarter and the
question is: How will these departments spend the remaining amount of their
capital budgets in the last three months. That raises the question of
dumping.

With reference to additional grants, underspending on a number of grants is
common. Nonspending affects the delivery of important basic services. This
is not in line with the objects of the Freedom Charter.

Before I proceed, I must remind my colleagues that we heard in the public
hearings that almost all departments, both national and provincial, are
undercapacitated. I think we have to change that to delivery, delivery,
delivery. We must also ask departments in provinces what they are really
doing regarding delivery. If you try to get hold of heads of departments on
Friday afternoons you will not find them in their offices but perhaps at
their farms or businesses.

Real underspending is cause for concern to us as public representatives and
we need to see how we can intervene. Members of provincial legislatures and
the National Council of Provinces are urgently requested to play a more
active and vital role in monitoring spending by provincial departments.

When I raised the question of underspending during the briefing in Limpopo
province the committee was surprised regarding the low spending and
underspending. The Limpopo province supports the 2005 Division of Revenue
Bill and recommends the following to improve the spending regarding
resources allocated for infrastructure development. The MECs should provide
regular briefing to the standing committees in the legislature or Minmec
meetings. The NCOP and committees in the legislature should interact more
frequently thereby facilitating the sharing of information. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr J AULSEBROOK (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, as a KwaZulu-Natal delegate,
it is my pleasure to have this opportunity to address the NCOP here in
Mpumalanga. It is appropriate that the division of revenue debate takes
place in the province in order that the people of Mpumalanga can have the
opportunity of understanding the significance of this Bill. The hon
Minister has given a comprehensive overview not only of this Bill but also
of the Budget, and I will certainly not venture into that area.

While the MTEF pre-empts the division of revenue and the budget forum
together with the sectoral Minmecs have agreed to the allocation of
provincial equitable shares in advance; further, while the provincial
governments have tabled their provincial budgets based on the division of
revenue, these give rise to a question whether the NCOP is not merely
rubber-stamping this Bill. The answer could be yes but I would suggest that
it is not. Yes, the argument could go, because of timing, the Select
Committee on Finance would not make any substantial changes to this Bill as
it is pre-agreed in the provinces. Further, it would create absolute chaos
in the budgeting process of national departments and the provinces.

I will also say, no, the NCOP is not a rubber stamp and is certainly not
rubber-stamping the division of revenue because of the manner in which the
Select Committee on Finance interrogates not only the Bill but the national
departments in the interests of the provinces. An example of this is when
various national departments were called to account for the services they
provide to provinces as well as for the conditional grants that emanate
from those departments. Here, one issue that stood out as a possible
weakness that some provinces may need to address is that while the Public
Works Department was emphatic that the monitoring of the Expanded Public
Works Programme projects was a provincial and local government function,
and that the Department of Public Works would fund and monitor the
programme as a whole and not the projects, this is a local responsibility.

On investigating in KwaZulu-Natal I found that the guidelines for the
Expanded Public Works Programme as published by the national Department of
Public Works were not readily available. So how are the principles
encompassed in these guidelines being monitored and who is taking that
responsibility? I raise this question on behalf of KwaZulu-Natal in spite
of the national Department of Public Works commending KwaZulu-Natal,
particularly the transport department, for running one of the most
successful expanded public works projects, that is the labour-intensive
Zibambele road maintenance project. We do have other projects that may need
monitoring.

In conclusion, the NCOP has an important role to play in dealing with the
division of revenue especially in monitoring the FFC formula and the
division of revenue formula to ensure that those formulae remain relevant
to meeting the needs of the people that the provincial and local
governments serve. KwaZulu-Natal will support this Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mnu M BASOPU (Eastern Cape): Ndiyabulela, Mgcinisihlalo. Bendingazi ukuba
ithuba lam lokuthetha selifikile, ndiyaxolisa.

Mgcinisihlalo neNdlu yonke, namhlanje sidibene apha ukuza kufezekisa
amaphupha abantu bakuthi. Kwiminyaka engama-50 edlulileyo, njengoko
usihlalo ebetshilo, abantu bakuthi badibana eKliptown ukuya kuqulunqa
uMqulu weNkululeko. Phakathi kwezinto abavumelana ngazo kukuba abantu baya
kulawula.

Kule minyaka ilishumi idlulileyo kuye kwabonakala ukuba abantu. Ukususela
ngoMvulo ukuza kutsho namhlanje, apha eMpumalanga, abantu bazibonakalisile
ukuba bayalawula. Kodwa ndifuna ukutsho ukuba thina singabathandi bezwe
nabalweli benkululeko kuyafuneka ukuba sihlale sibaze amehlo. Kaloku
idemokhrasi asiyonkoduso, yona nto uvela nje uyoneke uyishiye; iyafuna
ukugadwa. Kaloku amadabi amanye amazwe abonakalisile ukuba uvukelo
luyabiwa.
Urhulumente we-ANC uzibonakalisile ukuba uzibophelele kwiminqweno yabantu
njengoko ibekiwe kuMqulu waMalungelo. Loo nto ithetha ukuba into
ebalulekileyo kukuphucula ubomi babantu. Kambe, loo nto uyenza ngokweemeko
esiphila phantsi kwazo ngeli xesha, kuba kaloku uMqulu weNkululeko
waqulunqwa ngo-1955 kube ngoku ingunyaka ka-2005.

Ukuze ke ayenze loo nto, kuyafuneka ukuba kubekho izixhobo ezikhoyo.
Phakathi kwezo zixhobo, ngulo mcimbi woHlahlo lwAbiwo-Mali esithetha ngawo
namhlanje. Kungeso sizathu ke siliphondo leMpuma Koloni sisithi lo Mthetho
usayilwayo siwuxhasa ngokupheleleyo. Siwuxhasa ngokupheleleyo, kakhulu
kakhulu sisamkela amacandelo amathathu awo: icandelo 30, icandelo 38
necandelo 39. Kuyabonakala ukuba ukhona umahluko kwimithetho esithe
sayiqulunqa ngaphambili. Kuyabonakala ukuba okumandla kukuqinisa izikrufu
ukwenzela ukuba iimali zabahlawuli-rhafu ziphatheke ngendlela
efanelekileyo. Siyayamkela loo nto siliphondo.

Xa ndigqibezela, sikwatsho nokuba sinethemba lokuba isiphakamiso
esisenzileyo kule Ndlu malunga nezinto noko ezisixhalabisayo ziza
kuqwalaselwa ngokuhamba kwexesha. Kananjalo siyazi ukuba singade sibe
singamaphondo alithoba, kodwa singurhulumente omnye wobumbano.
Siyayaleza ukuba iMpuma Koloni le ndisuka kuyo yaziwa nanguthatha ukuba
lelinye lamaphondo ahlwempuzekileyo. Umzekelo, iziphumo zophando
obelusandul’ukwenziwa kwiminyaka edlulileyo luye lwaphawula indawo ethile,
ekuthiwa yi-Elliotdale, ekubonakala ukuba ihlupheke ngaphezo kwazo zonke
iindawo zoMzantsi Afrika. I-Elliotdale ayikho kwenye indawo, iseMpuma
Koloni. Kungeso sizathu ke sisithi xa sithetha ngomcimbi wemali, kukho
izinto ezibalulekileyo ekufanele siziqwalasele.

Kwakhona, siyatsho ukuba siyawuxhasa lo Mthetho usayilwayo, ngethemba
lokuba naxa sele uphunyeziwe asizi kuthi, “phela-phela ngantsomi,
uphunyeziwe umthetho osayilwayo”. Njengabameli babantu sinoxanduva
lokuqinisekisa ukuba lo mthetho umiliselwa ngendlela efanelekileyo ngabo
basemagunyeni. Siyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech
follows.)

[Mr M BASOPU (Eastern Cape): Thank you, Chairperson. I did not notice that
my speaking time had come. I beg your pardon, sir.

Chairperson, and hon members of the House, we are gathered here today to
celebrate the realisation of the dreams of our people. Fifty years ago
masses of our people gathered in Kliptown to launch the Freedom Charter.
One of the declarations made was that the people shall govern.

It is more than ten years since people have attained their freedom,
including those in Mpumalanga. I, however, would like to warn people
against becoming complacent as people who love their country and who are
also freedom fighters. We need to work to enhance the capacity to
consolidate democracy. The experiences of other countries have shown us
that the struggle could prove to us that the struggle for freedom is
shared.

The ANC-led government has proved its commitment to the needs of the people
as stated in the Bill of Rights. That means that it is important that the
quality of life of the people is improved. The ANC-led government is doing
that in line with the demands of the times we live in because, as we all
know, the Freedom Charter was adopted in 1955, a long time ago.

In order for that to happen, we need resources. In dealing with the
provision of those, the budget and the allocation of funds become vital. It
is along those lines that we, as the Eastern Cape province, fully support
sections 30, 38 and 39 of this Bill. There has certainly been a positive
move since we started formulating new pieces of legislation. We must make
sure that we spend taxpayers´ money wisely and responsibly. As a province,
we welcome that commitment.

In conclusion, we would like to express the hope that our proposals to the
House regarding our concerns would be considered favourably in due course.
We also know that even though we are nine provinces, we are a united
nation.

We all know that the Eastern Cape, which is the area I come from, is well
known as one of the most impoverished provinces. For example, the findings
of research conducted a few years ago indicate that Elliotdale is the
poorest area in the whole of South Africa. That area is not anywhere else
but the Eastern Cape. It is for that reason that when we debate the budget,
certain things need to be taken into account.

Furthermore, we support this Bill not with the intention, once it has been
passed, to sit and rest but rather to seek to ensure that the law is
implemented effectively. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr E M SOGONI: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Chair, hon Minister and all
protocol observed, the 2005 Division of Revenue Bill is a milestone in
addressing the needs of our people in the year of the Freedom Charter. This
Bill before the House today places obligations and stringent conditions on
all spheres of government to submit measurable strategic objectives for the
financial year commencing 1 April 2005. My brief today is to give a
perspective on governance issues in respect of the 2005 Division of Revenue
Bill. In this regard, clauses 33, 34 and 35 of the Bill deserve special
mention.

The withholding of conditional grants to a province or a municipality is
not the same as the stopping of a conditional grant allocation to a
province or municipality. The following are the requirements for the
withholding of funds by a transferring national officer from a province or
municipality that has not complied with the provisions of the Division of
Revenue Bill.
Expenditure on previous transfers during the financial year reflects
significant underspending for which no satisfactory explanation is given.
However, a transferring national officer must, seven days prior to
withholding an allocation, give the relevant province, provincial or
municipal officer a written notice of intention to withhold the allocation
and the reasons for withholding, and an opportunity to submit a written
representation within those seven days as to why the allocation should not
be withheld. The withholding of funds is not done unilaterally or
arbitrarily, as there is that communication between Treasury and that
particular province or municipality.

The transferring official may stop the allocation to a province or
municipality on the grounds of a persistent and material noncompliance with
the provisions of this Bill, and that National Treasury anticipates that a
province or municipality will substantially underspend a certain allocation
in a financial year. This is in line with section 16(1) and (2) of the
Constitution and sections 38 and 39 of the Municipal Finance Management Act
in respect of provinces. In addition, any stopping of an allocation must,
together with an explanatory memorandum, be published by the National
Treasury in the Gazette.
The Minister of Finance may by notice in the Government Gazette approve
that an allocation or any portion of such allocation be stopped or utilised
to meet that province or municipality’s outstanding statutory and
contractual financial obligations. Moreover, National Treasury may,
wherever it stops an allocation, determine that a portion or the full
allocation that will be underspent should be reallocated to one or more
provinces or municipalities on condition that that allocation will be spent
in that financial year.

In addition to counteracting the low rate of capital spending by provinces,
the Division of Revenue Bill uses a new clause, clause 13(2)d. This clause
enables provinces to address backlogs in provincial infrastructures by
introducing flexibility, which allows the shifting of funds within the
basket of acceptable capital projects. This shifting, however, requires
that provincial departments take into account any recommendations on
infrastructure made by the Cabinet member responsible for that function in
terms of section 26 of this Bill; a similar provision is made for the
municipalities as well.

With reference to the funding of early childhood development grants the
Fiscal and Financial Commission proposed that given that the Early
Childhood Development Grant is funded through the provincial equitable
share now, the education component should be augmented by at least the full
amount of the current conditional grants. The government responded by
saying that its approach is consistent with this recommendation. The funds
that previously flowed as a conditional grant are now part of the
provincial equitable share.

My time has not expired, Chairperson, I am sure.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: They did not say stop. Just continue.

Mr E M SOGONI: I cannot see … [Laughter.] You have just heard that as at 28
February 2005 municipalities had spent only 61% of their total allocation
to improve performance. Municipalities have to attempt to do the following:
to improve transitional arrangements, effective co-ordination with all key
stakeholders, co-ordination and support roles by provinces to
municipalities, poor capital investment planning, poor project management,
municipal compliance with DORA and the reporting mechanisms, improved
quality of spending, improved project management and visible impact of
projects.

Thank you, Chairperson. Gauteng declares its support for this Bill. [Time
expired.]

Mr K SINCLAIR: Chairperson, I just thought it was the hon Watson and the
NNP sabotaging the DA again. [Laughter.]

South Africa is a winning country. We succeeded in putting many of the
divisions and hardships of the past behind us. South Africans are reaping
the benefits of the objectives of the ANC government of a stable
macroeconomic environment and reduction in poverty.

Under your guidance and leadership, hon Minister, South Africa is also on
its way, in terms of the priorities set by government, to becoming a flag
bearer for economic growth and development in Africa and indeed the
developing world. To keep that flame of hope alive, three key critical
issues need to be raised. This must be done with the objectives of the DORA
as framework for the National Treasury to divide revenue among the people
of this country.

Service delivery to all the people must first improve drastically.
Parliament has put the best finance and legal framework in place. Now is
the time that elected representatives and officials must put their money
where their mouth is. Government indeed provides enough funds but as we
once again experienced this week, people do not share in the benefits of
the new democracy. Those people, hon Minister, are mostly poor women, the
elderly, children and people living in the rural areas. In this respect,
local government must be elevated to a different level as an instrument of
delivery.

Secondly, all spheres of government must be more vigilant in their approach
to uplifting the rural areas. In addressing the closure of the huge gap
between the first and second economies it is absolutely necessary to do
that. Many of the activities of the second economy take place in the rural
areas and because of that government must make it more lucrative for
investors to explore opportunities in these areas. Why must raw products
such as the iron-ore from Sishen be hauled hundreds of kilometres to
Saldanha and only then does value get added. Why must agricultural products
such as meat, grain, vegetables, timber and salt be transported from the
provinces of origin to the big three, namely Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal and the
Western Cape or overseas, and only then is value added? Something is wrong,
and it is the rural people who are feeling the pinch.

The third issue, hon Minister, is the state of agriculture in our country.
South Africa is indeed part of the global village. But the South African
farmers cannot compete with highly subsidised product tariff barriers and
the effects of the currently strong rand. We must compare apples with
apples. Currently, regarding the South African farming community, including
emerging farmers, we are comparing apples with pears. It is not sustainable
and if something is not done now, it will not be done in the future. Once
again it is the people of the rural areas, black and white, who are
suffering. Although what has been done is highly appreciated, but also in
terms of the conditional grant, DORA must intervene to save this important
sector of our economy.

In conclusion, maybe we must take the words that our former president
Nelson Mandela said to us: “The time is always right to do right.” The time
is indeed overdue to step up service delivery, and through acknowledging
the role of agriculture, look after the interests of the people of the
rural areas of this country. I thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I am told that there is a big
storm outside. That is what is causing the disturbance in here.

Mnr C A T SMITH (Noord-Kaap): Agb Voorsitter, agb Adjunkvoorsitter, agb
Minister, LUR’e teenwoordig, agb Speakers, lede van dié Huis, kamerade en
vriende, daar’s ’n handjie vol mense in Suid-Afrika wat Afrikaans wil
misbruik om hulself te verhef. Ek wil vandag Afrikaans praat deur die
teendeel te bewys, maar ook sodat die mense van Jan Kempdorp en Kuruman my
kan verstaan.

Die Vryheidsmanifes sê die mense sal regeer. Tereg wil die ANC-regering ’n
regering van die mense wees, deur die mense. Hierdie sitting hier in
KwaMhlanga is ’n bewys van die toewyding van die regering om die mense te
dien. Daardeur wil die Noord-Kaap vir u, as Voorsitter van die NRVP,
gelukwens, ook met dié oefening. [Applous.]

Dit is goed om te sien dat ook op nasionale vlak die gebruike van die Noord-
Kaap voortgesit word. Ná die uitslag van die verkiesing in 1994, toe die
ANC gewen het deur middel van die nasionale demokratiese revolusie sonder
bloedvergieting, het ons geskiedenis gemaak, maar was hierdie land bankrot.
Danksy die fiskale dissipline het ons dié land teruggekry op die koers van
4,2%, as gevolg waarvan daar in die volgende finansiële jaar R363 miljard
beskikbaar gaan wees, met ’n styging tot en met R428 miljard in die
boekjaar 2007-08. Dit is ’n merkwaardige prestasie, en ons wil, van die
Noord-Kaap se kant af, die Minister, die President en die Kabinet daarmee
gelukwens.

Dit is tog so dat in ons provinsie ons baie dankie wil sê vir die R3,124
184 miljard wat weer eens dié jaar aan ons toegeken word. Tog is daar
knellende probleme en behoeftes wat in die provinsie voorkom wat ons in
hierdie debat graag ook onder u aandag wil bring. Ons wil weer eens die
nood van behuising en paaie onder u aandag bring.

Die moontlikheid dat die munisipale area van Gasegonyane kan verskuiwe, en
dat in die omgewing van 180 000 mense die provinsie sal verlaat, beteken
weer eens dat volgens die per capita-formule – wat in die FFK voorkom en
wat vandag nie meer alleenlik daarop gebaseer is nie – die mense in die
provinsie minder word, maar die paaie word nie korter nie, én die afstand
na Port-Nolloth, Fraserburg en Sutherland word ook nie korter nie.

Ons wil vir u baie dankie sê vir dít wat u reeds gedoen het, en wil vra dat
as daar addisionele fondse is, u met u halfjaarlikse aankondiging van die
Begroting tog ook na paaie en behuising vir ons sal kyk. ’n Voorstel van
die Noord-Kaap is, onder andere, dat die toekenning - of die geld wat
gekanaliseer word vir openbare werke - ook vasgemaak sal word in die
amptelike voorwaardelike toelaag, sodat die geld nie kan verdwaal nie, maar
dat dit vir die doel aangewend word waarvoor dit bedoel is.

Ons sal dit waardeer, agb Minister, as daar ook gekyk kan word na die
rampbestuurprogram vir die Noord-Kaap. Uit die aard van die samestelling
van ons provinsie, wat die grootste gedeelte van die grondoppervlak van dié
land beklee met die minste mense, is dit noodsaaklik dat ons in rampbestuur
daarna sal kyk. U is bekend met die droogte wat tans daar heers. As
Calvinianer wil ek tog ook vandag u ondersteuning soek in dié debat om weer
eens water vanuit die Doringrivier vir primêre menslike gebruik in dié area
aan te wend. Daar is reeds ’n dam in Calvinia. Hoekom pomp ons nie die
water uit die Doringrivier tot in Calvinia, en retikuleer dit dan na die
dam en omliggende dorpe wat daar is nie?

Dit is van kardinale belang dat Statistiek SA sal seker maak dat die data
wat daar in dié land is, korrek is, sodat ons ook ons beplanning
hiervandaan verder kan doen. Ons is dankbaar vir die styging van die
salarisse van onderwysers en polisiebeamptes, maar ons wil tog ook pleit
vir die verplegingsektor, want ons weet dat daar ’n behoefte is, én ons
weet dat die koek net só groot is. Maar, as daar iets oor is, laat ons aan
dié sektor ook aandag skenk.

Dit is vanjaar die verkiesing wat gevestig word op die plaaslike regering.
Op dié vlak is dit absoluut belangrik, agb Minister, dat ons verseker dat
die plaaslike regeringsmunisipaliteite, asook die OVK - wat alreeds in die
vorige verkiesing kapasiteitsprobleme aangedui het - in terme van finansies
goed toegerus moet wees om die uitdagings van dié verkiesing aan te pak.
Die Noord-Kaap steun dié wetsontwerp. Dankie. [Tyd verstreke.][Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C A T SMITH (Northern Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Chairperson,
hon Minister, MECs present, hon Speakers, members of this House, comrades
and friends, there are a handful of people in South Africa who want to
exploit Afrikaans to promote themselves. Today I want to speak Afrikaans to
prove the contrary, but also so that the people of Jan Kempdorp and Kuruman
can understand me.

The Freedom Charter states that the people shall govern. Rightly so, the
ANC government wants to be a government for the people, by the people. This
sitting here in KwaMhlanga is proof of the government's dedication to serve
the people. The Northern Cape would like to congratulate you, as
Chairperson of the NCOP, on that, as well as on this exercise. [Applause.]

It is good to see that the customs of the Northern Cape are also
perpetuated at the national level. After the election results in 1994, when
the ANC won by means of the national democratic revolution without any
bloodshed, we made history, but this country was bankrupt. Thanks to fiscal
discipline we managed to get this country back to a rate of 4,2%, and in
the next financial year R363 billion will be available, with an increase up
to R428 billion in the 2007-08 financial year. This is a remarkable
achievement and, on behalf of the Northern Cape, we want to congratulate
the Minister, the President and the Cabinet.

It is a fact that we in our province want to say thank you very much for
the R3,124 184 billion that is being granted to us yet again this year.
There are however still pressing problems and needs prevailing in our
province that we would like to bring to your attention in this debate.  We
would once again like to draw your attention to the need for housing and
roads.

The possibility that the municipal area of Gasegonyane may relocate, and
that in the region of 180 000 people may leave the province, yet again
implies that, according to the per capita formula - that appears in the FFC
and that is no longer solely based on that today - the number of people in
the province is decreasing, but the roads are not getting shorter and the
distances to Port Nolloth, Fraserburg and Sutherland are not getting any
shorter.

We want to say thank you very for what you have already done, and want to
ask you, if there are additional funds, whether you would look into roads
and housing for us when you make your half-yearly Budget announcement. A
proposal from the Northern Cape is, amongst others, that the allocation, or
the money that is being channelled for public works will also be fixed in
the official provisional allowance, so that the money cannot go astray, but
that it will be used for the purpose for which it is intended.

We would also appreciate it, hon Minister, if the disaster management
programme of the Northern Cape could be looked into. By the very nature of
the composition of our province, which covers the largest part of the land
surface of this country and is inhabited by the smallest number of people,
it is imperative that we consider this when we consider disaster
management. You are familiar with the drought that is currently prevailing
there. As a local from Calvinia I also want to ask for your support in this
debate today once again to use water from the Doring River primarily for
human consumption in this area. There is already a dam in Calvinia, why
don’t we pump water from the Doring River to Calvinia, and then reticulate
it to the dam and the surrounding towns?

It is of paramount importance that Statistics SA ensures that the existing
data of this country are correct, so that we can do our planning
accordingly. We are grateful for the increase in salaries of teachers and
police officers, but we nevertheless want to plead for the nursing sector
as well, as we know that there is a need, and we know that the cake is only
that big. But, if there is something left over, let us pay attention to
this sector as well.

This year we will have a local government election. At this level, hon
Minister, it is of the utmost importance that we ensure that the local
government municipalities, as well as the IEC, that already indicated
capacity problems in the previous election, will be well equipped
financially in order to meet the challenges of this election. The Northern
Cape supports this Bill. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, I am reading the speech on behalf of our
special delegate who couldn’t make it. I won’t be long because darkness has
no eyes, and I am just afraid that the DA might do things in the dark.

The Western Cape Provincial Legislature welcomes the tabling of the
Division of Revenue Bill. This is, again, a sign of our maturing democracy.
It is even more appropriate that we engage in discussions of this nature in
our programme of taking Parliament to the people. It is particularly of
significant importance for this Bill to be discussed as we begin our second
decade of freedom.

The exercise of the division of revenue must also be seen in a context of
giving practical expression to the notion of spheres of government,
enabling them to be effective in what they are supposed to do. The end of
it is not fiscal dumping, but service delivery to those who need it most.
Going forward we have to take certain matters into account. It is our view
that the issue of the division of the Revenue Bill must take a multi-year
focus as opposed to a single financial year focus.

For future purposes we support the fiscal and financial commission’s
recommendation that provinces need to augment provincially raised revenues
through the implementation of section 228 of the Constitution, and take
advantage of the provision of the Provincial Tax Regulation Act. The
Western Cape supports the Bill. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Members were offered seats in front here, so
that you can be closer to the podium. I am talking to those people who are
sitting at the back, please come forward.

Ms S MOLOKOANE (Salga): Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy Chairperson,
Minister of Finance, hon MECs, hon members, special delegates, ladies and
gentlemen, the SA Constitution seeks to promote the improvement of living
environments and livelihoods for all constituents by means of a
developmental approach to local government. The 2005 Budget therefore
begins to clearly capture how the constitutional issues and government
priorities as pronounced in the state of the nation address, are taken into
account with the division of revenue for 2005.

After ten years of democracy and major transformation challenges the 2005
Budget provides a platform for the achievements of government’s objective
for a stable microeconomic environment, the expectation of better financial
improvements and accelerated service delivery and the opportunity to
reflect government strategies to assist the poor and provide secure
households. Most importantly, it presents a fairly optimistic picture of
the economy for the next three years.

It is a positive innovation for South African communities that government
in its own move to accelerate the pace of employment creation will focus on
economic policy and aim at reducing the regulatory burden and simplify tax
arrangements for small business, investing in skill education and the
administration and comprehensive response to HIV and Aids. The increasing
transfer for socioeconomic infrastructure investment emphasises the
government’s commitment to find measures that will assist with employment
opportunities to the labour intensive construction method via the Expanded
Public Works Programme.

On local government allocations, it should be noted that local government
receives 4,7% of the total Budget for 2005, with the total allocation
rising from R14,8 billion in 2004 to R17,2 billion in 2005-06. Salga also
acknowledged that the total R5,4 billion additional funding over three
years from 2005-06 would be allocated to local government. This amount will
be available to fund operational spending by R3,7 billion and municipal
infrastructure by R1,7 billion. Although the additional R2, 4 billion is
allocated to local government in the 2005-06 Budget, it should be
recognised that the municipal budget still constitutes about 90% of its own
revenue. As such, municipalities with low revenue-raising capacity will
still find it difficult to meet their development needs.

Salga supports the reviewed local government equitable shares allocation
formula, as it aims to provide simple calculations of equitable share
allocation to municipalities, by taking into account and ensuring the
balance in demand for basic services, with the capacity to raise revenue
required to provide such services. Furthermore, it is welcome that the new
formula is used to generate the allocation to municipalities based on the
new baseline allocations for 2005-06, until 2008.

In the Budget, although the formula will be phased in fully and only
introduced in 2007-08, we view it as a positive that in arriving at the
proposed allocation, all the indicative figures, in terms of the DORA,
promote the predictable principle of equitable share division for the
purpose of limiting the unintended consequences. We propose that in future
the new information, which affects the allocation of equitable shares
obtained in the current year, should be guaranteed to all municipalities,
and that those with more equitable share volume increasing will then be
distributed only to those municipalities with new information, having a
favourable effect on them.

Good municipal governance is built upon an effective interface between
councillors, officials, strong links between financial and technical
support functions and an appropriate organisational structure. It is
appreciated that government over the past four years has committed funds on
capacity building and restructuring initiatives. In order to enhance the
proper use of these funds, the Project Consolidate under the Department of
Provincial and Local Government and Salga should also help in measuring the
impact of capacity of all these municipalities.

The local government financial management grant condition requires the
appointment of an appropriate qualified chief financial officer. This is a
worthwhile condition, however, it will be useful if all those surrounding
managers should also be qualified, for example, municipal managers and
senior managers. This is so that you don’t find the CFO operating in
isolation.

The allocation of the restructuring grant is still happening on a small
scale due to the fact that many applications by eligible municipalities are
turned down as a result of such applications for funding being poor
quality. Our appeal is that they should be looked at with a different eye
by Treasury to simplify and make a transparent accessing of these grants to
eligible municipalities.

The municipal infrastructure grants introduced in the 2005 Budget aim to
rationalise the number of conditional grants within the system of
intergovernmental transfers and create flexible capital funding so that
these municipalities can freely allocate to their prioritised IDP needs.
However, MIG allocations for 2005-06 now constitute an inflexible portion
and if encouraged many of these inflexible portions may be created in
future, which will be the signal of a lack of confidence in the MIG
structure and its inability to address the infrastructure backlog.

It is also noted that the government has taken steps to link equitable
share allocation with the municipal infrastructure grant allocation through
the introduction of the revised average cost of services for service areas
and nonservice areas. However, such information needs to be thoroughly
true, as municipalities are likely to expand infrastructure at a rate far
greater than they are able to maintain.

Completion of the process of review in the local government fiscal
framework, which focuses on the reform of regional council services levies,
the introduction of new property ratings and assessments of the impact of
the restructuring of the electricity distribution industry and municipal
finance is crucial. In this regard Salga, proposes that in order to avoid a
major shift in revenue available to local government, the elimination of
RSC levies by 2006 be replaced in all municipalities affected by revenue
sources or by taxes easily collectible.

In conclusion, Salga supports the Division of Revenue Bill. We, however,
would like to see that in future the issue of financial sustainability of
municipal imperatives relating to local government in the Budget are taken
into consideration when the Division of Revenue Bill is concluded. It is
the responsibility of all spheres of government and some municipalities
have not established themselves as fully constitutional governments by
complying with constitutional and legislative provisions. Care must be
taken to achieve economies without compromising service delivery and
national policy.

Lastly, let me reiterate that the basis from which these inputs are made is
to indicate that there is significant progress with regard to achieving the
mandate of local government. In consolidating and co-ordinating an
integration between government spheres, it should be made clear that
irrespective of how government operates, the impact of its work is
understood as being of one entity called government. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, hon
colleagues and all our compatriots. My work this evening has been made far
easier by none other than the so-called opposition. We were taught in our
party - and I am revealing some secrets to you this evening - that whenever
those who are opposed to the advancement of democracy start to agree with
you, go back and reread your rules. [Laughter.]

I have been checking my Freedom Charter once, twice and thrice as I was
sitting here and I can’t help but agree with the hon Robinson on the issue
she raised about education. She was confirming once more that the doors of
learning shall be opened to all.

On the issue she raised about the Expanded Public Works Programme, what
more can I say, there shall be work for all! She said it and confirmed it.
[Laughter.] On the issues she raised about the FFC being a watchdog for
civil society on financial matters by government, she has confirmed, openly
so, that the people shall govern. [Laughter.]

The additional amount of R43 billon of nationally raised revenue added to
provincial budgets achieves the following: Firstly, it stimulates a higher
level of social services. Secondly, it improves service potential of
educators and social workers. Thirdly, it expands the outreach of social
security grants and protects their real value. Lastly, it speeds up the
housing availability.

A major change in the provincial fiscal framework for the 2005 MTBF is the
shift of the social security grant function from the provinces to the
national sphere of government, which impacts directly on the composition of
provincial allocations and the size of the provincial equitable share
relative to conditional grants.

The social security grant function will, as we all know, and it has been
said, as from 1 April be administered as a conditional grant by provinces.
Currently, nine departments will administer 24 conditional grants to
provinces. This shift will result in the equitable share component of
national transfer to provinces decreasing from 88,4% in the current year to
66,4% in the coming financial year, while the share of conditional grants
increases almost threefold from 12,6% to 35,6%.

Although additional national resources are allocated to social programmes,
specifically targeting the poor and the vulnerable, improvement in the
quality of spending, especially in the areas of housing and social
security, remains essential. Interaction with some of our provinces by way
of public hearings and some joint oversight convinces us that with due
vigilance and commitment we shall overcome the remaining challenges, be
they underspending or delayed projects.

We emphasise once more that the oversight role of all institutions of
government should receive more focus and urgency to ensure that the quality
of spending, that is to say, the appropriateness, the timeframe and
durability of all those projects become a common concern for all of us as
public representatives. [Time expired.] The province of Mpumalanga supports
this Bill.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson, and let me
express my sincere appreciation to all those who contributed to this debate
this afternoon.

We will watch, with keen interest, the discussions in the Select Committee
on Finance and the Joint Budget Committee, but also the reports coming
through from each of the provincial legislatures, after they have discussed
the Division of Revenue Bill. Clearly, the process has been intense,
notwithstanding the time constraints, and I will return to that in a
moment.

Let me run through some of the issues that hon members have raised, some of
them for confirmation. The hon MEC Coleman raised the issue of time-lags
and the timeous availability of data in local governments. Clearly, we
agree. There is work that we must do together to ensure that we have that.
If you can’t measure it, you can’t manage it, it’s as simple as that. On
the issues of section 32(2) and section 4, I’d like to align myself with
the hon Sogoni. These are not things that we can do arbitrarily. It’s a
real test of cooperative governance.

However, if we remind ourselves of what has happened in the current fiscal
year, one province has been spending exceedingly well on the hospital
revitalisation programme, to the extent that by October they had used all
their allocations. Yet, there were other provinces where, for the same
conditional grants, spending wasn’t happening. All that we need is a
mechanism that allows for flexibility and engagement within the spirit of
cooperative governance, that you can effect the changes and smooth the
work, failing which we will have too many incomplete projects.

Hon Robinson, I can’t be held responsible for oil prices and that is going
to have an impact. At US$ 56,37 per barrel this afternoon it’s really going
to wreak havoc on the global economy.

The issue of libraries and resource centres is a very important issue. Let
me again draw to the attention of members of the NCOP, and members of
Salga, that we need to examine where these libraries are going to be
located best and how they will be funded. I was quite saddened to read in a
magazine this week of a library in the Ukahlamba District Council area that
is now boarded up and has been closed for about a year, because the
individual who had been the librarian there for many years passed away, and
the municipality has not been able to recruit another librarian.

Needless to say, in areas of greatest need where children don’t have access
to the Internet and all of the other things, these libraries fulfil a very
important public good and we must ensure that they are properly provided
for.

On the Expanded Public Works Programme, and again to tie up with what the
hon Robinson said and with what the hon Aulsebrook said, I have gone
through the report of the hearing of 8 March and Dr Sean Phillips of the
Department of Public Works went into a lot of detail. Now, this notion that
there should be a different budget line for the Expanded Public Works
Programme is not correct, I mean, he confirmed this. It is how we do
things; it’s ensuring that we can do that regularly across every local
authority and provincial government area and, very importantly, let me
emphasise that the quality and extent of the Expanded Public Works
Programme will be determined by the quality and extent of the constituency
work put in by elected public representatives – you don’t do that, nobody
quite knows what is happening and unless we are there and we see, and also
become the eyes and ears, nobody actually knows what is happening.

You can’t ask a Minister sitting in Pretoria or a MEC sitting in a
provincial capital to always have a full scope. And, I think that
frequently leadership in political parties are asked how they know, even
MPs being there. There’s even less about it in the reports, because those
are the easy things. It’s in the footprints and fingerprints that are
communicated by reports and actual issues that are left unattended.

The hon Mkhize, a lot of what you raised requires some response. Of course,
these formulae are but formulae. So, the Western Cape and Gauteng had one
view, the remaining seven provinces had a different view, and so
development versus poverty is a marginal shift. These kinds of things will
happen and I think that MEC Coleman who was here with us and who was part
of that debate would be able to reflect that we try to be as fair as
possible in changing the formula.

On housing, clearly, you can’t give it. If you look at the conditions you
can’t give it to municipalities that are incompetent. You must have a
series of competency tests. However, in an area such as housing it is
argued, and hence the shift, that it is best going to be delivered by that
sphere of government which is closest to people. We must also align our
spatial planning with housing; you can’t build houses somewhere where there
are no clinics, no roads, no sports facilities, and so on. So, municipal
responsibilities are going to be exceedingly important in going forward,
but the competency tests, similarly, will be that which triggers the
transfer.

Classification of spending is not something we have immediate control over;
these are international norms. The risk for fraudulent application is an
interesting debate; I don’t have the time to go into it, but if all I did
was sit and fill out forms – I’m employed by one sphere of government – and
someone else is going to pay, there actually is no responsibility vested in
me to exercise my share of Batho Pele, which is to ensure that the system
works, to ensure that you don’t have fraudulent claims and, in dealing with
that, it’s primarily a function of how we equip our public servants. And
the engagement is their approach to the task at hand, which would be
important.

In respect of the fast-tracking, the hon Chairperson knows because we have
had intense discussions about this. I know that this is probably the most
important piece of legislation of the NCOP in the year. There are some
things that we do not have control over, such as the oil price and this
period, 21 March, which we didn’t determine shall be the time for Easter,
and so this brief recess period that is coming up throws us into a bit of
disarray.

As I communicated with the Chairperson, Parliament needs to be exemplary.
We must pass our budgets before the start of the fiscal year, and if we
delay it until the NCOP reconvenes we would be in the new fiscal year.
Reconvening the NCOP for a single meeting is a very costly exercise. So, in
these circumstances I crave your indulgence and indicate that normally the
Intergovernmental Fiscal Review is important, and also the Division of
Revenue Bill is important because it’s a three-year framework. The MTBPS
confirms that three-year framework.

A lot of this discussion here concerns issues that people know about
already. The numbers may have changed and the margins, the principles are
those that are obtained. My plea is for members of the NCOP, in the
engagement with both municipalities and provincial legislatures, to avoid
the rush, to have these discussions more intensely and that will make it
easier. Because, even in the period normally between the tabling of the
Budget and the third or fourth week of June and the start of the fiscal
year on 1 April you have too little time to do a full round of discussions.
It’s shortened this year by these holidays, but, normally, if we could get
through these discussions, in fact, before we rise in November/December we
would probably be in a much stronger position.

Hon Aulsebrook, I’ll check on these guidelines. I’ll speak to public works.
Hon Sinclair, the one difficulty is always, and I have to ask myself, when
is Bully Botma advising us of a problem in agriculture and when does he
just need to get into the papers. It’s a big difficulty we have with Grain
SA. Clearly, there are problems, but what we should avoid is a situation –
and you know we released the Commission for Africa report last Friday, and
the report reminds us that a cow in Europe is still subsidised at the rate
of US$2 a day. A cow in Japan is subsidised at the rate of US$4 a day, and
our big battle in South Africa is to ensure that people would be able to
live on more than US$2 a day. That remains a battle for us. So, we can’t
resort to the same thing; we couldn’t afford it. Our focus has to be on
people and, at the same time, to fight the subsidies, which destroy
agriculture in the developing world. We are not going to resolve that by
subsidising farmers. We have enormous challenges, but I hear you.

In respect of what the hon CAT Smith has raised, I clearly am moved by the
story of the number of people who would leave.

Al wat ek kan vra, is: “Broei, boetie, broei.” [Gelag.] [All that I can ask
is: “Breed, brother, breed.” [Laughter.]]

Go out there and breed and add some people to the Northern Cape, otherwise
this thing is going to catch us.

On disaster management, it’s work in progress and, clearly, we have been
advised by the premier about all of those districts that are affected by
drought. On the issue of water, it is something we will look at.

Councillor Molokwane, on the MFMA, for me the most important thing is the
amount of effort we put into the training of councillors. Of course you are
correct. You are correct that your CFO must be competent and the other
managers must be even more competent. And those other managers must be more
committed than the CFO. I saw some things on TV this week that left me
somewhat saddened about municipal managers, but that’s a different story.
But, most important, in my view, is that we must ensure that councillors
are properly equipped to engage, to oversee the work of the officials, to
ensure that budgets are passed, because the councillors approve these as
elected representatives of the people. That’s a big challenge for us, and
that is the investment we must make, and so, as we move towards the local
government elections and beyond, it is one of those big investments that
this country must make to ensure that we have competent, skilled
councillors, whose understanding of issues is regularly updated. I think we
must make a joined commitment with Salga on that.

On the conditionalities in the MIG, it is something we would clearly look
at. I agree with you that there are big challenges, and we have raised the
numbers between those municipalities where the services exist and where
they don’t exist. That is a rough approximation, but it also serves to
remind us, hon members, of the gaps that exist. I said on one area, such as
the termination of the bucket system, that there is a clear commitment that
we can make, but there would be a series of other changes that we have to
undertake. The key is the speed with which we can align IDPs with budgets,
with accessing the MIG, with ensuring that we are using the available
resources to improve on the quality of services that the poor have access
to. That’s a big challenge for us. It’s not something that municipalities
have to do alone; you are correct in saying that as well and that it’s a
joint responsibility, and I am merely echoing precisely what you were
saying, councillor.

On the RSC levies, we haven’t said anything, but we would be foolhardy
collectively if we terminated the RSC levies to leave municipalities
without that source of revenue that they’ve had for infrastructure
development. My people assure me that by June or, at the very latest, by
July, we will have a set of proposals that we can examine, together with
Salga, on what will replace the RSC levies. Is that so? Good.

On the financial sustainability of local government, in respect of what the
hon Mkhaliphi raised, I’m glad about the way in which he spoke to the hon
Robinson. He also demonstrated that there shall be peace and friendship.
[Laughter.]

But, let me conclude by reminding everybody that 50 years ago this year
those who gathered at Kliptown, in agreeing on all of that which puts
together the vision of this South Africa, said: “These freedoms we shall
fight for, side by side, throughout our lives, until we have won our
liberty.”

Part of this discussion here, part of the content of what members have
given, says to us that we are still fighting for those liberties. We can’t
rest until all the freedoms that are expressed in the Charter touch the
lives of the poorest South Africans. That’s the struggle; that is why we
march together, side by side, until we have won all these freedoms. Thank
you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Minister, for responding to all
the debaters this evening. That concludes the debate. I shall now put the
question that the Bill be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms
of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all the
delegate heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes.
Are all delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to
make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. Is there any province
that wishes to do so? None. We then proceed. We shall now proceed to the
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour, against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE (Mpuma Koloni): Re a thekgla.[Eastern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mrs S E MABE (Free State): Free State votes in favour.
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA (Gauteng): In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI (KwaZulu-Natal): KwaZulu-Natal iyaxhasa. [KwaZulu-Natal
supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE (Limpopo): Limpopo, e a thekgla. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA (Mpumalanga): Mpumalanga iyasekhela. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr R J TAU (Northern Cape): Noord-Kaap stem saam. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI (North West): North West in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS (Western Cape): Wes-Kaap steun. [Western
Cape supports.]

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 19:36.

                                 __________



                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS




                           THURSDAY, 10 MARCH 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The Fifth Economic and Social Rights Report of the South African
         Human Rights Commission for 2002-2003 is referred to the following
         Select Committees:


         (a)     Chapter 1 - "The Right to Land";

         (b)     Chapter 5 - "The Right to a Healthy Environment" and

         (c)     Chapter 8 - "The Right to Water" is referred to the Select
              Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration
              and report.

         (d)     Chapter 2 - "The Right to Food";

         (e)     Chapter 3 - "The Right to Health Care" and

         (f)     Chapter 4 - "The Right to Social Security" is referred to
              the Select Committee on Social Services for consideration and
              report.

         (g)     Chapter 6 - "The Right to Education" is referred to the
              Select Committee on Education and Recreation for consideration
              and report.

         (h)     Chapter 7 - "The Right of Access to Adequate Housing" is
              referred to the Select Committee on Public Services for
              consideration and report.


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs:

         Strategic Plan of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry for
         2005-2008.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Health

     Strategic Plan of the Department of Health for 2005-2008.

2.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

     Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2003-2004,
     including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
     for 2003-2004.

                            FRIDAY, 11 MARCH 2005


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory Council on
     Innovation for 2003-2004.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Division of Revenue
     Bill [B 8B - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 11 March 2005:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
         the Division of Revenue Bill [B 8B - 2005] (National Assembly -
         sec 76), referred to it, reports the Bill without amendment.

                          WEDNESDAY, 16 MARCH 2005


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Science and Technology

   Strategic Plan of the Department of Science and Technology for 2005-6 to
   2008-2010.


2. The Minister of Social Development

   Strategic Plan of the Department of Social Development for 2005-6 to 2009-
   2010 [RP 28-2005].

                           THURSDAY, 17 MARCH 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 16 March 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (I )    Convergence Bill [B 9 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)

2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 17 March 2005:


         (i)     Sterilisation Amendment Bill [B 12B – 2004] (National
              Council of Provinces – sec 76)

National Council of Provinces

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 17 March 2005 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


            i) Citation of Constitutional Laws Bill [B 5B – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

