---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 September 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-09-14
---

WEDNESDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                                 NEW MEMBERS


                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancies caused by the resignation from the
National Assembly of Mr P S Molefe, Mr J G Zuma, Ms P N Mnandi, Ms H M
Mpaka, Ms R R Joemat, Ms M N Magazi, Ms N R Ntshulana-Bhengu and Mr E M
Dipico had been filled by the nomination, with effect from 2 September
2005, of Ms M L Matsemela, Mr G Lekgetho, Mr S L Dithebe, Ms M J J
Matsomela, Mr AF Madella, Ms W Ngwenya, Mr M A Cele and Mr T J Bonhomme
respectively.

Ms M L Matsemela, Mr G Lekgetho, Mr S L Dithebe, Ms M J J Matsomela, Mr A F
Madella, Ms W Ngwenya, Mr M A Cele and Mr T J Bonhomme, accompanied by Ms M
M Malumise and Mr D M Gumede, made and subscribed the oath or solemn
affirmation and took their seats.




                         CHANGES IN PARTY MEMBERSHIP


                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I would like to announce changes in party
membership that have occurred in terms of Schedule 6A to the Constitution.
Mr Y Wang has, on 14 September 2005, left the ID and joined the ANC. Mr C V
Burgess has, on 14 September 2005, left the ID and joined the ANC.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Madam Speaker, on a point of order, does that mean that
Mr Wang now has a real ID? [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I will leave that to your interpretation. Hon
members, it is my real honour to welcome to the South African Parliament
our guests : members of the delegation led by the hon Mr Abdul Wahid M Al-
Awadi, who is the head of the parliamentary delegation of the national
assembly of the state of Kuwait. [Applause.] The delegation is accompanied
by the ambassador of the state of Kuwait to the Republic of South Africa,
His Excellency, Mr Salem Al Zamanan. You are welcome.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE


                                  (Ruling)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed, I wish to make a ruling on
what transpired in the House on 23 August during members’ statements. The
hon Ms H Zille of the DA, in reference to the so-called oil-gate scandal
said, and I quote:

   It is the utmost corruption that any government can perpetrate, yet none
   of the parties involved have adequately explained what amounts to a gross
   abuse of state resources for the ANC’s political gain.


The hon Deputy Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
subsequently raised a point of order, asking that the remarks be withdrawn
unconditionally on the basis that the government had not been found guilty
of corruption.

In response to the Deputy Minister’s point of order, I indicated that I
would check the Hansard and come back to the issue. Having now had the
opportunity to consider the Hansard, I wish to rule as follows.

Government is a broad concept that is viewed as such by people. According
to established practice, reflections on government are generally
acceptable, just as in practice they are on parties. Had the contested
remark been with particular reference to a member of this House, it would
have been unparliamentary.

Therefore under the circumstances, I am of the view that the statement by
Ms Zille is not unparliamentary, but it is a matter of debate. Whether the
government has or has not been found guilty of corruption in regard to a
particular matter is not relevant to this ruling.


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY:





DEPUTY PRESIDENT:


    Assistance by the Presidency to former Deputy President Mr Jacob Zuma

    18. Mrs S M Camerer (DA) asked the Deputy President:


      Whether the Presidency has at any time contributed any (a) funds from
      the money budgeted for the Presidency, (b) legal and/or (c) other
      assistance to former Deputy President Mr Jacob Zuma in relation to the
      trial of Mr Shabir Shaik and/or the charges currently faced by Mr
      Zuma; if not, what factors were taken into consideration in reaching
      this conclusion; if so, (i) who authorised the funds or assistance,
      (ii) what are the relevant details of the funds or assistance provided
      and (iii) why?
      N1943E
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, hon members, the answer to this
question is that the Presidency agreed to fund a watching brief for Mr Zuma
in the trial of Mr Schabir Shaik. The decision was taken after considering
a recommendation by the Chief State Law Adviser and the uniqueness of the
case in that, although the then Deputy President was not charged in the
matter, the majority of allegations that had to be answered in court
involved him directly; but also noting that there was no precedent that
could be relied upon for guidance under the unique circumstances. The
accounts were settled by the state attorneys, but no payments have as yet
been made from the Presidency’s budget.

No application has been submitted to the Presidency in relation to the
charges currently faced by Mr Zuma. [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy President, I think the DA has
made its view known, namely that taxpayers’ funds should not be used for
this purpose because the generally corrupt relationship which the court
found Mr Zuma had with Mr Shaik was surely not conducted in the course of
his duties, either as an MEC or as the Deputy President. I would be
interested in the Deputy President’s view of this. I would also be
interested to know, and I am sure the House would like to know, how much of
the taxpayers’ money has been allocated to meet these bills? Thank you.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon member. As I stated in
my answer, there is no precedent for this. In this particular matter the
Deputy President was not charged and the Presidency was advised by the
Chief State Law Adviser, whose guidance we often seek on matters like
these. So there is nothing untoward on the part of the Presidency.

The relevant amount is not yet known to us because we have not yet received
an account from the state law advisers. However, I advise the hon member to
raise the question with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development, who will in due course, handle it.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask
the Deputy President whether she thinks the question is informed by a
concern for taxpayers’ money. Previously, state money was used to pay for
the defence of Magnus Malan . . . [Interjections.] . . . and of Basson.
[Interjections.] Absolutely no questions were asked then. [Interjections.]
The two were facing charges for more heinous crimes, but the state paid for
their defence and there was not even a murmur. [Interjections.]

What, in the opinion of the Deputy President, informs these questions?
[Interjections.] . . . [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I
submit that the hon Chief Whip of the Majority Party’s question is out of
order, because he asks for an . . . [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I am addressing the Speaker, not you!
[Laughter.] The question by the hon Chief Whip of the Majority Party is out
of order because he asks for an opinion. A question should not be phrased
that way.

The SPEAKER: This is a follow-up question and I leave it to the Deputy
President to decide whether she would like to answer the question or not.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, I concur with the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party. I think of an evil person and the name Wouter Basson comes
to mind. I can’t even count the amount of money, taxpayers’ money, this
country has had to pay for his court defence as a result of the heinous
crimes he committed. So there is no comparison. [Applause.]

Mr M SWART: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, one clearly needs to
distinguish between state legal aid and state legal aid where one operates
in the course and scope of your governance.
Would you not agree, given that state law advisers are investigating the
corruption charges levelled against former Deputy President Zuma in
relation to his role in governance and whether that role qualifies him for
state legal aid, that could result in a precedent where allegations of
corruption are concerned?

I am fully aware of legal aid being granted to people who are indigent or
do not have sufficient means and I believe that that was the situation in
the cases referred to earlier. [Interjections.] But can we afford to send
out a message, in view of the ongoing fight against corruption,
particularly in the public sector, that we are using government funds to
fund legal aid for a person who has acted in the course and scope of his
governance? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: What we paid for was a watching brief, hon member. In
any case, I think all of us will agree that it was important for the
Presidency to be informed and to be able to follow what was happening in
the course of that trial. In any case, I will have to consult my lawyer,
Madam Brigitte Mabandla, about the details. [Laughter.] . . . [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Camerer, in the absence of any other member asking a
follow-up question, I will allow you to take a second slot, although it is
not the usual procedure.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, I gathered one had the opportunity to do so
when there was nobody else asking a follow-up question.

The SPEAKER: Sure! That’s what I’m saying.

Mrs S M CAMERER: The rest of the opposition seems to be very silent on this
issue this afternoon. [Interjections.] There is hardly any of them left
here!

Madam Deputy President made the point that the lawyers acting for the
former Deputy President were holding a watching brief, so it wasn’t as
though he was the accused in the matter. But, applying that principle,
would you not agree that it would be inappropriate for the Presidency to
fund the legal costs of the former Deputy President where he is the accused
facing charges of corruption, which occurred in the course of his action in
his office? That is the first aspect that I would be interested in.

Following on what you have just said, Deputy President, could you just
clarify the following: Has there indeed not been any application by the
former Deputy President to the Presidency or any other government
department to cover these costs?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, there has been no such request. The
other question, therefore, falls away, because it’s really academic. Thank
you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
 Assistance to women, the disabled and the youth operating businesses in the
                               second economy

    19. Dr M Sefularo (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      What linkages to and initiatives in sectors in the first economy have
      been identified by the Government to assist women, the disabled and
      the youth operating businesses in the second economy?
                                        N1949E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, you welcomed our Kuwaiti guests on the
gallery. I also want to congratulate them on the advances they’ve recently
made, namely the involvement of women in politics.

I think they will enjoy this question. [Applause.]

The question is what linkages and initiatives in sectors in the first
economy have been identified by government to assist women, the disabled
and the youth operating businesses in the second economy.

The reply is: Our broad economic policy is to eradicate poverty and
unemployment in our society, with particular focus on the most vulnerable.
Because women, the youth and the disabled are in the majority in our
society, many government policies make provision for these groups.

Specific targets are, therefore, set for women, the disabled and the youth
in the government’s empowerment policies, entrepreneurial development
programmes, small business development programmes, employment equity and
other programmes. As a result of time constraints, I will not go into the
details of all the initiatives that we have. I will just highlight some of
the laws that specifically target the empowerment of women, the youth and
the disabled.

The Broad-Based Economic Empowerment Act of 2003, which ensures that a
great number of our people, including women, are brought into the
mainstream economy, addresses and sets targets that are specifically for
the benefit of these groups. The Employment Equity Act provides for
affirmative action and protection against unfair discrimination based on
gender and disability.

The Minerals and Petroleum Resources Development Act of 2004, amongst other
things, entrenches the right of women to participate in the minerals and
energy industries. The Preferential Procurement Act allows women, the youth
and the disabled to secure tenders and render service for government
departments.

The government has implemented various measures to encourage financial
institutions to extend credit to women and other historically disadvantaged
groups. These include such measures as the recently signed agreement
between the Department of Public Works and Absa bank, which facilitates
access to credit for women in construction.

The Office on the Status of Disabled Persons in the Presidency is also
working with the Department of Trade and Industry on a targeted assistance
programme on SMME development for the disabled. Government support
programmes in targeted groups include the disabled.

Umsobomvu was established to assist and promote a number of youth
initiatives. These include youth career-building initiatives, employment
entrepreneurship information and advice, and a graduate database that links
unemployed graduates to job opportunities.

There are also youth entrepreneurship programmes that provide access to
finance and business development support. The programme is provided through
a voucher to young entrepreneurs, which they use to pay for services from
an accredited service provider.

To promote entrepreneurship, Umsobomvu has started the entrepreneurship
education programme, currently running in 30 schools. Hon members, it is
clear that the general direction of government policy is inclusive and is
also targeted to ensure that women, disabled persons and young people don’t
fall through the
cracks. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms L L MABE: Deputy President, how far has the finance sector gone to
ensure that women, the disabled and the youth gain access to credit, which
has been a major stumbling block to their active participation in the
economy, regardless of the good ideas that they have? How far has the
finance sector gone in addressing that problem? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, I first have to start off by saying that
we cannot say “regardless of the good ideas”. A financial service provider
has to provide credit. It is important that the idea being financed is
bankable.

So our starting point and our commitment as government are that people who
have ideas that have the potential to make a contribution towards the
development of the economy and to their personal empowerment need to be a
given a chance.

As far as government-related institutions are concerned - that is your
Khula, your empowerment fund, as well as your IDC - there is always the
requirement when a transaction is entered into that the applicants must
indicate whether there is going to be direct or indirect benefits to women.
The statistics are, unfortunately, not available at this point.

However, regarding the private sector, we are certainly still struggling.
In the financial services charter there has been an effort to address this
issue. For instance, the Mzansi account, which in part provides microcredit
to get started with, is meant to bring into the banking network many, many
women for whom banking services have been out of reach. We still need to
evaluate the impact that we have been able to make in that regard.

Government also has its own newly established microcredit financer, Mafisa,
as well as support for people in the co-op sector. We anticipate that in
that sector lots of women will benefit. Thank you.

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, the President of this
country, hon Thabo Mbeki, called on the private sector, especially in the
first economy, to embark on a mentorship programme for small-business
people in the second economy, the youth and women. Could the Deputy
President indicate to us how far the programme has gone? Is there any
progress? Are there any success stories and what are the challenges,
especially in the mining industry?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: In general, hon member, across the economy there
hasn’t been significant development as far as this particular initiative is
concerned and we would like to encourage the private sector to heed the
call of the President and use learnerships and other means to bring young
people and women into their fold for the purpose of mentoring.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Deputy President, I want to ask which specific business
credit initiatives have been instituted by government to facilitate
entrepreneurial opportunities for targeted groups within the second
economy? You did mention Absa’s involvement in a specific programme, as
well as Khula, the empowerment fund and IDC.

However, thinking of small enterprises as they exist in the second economy,
they tend to be necessity entrepreneurs, or what is sometimes called the
nonentrepreneurial self-employed, whose demand for credit is limited by the
fact that they are unable to form contractual relationships with buyers in
order to ensure a reasonable, constant cash flow.

To what extent has such business credit schemes been successful? You said
just now that this was one particular aspect you were unable to assess.
Have you been able to broadly assess this aspect in terms of the second
economy?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: The Apex fund, for instance, which is quite new and
therefore we are not in a position to give you the results of the
assessment thereof, will give us some of the answers that the hon member is
looking for, I hope. However, Khula did have a special fund, which was
targeted at entrepreneurs who were looking for sums of money of around R10
000. They needed to approach Khula as a group or in a stokvel type of
arrangement.

In many cases, in the rural areas in particular, this was quite successful.
They got involved in things like feeding schemes and the cultural industry.
Some of them graduated from there to become well-structured
microentrepreneurs, etc. I will ask the Department of Trade and Industry to
supply you with more information about the success of that initiative.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Hon Deputy President, we presume that the Presidential
Women’s Working Group was set up partly to address these kinds of problems.
At a recent meeting of this working group it was reported that government
would consider giving priority in the awarding of government tenders to
companies owned by women. Can the Deputy President assure this House that
when these tenders are awarded, consideration will be given to all
companies owned by women, not just companies that are owned by certain
groups of women? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, as is the case where all government
tenders and contracts are concerned, there is indeed no preferred group of
women or persons. We are considering reviewing the Procurement Act to
strengthen it and in part, we will seek to ensure that we cover women even
more closely than is the case currently.


          Progress in relation to hosting of 2010 Soccer World Cup


    20. Mr B M Komphela (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      What (a) progress has the Government made in meeting its commitments
      and deadlines as agreed to with FIFA upon being awarded the
      opportunity to host the 2010 Soccer World Cup, (b) outstanding
      commitments must still be met in this regard by the end of 2005 and
      (c) organisational framework has been put in place to co-ordinate the
      preparations for the 2010 Soccer World Cup?
                                   N1950E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, this question from hon Komphela asks
about the programmes we have put in place in relation to the 2010 Soccer
World Cup.

Let me reiterate government’s commitment to ensuring that all the
requirements set by Fifa for the hosting of the 2010 Soccer World Cup are
met.
These requirements range from building the necessary roads to ensuring that
we host a successful Soccer World Cup that promotes soccer in this country,
the continent and the world, as well as our commitment to ensuring that
good - quality infrastructure is in place for the tournament. This
infrastructure relates not only to the venues where the events will be held
but also to other matters such as transport, accommodation, etc.

I am pleased to report that government is ahead in meeting its obligations.
In addition, I know that the Minister of Communications wants to ensure
that we will have the appropriate infrastructure to ensure that the whole
world will be able to enjoy – whether from a cell phone, TV or a computer –
watching the matches as they are being played in South Africa.

The only outstanding commitments relate to the need to pass the Special and
Financial Measures Bill, which will consolidate all legal guarantees.
Originally, we were required to enact the two Bills before the end of the
year. However, in terms of an agreement between Fifa and the local
organising committee, this deadline has been extended to June this year.
This is because certain technical information has not being finalised.

The local organising committee consists of representatives of government,
the SA Football Association and the business sector. The CEO of this
structure is Mr Danny Jordaan, and he and his staff are responsible for the
implementation of the local organising committee’s board decisions.

On the side of government, we have established an interministerial
committee, chaired by me, to drive government’s commitment towards the
successful implementation of the Fifa World Cup, because my soccer skills
are well known. [Laughter.]

A technical committee, to ensure that our responsibilities are implemented
in a co-ordinated fashion, has also been established. The committee is
chaired by the Deputy Minister of Finance, Mr Jabu Moleketi, and earlier
last month, Cabinet approved the appointment of Dr Joe Phaahla, the former
CEO of the SA Sports Commission, as government co-ordinator to lead the
implementation of government commitments.

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Thank you, Deputy President. I definitely believe, Deputy
President, that as far as the answer is concerned, the Deputy President has
very good football skills. [Laughter.]

Throughout the provinces and all over the country, municipalities and other
people are waiting anxiously, and time and again the Minister of Sport says
. . .

Hambani kancane, madoda. [Go slowly, gentlemen.]

We want to find out, Deputy President, which implementing agency, or which
sphere of government, is going to take charge of this big and important
task of constructing the infrastructure in preparation for the 2010 World
Cup in this country. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Speaker, all on the activities of the bid are
co-ordinated centrally through the Department of Sport and Recreation and
now that we have appointed Mr Phaahla, he obviously will play a very
important role.

When it comes to the implementation of infrastructure, there are
opportunities for partnerships between the public and private sectors and,
at provincial and local level, it will be possible for those spheres of
government to be implementing agencies.

However, what we will not have, clearly, is a situation where those spheres
of government on their own decide and dictate the nature of these projects.
These projects are centrally divided and, in a consultative process, are
allocated to the most appropriate sphere of government. These must be on
budget and they must meet the relevant Public Finance Management Act
regulations or that of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management
Act, whichever the case may be.

Mr S J MASANGO: Deputy Speaker and Deputy President, three weeks ago we the
portfolio committee, met Safa, and we asked Safa when it was going to
inform the public about the stadiums earmarked for the 2010 World Cup. Safa
said that we shouldn’t be asking them when and where, but who is going to
be building the stadiums?

Deputy President, I want to know whether the government accepts
responsibility for ensuring that the necessary stadiums are built or
upgraded for the 2010 Soccer World Cup.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Speaker, yes, this is a South African bid,
which was won on behalf of and for the people of South Africa and, of
course, also for the people of Africa.

So, government will do everything to ensure that the infrastructure that is
necessary is in place and on time.

We, as the committee in government, will be working together very closely
to monitor whether the different spheres of government with the
responsibility to implement these projects are proceeding on time.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Deputy President, I am very happy to hear of your interest
in soccer. I’d like to see you kicking a ball one day! [Laughter.] You are
very young; you can do it.

We as South Africans are proud to host the 2010 Soccer World Cup. My
question to you is whether a special concession will be given to the poorer
section of society so that they can buy tickets cheaper to watch the games
at the stadiums. Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: That matter is still under consideration, hon member.
The brief of the South African party is to try to see if there will be a
mechanism to ensure that our poorer soccer-loving public is afforded this
opportunity.

I do want to assure the members that in my younger days I played for a club
called Indunduma Young Tigers. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a question here. What position did you play
in?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Goalkeeper, Deputy Speaker. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why we have heard so little about that team!
[Laughter.]

There is another slot here.

Mr B W DLHAMINI: Deputy Speaker, and Deputy President, in preparation for
the 2010 Soccer Cup, it is only a blind person who cannot see that
government is serious about infrastructure.

My problem is that we don’t need, as a country, only to host but also to
win. One of the steps that has been taken is the memorandum of
understanding that has been signed between the Departments of Sport and
Recreation and Education. However, there isn’t enough money.

Can the Presidency, and more especially your love for soccer, prevail on
the Minister of Finance to put more money into school sports so that we are
able to tap the talent and win, and not only host the tournament? Thank
you. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, I will try and tackle the Minister of
Finance. [Applause.]


            Failure of local government to deliver basic services



21.   Mr W P Doman (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether Cabinet has discussed the failure of the local sphere of
      government to deliver basic services in terms of its mandate; if not,
      why not; if so, (a) what key factors have been identified as
      contributing to this failure and (b) what steps are being taken to
      rectify these problems?                 N1944E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Speaker, it is our view that local government
has not failed to deliver services, but that it is indeed experiencing
challenges, in particular as a result of historic factors that need to be
attended to so that it can be adequately empowered to meet its
responsibilities.

The challenges that municipalities are experiencing are evaluated and
discussed by Cabinet on a regular basis. In fact, nothing is more important
to us as the executive and to the President in particular than ensuring
that we address the challenges that we face at local government level. A
number of these challenges were listed by the President when he replied to
a question in this House last week.

With regard to steps taken to address these problems, one of the
initiatives undertaken by government is Project Consolidate. This is a
hands-on initiative with 136 municipalities, to assist them in building
their capacity to improve service delivery, local economic development,
financial viability, municipal transformation and good governance. We have
also roped in the private sector to assist us in this regard.

This process is further complemented by the municipal izimbizo programme,
of which the President also gave details last week. The programme involves
meetings with mayors, councillors and municipal officials, as well as
meetings with ward committees; and it allows for an in-depth evaluation of
the problems experienced by the affected municipalities in the districts.

A number of municipalities have thus been visited by the President, by me,
by Ministers and by government officials to have a hands-on experience of
what is happening on the ground and to make informed interventions.

Sector departments, provinces, public entities and the private sector are
now also involved in supporting the municipalities with planning, capacity-
building on sector technical standards and norms, implementation,
monitoring, evaluating and auditing of local programmes as implemented by
municipalities.

Government is therefore taking a practical approach to ensure that all
systems are in place to allow the local sphere of government to be able to
deliver services in terms of its mandate.

Mr W P DOMAN: Deputy President, thank you very much for that comprehensive
reply. We agree that there are historic reasons. But apart from that, Madam
Deputy President, in its very honest report on skills levels in
municipalities, the department observed last week that there are shocking
shortages of skills in local government and, they said, chiefly because of
transformation and employment equity. We, as the DA, believe that this is a
direct result of overzealous transformation of the work environment along
racial lines by the majority of ANC mayors and executive committees.

Now, I want to ask you: Will the government not consider relaxing the
employment equity requirements in local government, especially in the 136
municipalities that cannot fulfil their basic functions; and with that,
consider a means of conveying the message to ANC mayors and the executive
committees that service delivery is more important than the colour of the
skin of those senior managers that who deliver those services? [Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, South Africa has massive skills
shortages. Labour is sold by those who possess skills wherever they choose
to. Many of the people whom we have lost in the local government sphere
were not necessarily chased out. They opted for greener pastures.

The work at local government level is not for the faint-hearted. It is for
those people who really want to go the extra mile. Some of those people,
because they had good CVs – apartheid had afforded them an opportunity to
work without having to compete for the jobs they dominated - have been able
to go and sell their skills anywhere, and they ran away from where they
were needed most. So it is not a question of actually chasing them away.
[Applause.]

You will have to produce proof of people who want to come back and are
being kept out. And as the President said last week, we would be willing to
look into those cases, because we are indeed looking at reinforcing
capacity. That is why in our work with the private sector we have asked
them to bring in even their retired people who would be willing to co-
operate and collaborate with us. We then deploy them to actually work there
and mentor the up-and-coming people in the system. [Applause.]

Ms L M MASHIANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President, I would like
to commend the strategic intervention by government of and I believe that
the support you referred to will go a long way towards assisting
municipalities with challenges in service delivery.

The current system of local government is only five years old. What are the
lessons that government has learnt over this period? And, seeing that rural
municipalities make up the bulk of municipalities in Project Consolidate,
what other government measures are there to address these disparities and
ensure that rural municipalities realise their optimal potential and keep
up momentum in the provision of services? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon member. In the five years of the local
government system, one of the things that we have learnt is the importance
of consulting communities about their priorities and the manner in which we
phase in communities.
That is reason the integrated development programmes were introduced,
because they afford a formal consultative process between the municipality
and the communities that they service. There has therefore been an effort
to integrate the views of the community into the planning and the
programmes that are financed and implemented by local government.

We have also learnt that it is important to have a structured financial
management system at local government level, and that is the reason a
special version of the Public Finance Management Act was developed and is
now being implemented at a local government level. I am referring to the
Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act.

We also learnt that in some cases people want to relate to government about
services within the municipality and outside the municipality, and so far
we have not been able to have all of the services closest to the people so
that they have people who can answer some of their questions.

We have therefore started the programme of community development workers,
who literally are government’s fieldworkers. They try to interface between
communities and councillors and between communities and the different
service providers in all spheres of government. Many of these are graduates
and therefore highly skilled, and they are able to hand-hold old people and
people with limited education through the system so that they can expose
them to the services that are available from government.

We’ve also learnt about the importance of the ward system. That is why, in
the municipal imbizos, which we have been following up with the President
and other Ministers, we have focused on trying to build and strengthen the
ward system, because it is one of the smallest and closest units within a
community, where government and the community are able to make decisions
together.

In order to address the disparities between the urban and rural areas, we
have, as you know, the Rural Development Strategy. We identified the nodes
-  those areas that are the poorest districts in South Africa. Within those
areas we have devoted specific programmes and resources to addressing the
challenges at municipal level.

Of course, now, with the accelerated and shared - growth initiative, we are
not just looking at the economy growing, we are looking at how the growth
in the economy will be shared. Part of that is looking at how you can
support small towns so that whatever economic development and growth
ensues, we are able to ensure that these small towns and the rural areas
are also beneficiaries. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Deputy President, to what extent has the deployment of
community development workers addressed government’s failure to deliver at
local government level?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I don’t think that their deployment addresses the
failure, but is government’s recognition of the need to increase the
capacity of government to deliver. It is a considered lesson about the need
continuously to enhance our proximity to the people. It is about employment
creation, which I am sure we all appreciate, because it, in particular,
brings in young people who have a community concern to work within the
communities that they live in and love to serve.

Mr W P DOMAN: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. Deputy President, I
agree with you that local government is not for the faint-hearted, but,
apart from people who were not prepared to take on the challenges of the
new South Africa, we know of a lot of people who  are or were fully
committed to the new South Africa. I can think of one person who was so
active in the struggle that he was called a white communist in the previous
dispensation and he lost his position just because he was white.
[Interjections.]

So, I want to ask you: Will the government not consider asking the Minister
for Provincial and Local Government to do the same as the Minister of
Education, who has a list of all qualified teachers who are looking for
positions - she has such a list - and that the Minister for Provincial and
Local Government take a leaf out of that book and also compile such a list
of people who are willing to work, who have the skills, who were employed?
We as the DA will contribute quite a number of names. [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: We wouldn’t have a problem with that, hon member.
Just don’t come and infiltrate your people that you want to get rid of from
somewhere else. So, people must have a proven track record and a
willingness to serve. So we can happily talk about it.


                                 MINISTERS:





                      Innovative test for HIV infection


92.   Dr R Rabinowitz (IFP) asked the Minister of Health:


      (1)   Whether a test that detects HIV infection within the first three
           weeks has been identified; if not, what is the allegedly
           innovative test identified by scientists of Wits University
           working at a certain clinic (name furnished) in Johannesburg; if
           so, on what principle is the test based;


      (2)   whether the test has been accredited for general use; if not,
           what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the
           relevant details;


      (3)   whether the test detects HIV infection during the highly
           infectious window period; if not, what is the position in this
           regard; if so, what are the (a) relevant details and (b)
           implications of this test on the management and treatment of HIV
           and the prevention of Aids;


      (4)   (a) what is the cost of this test compared to the cost of
           standard HIV tests used in clinics and hospitals and (b) how
           does this test differ from the polymerise chain reaction used to
           identify the HIV virus?                 N1843E


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Question 92 has been asked by the hon
Dr R Rabinowitz to the Minister of Health. Unfortunately, the Minister of
Health was unable to be in the House owing to a family bereavement. She has
indicated that she will submit written responses.

        Progress in relation to Prestwich Street burial-grounds issue

85.   Mr M R Sonto (ANC) asked the Minister of Arts and Culture:
      Whether any progress has been made to harmonise the Prestwich issue;
      if not, why not; if so, (a) what progress and (b) what legislation has
      been put in place in this regard?       N1638E

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Prestwich
project committee appealed against the decision of the SA Heritage
Resources Agency that development on the Prestwich Street burial grounds
should continue.

In terms of section 49 of the National Heritage Resources Act, Act 25 of
1999, a tribunal was appointed to consider the appeal. The tribunal was
satisfied that consultations with the public and potentially interested and
affected persons and organisations were adequate and reasonable in the
circumstances and fulfilled the requirements of the National Heritage
Resources Act.

Sufficient notice had been taken of the need to balance the socio-economic
and scientific value of the find and its significance to the people of Cape
Town and South Africa.

The tribunal and the Department of Arts and Culture, therefore, support the
recommendation that the city of Cape Town, in consultation with SA Heritage
Resources Agency, should construct a suitable memorial park or garden on an
appropriate site in the Green Point area where the Prestwich Street remains
can be interred with any other further finds of human remains.
Such a park could become the focus of the community’s memory and learning
about the past. The Department of Arts and Culture supports the ruling of
the tribunal, as a reburial of the human remains will ensure that the
remains are properly protected while the memorial will ensure that these
people are remembered.

The memorial will be protected as a heritage site in terms of the National
Heritage Resources Act. Therefore, question (b) falls away. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Minister. Just before we proceed to the
follow-up questions, the level of noise is unbearable, hon members. There
are too many meetings taking place and those meetings have our blessings as
long as they take place outside the House. Thank you.

Mr M R SONTO: Thank you, Minister, for such an elaborate reply. Based on
that reply, Minister, would you agree that this reburial and memorial would
be an important link between the past and the present, such as in our
campaign to entrench a human rights culture in our country? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the reburial of the
remains of the corpses found at Prestwich Street, of course, is consistent
with the government’s policy, first of all, of showing respect to those who
have passed on and also in terms of preserving that past, or aspects of it,
for our heritage and as a means for our young people to learn about the
country’s past. Secondly, it’s also consistent with our human rights
culture. Thank you.

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Madam Deputy Speaker, given that emotions run high
around such incidents and the Minister has presumably referred the matter
to the South Africa Heritage Resources Agency, can he tell us what action
they have taken on this matter, or what SAHRA recommends be done, so that
this case is not dealt with on an ad hoc basis?

I accept the answer on the memorial park, but maybe the Minister can then
also tell us when it would be ready, so that in future others do not use
the same park, and this matter should not be dealt with on ad hoc basis.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I don’t think it’s
possible, at this juncture, to say that we would do this, that or the other
about human remains that are found. We first have to discover  what the
significance of such human remains is. For example, one could very easily
find human remains beneath this very Parliament, which used to be the site
of the grazing ground of the Gouriqua Qua tribe that Van Riebeeck found
here at the Cape. Now those people are not linked to the people who were
found at Prestwich Street.

We could very well also find human remains in areas such as Simon’s Town
and elsewhere, which are not necessarily linked; so one can’t make a
decision that all human remains will be treated in a specific way. You have
to treat them on an ad hoc basis because every case is different from the
other.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Minister. The hon Camerer said earlier
that it seems as though people are tired this afternoon. There are no other
questions for you.

   Infringement of rights of South African music artists by international
                                   artists

117.  Mrs N D Mbombo (ANC) asked the Minister of Arts and Culture:

      Whether, with reference to a media report (details furnished)
      regarding the infringement of music rights by international artists on
      South African music artists, the Government has any mechanisms in
      place for protecting and safeguarding our culture and folklore; if
      not, why not; if so, (a) what mechanisms and (b) how are they
      implemented?                                       N1878E

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the answer is
extremely long, so you will have to bear with me.

The question refers to the infringement of the music rights of South
African music artists by international artists. The case that I am
currently aware of is the one that involves Helmut Lotti, in a Belgian
court, to overturn the claim by Lotti that Jikel’emaweni and the click
song, known as uQongqothwane, originated from traditional folk songs and
not in the public domain.

These songs were made world famous by Miriam Makeba and were melodically
rearranged by Joe Mogotsi and the Manhattan Brothers. Apparently Helmut
Lotti’s version is based on Miriam Makeba’s version, as arranged by Joe
Mogotsi and the Manhattan Brothers.

Regarding the mechanisms to protect and safeguard the copyright of the
South African musicians at home and internationally, the hon member will
recall that in 2000 my predecessor instituted the music industry task team
to investigate various problems and challenges pertaining to the
development of the music industry.

The team was tasked to do the following: Firstly, to receive written
submissions from stakeholders, consult and recommend to the Ministry
various strategies that can be adopted to address the problems of the
industry; secondly, to examine the inadequacy of the legislative framework
governing the industry and to make recommendations; thirdly, to appraise
the various systems and instruments, such as contracts, piracy, recording,
distribution, publishing of music, royalty collection and distribution,
needle time, etc, and identify actions that would address problem areas;
and fourthly, provide advice to government on its role in the industry and
advise on any other action.

The music industry task team presented 37 recommendations, which can be
grouped, as follows: developing and/or implementing an effective and
enabling legislative framework; human resource development, education and
training in the music industry; economic growth of the music industry;
promotion and development of the music industry.

Some of the recommendations of the music industry task team relate directly
to the line function of the Department of Arts and Culture, while many
aspects relate to the functions of other government departments, the
private sector, trade unions and civil society. Copyright matters relate to
the function of the Department of Trade and Industry.

My understanding is that the DTI has subsequently amended certain
legislation in our copyright regime, as follows: The Copyright Amendment
Act of 2002 and the Performers’ Protection Amendment Act of 2002. The
former law broadens the definition of the performer to protect unscripted
performances that make use of folk songs and oral tradition, while the
latter secures the right of the musician to be paid when their music is
broadcast or performed live.

Further to that, my department, together with the Legal Aid Board, is in
the process of establishing a legal aid facility to assist musicians and
artist in general with legal support on matters pertaining to copyright
infringements and to advise them on contractual issues. Thank you.

Nkskz N D MBOMBO: Sekela-Somlomo, mnye umbuzo wam kuJolinkomo [uMphathiswa
wezeNkcubeko noBugcisa]. Ndiyayibulela nenkcazo oyinikileyo, Mphathiswa,
iyandonelisa. Kodwa ke ndisenombuzwana nje.

Abanye baba bantu babhubha, beshiya amaculo abo eculwa ngabanye abantu,
abangahlobenanga nabo, nabaxhamlayo ngawo. Ngaba iintsapho zabo
singazinceda njani na ukuze nazo kubekho uchatha eziwufumanayo ngamaculo
ooyisemkhulu okanye ooyise? Singazazisa njani ezi ntsapho ukuba zinalo
ilungelo lokuba nazo zixhamle ngamaculo aqanjwa ngoomama okanye ngootata
bazo? Ndiyabulela. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N D MBOMBO: Deputy Speaker, I have one question for Jolinkomo, the hon
Minister of Arts and Culture, if I may, please. I would like to thank you,
hon Minister, for the answer you have supplied. I am satisfied. The
following is my question.

Some of the writers of these songs have since died and other people who are
not even blood-related to them sing the songs and receive benefit from
them. I am wondering whether there is a way by which they could receive
benefits from the songs that their grandfathers wrote. How can we make the
families of the people who wrote those songs aware of their rights so that
they can make claims for the songs and hymns that were written by their
mothers or fathers? Thank you.]

UMPHATHISWA WEZENKCUBEKO NOBUGCISA: Sekela-Somlomo, ndiyabulela kudad’
ethu. Ukuba umntu unosapho, kwaye engabhalanga myolelo othi iimali zam
endizizuza ngamaculo am maziye kusapho lwam, kungenzeka ukuba olo sapho
lulahlekelwe.

Kodwa ke noba kunjalo, ngoku sizama ukuba sibe neqela lamagqwetha aza
kumela nokucebisa abantu ababhala amacula kunye nabo benza umculo. Loo
magqwetha aza kuzama ukucebisa iintsapho zaba bantu malunga namalungelo
abo. Ndikuphendule? Kuyavakala? [Kwahlekwa.]

USEKELA-SOMLOMO: Kuyavakala, Mphathiswa. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to
thank my sister for her question. If one has a family and one does not
state in one’s will that the proceeds one receives from the music should go
to one’s family, the family may lose those benefits.

Notwithstanding that, we are trying to ensure that there is a team of
lawyers whose function would be to represent the interests of musicians as
well as to advise them. That legal team would also advise their families
with regard to their rights. Have I answered you? Can you feel it?
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is very clear, hon Minister.]

Mev D VAN DER WALT: Adjunkspeaker, ek wil graag vir die Minister vra: Die
DA steun die regering in die beskerming en bewaring van die volkskunde van
al ons kultuurgroepe in ons land, maar wat ons egter van die Minister wil
weet, is of die regering, en veral hy in sy posisie as beskermheer van
kultuursake, waarborg dat die Afrikaanse volksoorleweringe – wat een van
ons inheemse kultuurgroepe is – gelykwaardig saam met die ander
kultuurgroepe beskerm en bewaar sal word, en dat dit nie net lippetaal sal
wees nie?

Die MINISTER VAN KUNS EN KULTUUR: Aangesien die Grondwet sê ons is almal
gelyk, dink ek daardie vraag word deur die Grondwet beantwoord. Baie
dankie. [Gelag.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Deputy Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister the
following: The DA supports the government in the protection and
conservation of the ethnology of all of our cultural groups in our country,
but what we want to know from the Minister is whether the government, and
especially he in his position as custodian of cultural matters, guarantees
that the Afrikaans folklore – which is that of one of our indigenous
cultural groups – will receive equal protection and conservation along with
the other cultural groups and that mere lip service will not be paid to
this.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Seeing that the Constitution states that
we are all equal, I think that question is answered by the Constitution.
Thank you very much. [Laughter.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. Would you like a second bite? You
may even go for a third, because, seemingly, you are the only one who is ’n
bietjie wakker [a little awake] in the House this afternoon.

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Adjunkspeaker, ek het geweet dit is wat die Minister
gaan antwoord, maar ek het vir hom gesê dit moet nie net lippetaal wees
nie. Ek wil weet hoe hy dit in werking gaan stel, want dikwels staan die
ANC-regering op en sê daar is niks fout nie, ons diskrimineer nie teen
julle nie. Maar, wat ons ervaar is die teenoorgestelde.

Die MINISTER VAN KUNS EN KULTUUR: As die agb lid vir my een instansie kan
gee waar daar diskriminering is teen die Afrikanervolk, kan ek miskien
antwoord.

Die vorige keer wat ek met die agb lid gepraat het oor Afrikaans, het ek
haar ’n boekie gegee - ’n bloemlesing van poësie - wat deur ’n lid van die
ANC in Afrikaans geskryf is. Dit is hoe ons Afrikaans aanvul, het ek aan
haar daardie keer vertel. En dít is nogsteeds my standpunt.

Ons wil in Afrikaans skryf en boeke in Afrikaans vertaal om te verseker dat
mense wat Afrikaanssprekend is ook deelneem aan die nuwe Suid-Afrika. Dis
hoe ons Afrikaans aanvul. Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT:  Deputy Speaker, I knew that was what the Minister was
going to say, but I told him that it should not be mere lip service. I want
to know how he is going to put this into operation, because the ANC
government often stands up and says there is nothing wrong, we are not
discriminating against you. But we are experiencing the contrary.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: If the member is able to give me one
instance of discrimination against the Afrikaner people, I may be able to
answer.

On the previous occasion when I spoke to the hon member regarding
Afrikaans, I gave her a booklet - an anthology of poetry - that was written
in Afrikaans by a member of the ANC. That is how we are supplementing to
Afrikaans, I told her at the time. And that remains my position.

We want to write in Afrikaans and translate our books into Afrikaans to
ensure that people who are Afrikaans-speaking also take part in the new
South Africa. That is how we are supplementing Afrikaans. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]]

        Attracting skilled and experienced teachers back to teaching

97.   Mr G G Boinamo (DA) asked the Minister of Education:

      (1)   Whether any process has been put in place to encourage teachers
           who took retrenchment packages in the 1990s to return to
           teaching; if not, (a) why not and (b) what is being done to
           attract skilled and experienced teachers back to teaching; if
           so, what (i) process has been put in place for this purpose and
           (ii) success has been achieved;


      (2)   whether there are any legal or administrative problems related
           to rehiring teachers who have been retrenched in the past; if
           so, what are the relevant details?      N1852E


The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, you didn’t announce the
hon Dudley’s crossing of the floor. [Laughter.] I am not sure if you missed
her.

The response to Question 97 is as follows, with respect to both part one
and two . . .

Ke araba potso ya gago ntate, ke kopa gore o ntheetse. [I am answering your
question, sir, could you please listen.]
At no stage was any teacher retrenched, but some teachers elected to take a
voluntary severance package in 1996. This voluntary severance package was
made available as a measure to effect equity within the education system.
One of the conditions of the package was that educators were prohibited
from reappointment in a permanent capacity in the public education system.
However, there was no prohibition on voluntary severance-package teachers
being appointed to schools in a temporary capacity.

We have looked at this matter and I believe that the prohibition on
permanent appointment no longer serves the purpose for which it was
intended. I believe, therefore, that we should reconsider this prohibition,
particularly in regard to teachers with scarce skills.

The department is also in the process of investigating the introduction of
incentives to attract and retain teachers with scarce skills. Part of the
strategy that is being developed will be aimed at recruiting student
teachers and creating more favourable career pathing. Thank you.

Mr G G BOINAMO: Madam Deputy Speaker, arising out of the Minister’s reply,
are educators who took severance packages included in the register of
unemployed educators compiled by her department? And how many qualified
maths and science educators are included in this register? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, the scarce-skills list
that we have been drawing up does not include teachers who have taken this
voluntary severance package. Regarding the number of qualified
mathematicians, we have a figure of around 1 390 on our list at the moment.
Those are teachers who are not employed, but have degrees which would allow
them to teach the subject.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Deputy Speaker, I think that our hon Minister has already
answered some of my questions. I was going to ask a question on
retrenchment. Nevertheless, hon Minister, I am going to ask this question:
Will the voluntary severance package effect in any way the earnings and
other incentives, should these teachers come back? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that what we have
to do is first develop the policy and then look at what the detail of the
policy will be. As you know, if you have accepted a voluntary severance
package, it is very difficult to take you back into the Public Service with
the same kinds of benefits, but you shouldn’t be disadvantaged in terms of
our Constitution and so on.

Therefore it is a matter that we really need to reflect on in quite a
serious fashion and we need to be far more careful and analytical in terms
of our utilisation of such a strategy if we develop it as a new approach.

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Deputy Speaker, it is common cause, Mr Minister … Madam
Minister, that the transformation of education has seen a number of
teachers wishing to leave the system without necessarily being compelled to
do so. At the same time there was the introduction of a new educational
system, the outcomes-based education system. In that regard, obviously,
some of the teachers who had been in the system for a very long time and
who came from the past curriculum would have wished to leave.

In light of the new crop of teachers who have been produced through the new
system of OBE, is it possible, Madam Minister, that the department can
actually renege on its responsibility to take on the new teachers, most
particularly those who have qualified in subjects such as science,
mathematics and economics, which we know are the type of subjects that we
need? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Hon member, the statement that the department
has a responsibility to take on teachers is not actually confirmed by our
current law, because the departments do not play a particular role in
deciding what category of teachers you take on in terms of the current
framework. So it is difficult to respond to the question as you set it out.

You are correct that the policy that was adopted in 1996-97 intended to
correct a historical inequality, but I think what we are saying is that
sometimes a policy could have unintended consequences. And the
responsibility I have, as Madam Minister and not Mr Minister, although I
have a new haircut, is to ensure that we provide educators who can respond
to the imperatives of education that we wish to promote.

I think that part of our challenge is that we have not really attracted
young people to take on an education degree in the critical skills areas.
The technical, technology and management subjects we have introduced in
schools are a problem area and we really need to ensure that we have
adequately trained people who can handle these subjects. But I believe that
there is a great deal of opportunity in education, and we are improving the
conditions of service so that, increasingly, this career will become one of
choice and attractive to young people.

     Request to provide residents of Bushbuckridge North with water from
                                Klaserie Dam

112.  Mr M W Sibuyana (IFP) asked the Minister of Water Affairs and
      Forestry:

      Whether a request to provide the residents of Bushbuckridge North with
      water from the Klaserie Dam is being considered; if not, why not; if
      so, what are the relevant details?      N1873E

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Deputy Speaker, the reply to
the question that the hon member asked is as follows. While considering the
use of the Klaserie Dam would be a good idea for water supply to the area
mentioned, the Inyaka Dam is, in fact, a better option as a source,
according to our research.

The answer to the question is, no, the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry is not considering supplying the residents of Bushbuckridge, North
Acorn Hoek area, with water from the Klaserie Dam. The construction of a
water pipeline to transfer water from Inyaka Dam to Acorn Hoek, which will
provide for their water needs, commenced during the 2004-05 financial year
and is 50% complete.

It is expected that the pipeline will begin delivering water to the area
during 2006. The total cost will be in excess of R30 million. Thank you,
Deputy Speaker.

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, are you in
a position to tell the residents of Acorn Hoek or Bushbuckridge North when
they will be able to access water from Inyaka Dam, seeing that even now
Inyaka Dam is failing to provide enough water for the people of Dwarsloop?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: As already indicated in my
initial response, hon member, we are delivering in 2006. I can get the
details on the exact month and date, and then I can supply the hon member,
who is not listening, but is busy chatting with a lady next to him. I don’t
know what’s happening. Maybe the hon member wants to marry this lady.
[Laughter.]

Thank you, I caught your attention because I spoke about marriage. I am
saying that I can supply you with the details of the day in which we are
going to deliver on this.

Mr G G BOINAMO: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, clearly,
there is an acute shortage of educators in this country. The fact that
there are 500 schools in Limpopo . . .

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are dealing with water affairs. [Laughter.]

Mr D K MALULEKE: Deputy Speaker, during our oversight visit to Nelspruit,
Mpumalanga, we were informed that the Working for Water programme, which is
focusing mainly on removing evasive alien species, has employed 3 000
people, 60% of whom are women, 5% of whom are disabled persons and 35% are
youth. It has been regarded as a success, because it managed to get rid of
alien species and nonperennial streams.

However, the programme is faced with the following challenges. Contractors
want to remain in the system even when they have completed their training.
There have been allegations of corruption, nepotism and fronting. The exit
policy has been ignored. Would the Minister give assurance to this House
that she is going to look into the matter and do something about it?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Thank you very much, hon
member, for the question, although I would really appreciate it if you
could table it as a new question. There are serious problems with the
programme that need my attention. We are busy trying to restructure the
Working for Water programme, so that broad-based Black Economic Empowerment
also benefits from that particular programme.

There is a lot that needs to be done. What I was busy with was saving the
Working for Water programme from being transferred from the Department of
Water Affairs and Forestry to the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism. Now that that project is behind me, I will be able to focus on the
actual functioning of the Working for Water programme. I would really
appreciate it if you could table this as a new question. Thank you.
Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, in fact, I was going to follow on the
hon member who spoke about the Klaseri Dam. I just wanted to thank the
Minister for her reply, which was short and to the point. I hope that the
opposition is now aware that the ANC-led government is serving all the
people of Bushbuckridge and not just those in small villages. They should
know that.

Ntate ya neng a botsa potso eo o hodile, mme o a tseba ka mokgwa oo re neng
re sokola ka teng matamo e le a bona, ba na le diirrigation schemes, mme
batho ba sa fumane metsi. [The gentleman who asked that question is old
enough to know how we struggled. The dams were theirs, they had irrigation
schemes and people did not get water.]

In fact, Madam Minister, I have just learnt, with pride, that Inyaka Dam
has the capacity to feed the people around there. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I can
just, maybe, give an indication of the number of people who will benefit
from the Inyaka Dam scheme. There are 573 000 people who will benefit from
the project, hon member. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Indeed, people are not in the mood for asking questions
this afternoon. We now pass that, with that slot that was not taken. The
level of noise is so high that I thought someone was addressing me. The
question from D M Morobi is as follows:

                    Rolling out of transformation charter


  88. Mof D M Morobi (ANC) o tla botsa Letona la tsa Dipapadi le Boithabiso:

      Na ebe lefapha la hae le ikemiseditse ho atolosetsa tokomane ya
      phetoho ho fihlela mekgahlelong e fapaneng ya mmuso le setjhabeng; ha
      ho se jwalo, lebaka ke lefe; ha ho le jwalo, seo se tla etsahala neng?
                                        N1747S
(Translation of Sesotho question follows.)

[88.  Mrs D M Morobi (ANC) asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

      Whether his department intends rolling out the transformation charter
      to the various levels of government and the communities; if not, why
      not; if so, when?                       N1747E]

O tla botsa Letona la tsa Dipapadi le Boithabiso. Letona re kopa o re
arabe. [We will ask the Minister of Sport and Recreation. Minister, please
give us the reply.]

The question is put in Sesotho, so I have to put it that way too. Thank you
for your understanding of Sesotho, Minister Stofile.
The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: We try, Madam Deputy Speaker, but
fortunately it was translated into English.

The answer to the question is, yes, we will be continuing our endeavours to
consult everybody and take everybody on board in the development of this
transformation charter. It will not only reside with the spheres of
government, it will also involve the sectors of society - not only the
federations, but indeed every sector of society.

At the end of that process it will go back to all the constituencies that
gave inputs to the development of the charter in the first place. However,
we want to report that the process is still far from being completed. The
charter was discussed at the Technical Intergovernmental Committee, the
TIC, meeting which took place on 1 and 2 September 2005, where it was
agreed that a special TIC meeting will be held on 26 September, next week,
where the charter will be unpacked further for the understanding of
everybody.

The provinces will then hold provincial indabas with their provincial and
local constituencies to discuss the draft charter. They will give feedback
on the outcomes of the provincial indaba. The charter will then be taken
back to the Minmec and the Minister will be able to approve it or
disapprove of it. But as I say, the process is still far from completion.

Mof D M MOROBI: Ke a leboha, Motlatsi wa Sepikara. Ke a leboha, Mohlomphehi
Letona, ka karabo e batsi. Ho totobetse hore ka nnete tokomane ena e sa le
hole le ho qetwa, hobane ha re ntse re nkile maeto a dikomiti ho ya
mabatoweng, re hlokometse hore ha ho na batho ba tsebang letho ka tokomane
ena. Jwale ke ne ke kopa letona hore mohlomong le ka hlalosetsa Ntlo ena
hore ebe mohla tokomane ena e seng e ya tshebetsong, ebe ho tla ba le
malebaleba a ho tiisa hore tokomane ena ya phetoho e tla kenngwa
tshebetsong. Na ho tla ba le tiiso ya hore matla (capacity) a tla ba teng
mabatoweng hore e finyelle setjhabeng? Ke a leboha. (Translation of Sotho
paragraph follows.)

[Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Thank you, hon Minister, for your broad
answer. It is clear that this document is indeed far from finalised,
because when we, as committees pay visits to regions, we realise that
nobody knows about this document. Now, I would like to ask the hon Minister
to explain to this House whether, when it is time for the implementation of
this document, there will be strategies to ensure that this document will
be implemented. Will there be confirmation that regions will have the
capacity to make it accessible to the community? Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Deputy Speaker, I want to first make
a confession. I am not a big fan of documents such as this one, because
they are not justifiable. You can have as many charters as you like and you
file them in as many shelves as you like, there is no compelling mechanism
to have them implemented. For that reason, I really don’t have a great
appetite for these kinds of documents.

The consultative process wants a charter for transformation, and if the
people want it, the people must have it. When will it be completed? As soon
as we get the feedback from all these consultative fora that we are sending
the documents to.

I agree with the comrade that many people would not know about it, because
there is a serious syndrome in our communities, that is, the syndrome of
not attending meetings. It does not have to do with the charter, it has to
do with the IDPs, it has to do with ward meetings and it has to do with
every meeting. People simply do not attend meetings. They will attend the
meeting if it is convened by a person with a famous name. There will be a
number of people who would not have attended those meetings and indeed, who
would not be aware of the existence of this discussion. We urge them to do
come to those meetings. We also urge the members of this House to talk to
their constituencies during the constituency weeks and urge them to make
contributions to this charter, because it must belong to all of us.

Mr T D LEE: Deputy Speaker, Mr Minister, transformation does not mean
fighting your brother’s cause to become the president of SARU. That is
called nepotism. Children do not play sports with charters. They need bats
and balls, they need training, they need coaching, and they need playing
fields to play on, Mr Minister.

My question to you, Mr Minister, is when are you going to supply such tools
to our children? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Thank you very much, Mr Lee. I was
looking forward to you raising the question of nepotism. First of all, my
brother - whether he wants to be president of SARU or not, that is his
business. Secondly, the dictionary meaning of “nepotism” - may I ask you to
go and look at it – is “to take a favourable position towards your relative
in appointing them”.

I don’t appoint presidents of any federation in this country. So, the
reference to nepotism is completely inappropriate. It is misuse of the
English language, or shall I say of the Latin language, by people who do
not understand what the term means. They are just trying to take a cheap
shot at me. I am above that, believe me, I am above that.

My brother was elected in a general council meeting of the SA Rugby
Football Union in 2003, and I was not a delegate at that meeting. Yes,
Brian van Rooyen was also elected as president of that rugby union and he,
in his capacity as the president of that union, appointed the Heunis
Commission to investigate allegations against him. His appointed
investigators have confirmed all these allegations.

Now that has nothing to do with nepotism, it has to do with corruption, Mr
Lee. I put it to you, because you raised it in the past, that we were
chasing Mr Van Rooyen because he was coloured. Now I put it to the DA: Are
you protecting coloured persons when they are corrupt, irrespective of the
corruption? If you do not, then you must support the Heunis findings and
say to Mr Van Rooyen: “The honourable thing to do is for you to recuse
yourself and allow the investigation to be completed. That is what we stand
for, irrespective of which party, or what colour, or whatever your . . .
[Inaudible.] . . . relationships.” Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chairperson, the hon Minister has
managed to create a lot of sound, light and anger about the matter and that
enabled him to evade the proper issue, which is: Children need bats, they
need balls, they need coaching and they need rugby fields and cricket
fields.

The Minister spends all his time with charters, ideologies and politics of
these sports, instead of focusing on giving our children, right across the
spectrum, the opportunity of becoming good at these sports. When is he
going to focus his attention on the real thing and stop playing politics
with sport?

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Chairperson, I don’t know
what’s wrong with the members of the DA these days - they were not always
like this. [Interjections.] We have been distributing equipment to our
children since Adam.

Last Saturday . . .

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: No! South Africa is not just your
area. South Africa is much bigger than that. [Applause.] We will not be
dragooned into favouring particular members. We will take our decisions on
the basis of the backlogs and on the basis of the needs of the people, as
identified by themselves and by us. We have been distributing all those
things.

As a matter of fact, we are distributing a whole lot of equipment next week
to a number of codes and communities. You must come and be part of this and
stop misquoting Shakespeare in this House [Laughter.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chairperson, I have a follow-up question. Minister, do you
have any information on whether the hon Gibson and the hon Lee ever played
any kind of sport? Do you have any information regarding that?
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: I have no idea. As you will remember,
if Mr Gibson played sport, he would have played it in white suburbs where I
was not allowed to go and watch him . . . [Laughter.] . . . and he enjoyed
it. [Applause.] I also do not have any idea if either Mr Gibson or Mr Lee
has ever gone to his constituency and assisted them in applying for the
municipal infrastructure grant to provide all the things they are talking
about.

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, that was neither a follow-
up question, nor a follow-up answer. Thank you very much.

       Recruitment of mentors for inexperienced senior municipal staff

93.   Mr M M Swathe (DA) asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:

      (1)   Whether the Government will undertake to first recruit mentors
          for inexperienced senior municipal staff from amongst South
          African citizens who have the relevant local government
          experience prior to seeking mentors from abroad; if not, (a) why
          not and (b) what factors were taken into consideration in
          deciding that international experience is more useful than local
          experience; if so, what are the relevant details;
          (2)    whether any mentors recruited from overseas will have to
          be black; if not, what criteria will be used in recruiting
          international mentors; if so, why?                        N1848E


The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I’d
like to bring to your attention the fact that this question has now been
asked for the third time in this House. It has been posed to the President,
the Deputy President and now to the Minister for Provincial and Local
Government. Nevertheless, I will answer it.

The answer to the first part of the question is yes, government will first
seek suitably qualified persons locally before recruiting skilled people
from outside the country.

The answer to the second part of the question is “no”. Skills, relevant
knowledge and experience will be some of the criteria that will be used
when recruiting mentors. Thank you.

Mr M M SWATHE: Thank you very much, Deputy Chairperson. Deputy Minister,
the need to recruit mentors from India is a clear admission that many
municipal managers cannot perform their duties, despite earning exorbitant
salaries and receiving performance bonuses. How much will it cost the South
African taxpayer to recruit, train and pay these mentors from overseas?
Thank you very much. [Interjections.]
The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, this
is a new question. He can put it again, to be included in the Question
Paper. This is a completely new question. [Interjections.]

Mr B M SOLO: Chairperson, I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for the
response she gave and the comment she made. The ANC has at all times
expressed its commitment to fighting racism and any form of discrimination
based on colour or race. We have a history of racism in this country, which
we all know about, and which needs to be corrected. We note that some
people are a factory fault. Anyway, we ask questions because we have been
told to ask them. It is true, sometimes, that . . .

. . . baneendlebe nje, kodwa abeva, baqinile. [ . . .they have ears but
they are deaf. They are stubborn.]

 . . . and we shall continue responding to these questions. Deputy
Minister, to demonstrate that charity begins at home, could you assure this
House that your department is going to engage with all relevant
organisations, such as the Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut and others, to
assist in identifying people with skills who can either do mentoring or
fill some of the vacant posts? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Hon member, I
would like to reassure you and emphasise what the President has also said,
that government is willing to engage all institutions and all stakeholders
that actually interact with DPLG. There is the legacy of the past that we
need to address. We can’t simply move on as if nothing happened in the
past. We have to address the past imbalances.
In terms of the state, I think some people are fighting for the status quo
to continue. In terms of factory faults, hon member, I agree with you that
there are some issues that we would refer to as factory faults. I’d like to
reassure hon members that at local government level we have started with
the process of engaging many other individuals from the private sector in
order for them to assist with capacity-building. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr W P DOMAN: Thank you, Chair. Deputy Minister, we agree with the hon Solo
that we must fully take our past into consideration and, of course, there
are new municipal managers that are performing very well. It is just a pity
that he had to be so patronising regarding  the question that was put. I
want to ask you what role Seta will play in mentoring? Isn’t it their task
to deal with this mentoring in local government?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I
have already alluded to the fact that we have invited all stakeholders. In
government, we will work as a collective and not as individual departments.
As government, we will utilise all those who are, in fact, affected by
capacity-building.

I also think that to say that when we refer to our past, we should refer to
it in isolation is a bit aggressive. I think this is very negative and
aggressive. Thank you, Chairperson. [Interjections.]

Mr A C STEYN: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Deputy Minister, will you give us
an indication of whether the remuneration and performance packages of the
officials who will receive mentors will be reviewed, in light of the fact
that they will have a mentor to do their jobs for them?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Chair, I
think that government will be tabling a Bill very soon that will review the
remuneration of the affected municipal managers. What we want to share with
members is the fact that municipalities have the right to pay their
municipal managers what they can afford. Government at national and
provincial levels cannot interfere in that. What we are saying is that we
do have a Bill that will look at the remuneration of such municipal
managers, which will be tabled in Parliament. Thank you.


      Task team investigating the possible reduction of public holidays


129.  Mr I S Mfundisi (UCDP) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      (1)   Whether the task team set up to investigate the possibility of
          reducing public holidays has completed its assignment; if not,
          what is the cause of the delay; if so, when will the report be
          made available to the public;


      (2)   whether she will make a statement on the matter?   N1840E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chair, the answer to the question is,
yes, the task team has completed its assignment. The Minister expects to
receive the report shortly and she will make a statement upon receipt of
the report. Thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Thank you, Chairperson. Whilst we appreciate that the
report has been received, perhaps you could nevertheless answer this
question … Captains of industry, economists and the government, through the
Public Service Commission, have indicated that people go on holiday and
then take leave either a day before or after a public holiday. Has the
government, or will the Ministry, consider trying to pin some holidays to a
Friday to make it easier for people, so that productivity will not be
affected that negatively? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon member. Just a
correction: I did not say that the report had been received. I said the
task team had completed its work. The Minister awaits the report and upon
receipt of the report – soon – the Minister will make a statement. Now,
regarding the problems that confront the captains of industry and so on, I
am unable to pre-empt what will arise from the report. Once we receive the
report, we will study it and make the necessary determination following
proper procedures. But for now, if captains of industry have a problem with
their workers leaving a day earlier, that honestly cannot be the problem of
government.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, the problem is that most
public holidays fall close to a weekend. This tends to lead to many people
taking an extra-long weekend as you’ve heard the hon member from the UCDP
say. Has the task team given any consideration to providing for public
holidays perhaps to always fall on a Friday or a Monday to limit the
disruption to the economy? A comment from you on this would be useful,
although, as you say, you haven’t studied the report.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Chairperson, with your
permission I would like to reread the answer that I read earlier. The task
team has completed its assignment. The Minister expects to receive the
report shortly and then she will make a statement.

Now, the public holidays change every year. The 16th may be on Friday this
year and next year on Monday, or on any other day. The problems that people
confront with regards to their employees cannot be solved by legislation,
by decree, by policy, or by anything. We cannot create new holidays to
accommodate the fact that people, if a holiday falls on a Thursday, want to
leave on Wednesday and not be back at work on Friday. We honestly can’t. I
would like to request hon members to reconsider the follow-up questions
they had prepared before we gave the answer, because the answer I’ve given
- that the report has not yet been received - must surely impact upon the
questions that people have prepared. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you. Order! The hon Swart is
next. Please take note of what was said by the Deputy Minister.

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Chair. Hon Deputy Minister, I take to heart what
you’ve just said and therefore I ask this question in a lighter vein. I
appreciate that you have not read the task team’s report, but can you and
the Minister give us the assurance that you will not become a grinch and
steal Christmas? Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you. You needn’t respond. Thank
you very much. Christmas is safe.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Deputy Minister, I just want to find out if you know why
this commission was set up, because this was done during the previous
Parliament? Has the former Minister told you why this task team was set up?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon member. As soon as the
task team’s report is received, we will consider all of that. We in the
department are in the process of studying the rest of the legislation and
policies that fall within the department to determine whether any of them
need to be reviewed. I think that when we have done that in a comprehensive
manner, we will be able to interrogate all of them regarding their
relevance, the reason why they have to be the way they are, and then we
will make the necessary determinations. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you very much, hon Deputy
Minister. You can see that that was an issue of great seriousness for the
House.

              Developmental thrust of food emergency programme

121.  Mrs T J Tshivhase (ANC) asked the Minister of Social Development:

      Whether the developmental thrust of the food emergency programme is
      being realised, with specific reference to linking beneficiaries with
      agricultural starter packs that will enable them to produce their own
      food; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the
      relevant details?            N1927E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, the answer to the
question is as follows. The food emergency relief programme is a
subprogramme of the integrated food security and nutrition programme, of
which the Department of Agriculture remains the overall convener.

The developmental thrust of the national food emergency scheme was centred
on two objectives, namely the provision of agricultural equipment and
starter packs for household food gardens – this is an income-generation
initiative – and, secondly, the linkage to community production centres for
sustainability and the ultimate independence of beneficiaries.

The provision of agricultural equipment and starter packs to households in
terms of the national food emergency scheme programme is the role and
responsibility of the Department of Agriculture. However, the Department of
Agriculture could not come on board, citing as their reason that there was
no budget for this activity.

With regard to the second objective of linking households to community
production centres, the department has established and supports 22 drop-in
centres in all nine provinces. Drop-in centres are physical structures
where a comprehensive range of services is rendered with the specific focus
on meeting the needs of children, orphans, women, the frail and the
terminally ill.

This, in effect, is done through the provision of emotional support to the
beneficiaries by social workers. In addition, the beneficiaries are also
referred to the necessary departments for possible application for social-
security grants and for other assistance and support.

The short-term support rendered includes the provision of immediate food
relief in the form of food parcels, school-feeding schemes and soup
kitchens. Long-term plans for sustainability of the drop-in centres include
creating an enabling environment for sustainable income-generation
projects, skills transfer for entrepreneurship development among
beneficiaries and the implementation of food gardens. Thank you, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Tshivhase? Hon Nzimande, I first
have to give an opportunity to the person who put the question. I have your
name on my list. I am looking for the hon Tshivhase.

Mr L P M NZIMANDE: Hon Chairperson, she’s not in the House. I’m asking a
follow-up question on her behalf.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you very much. Please continue.

Mr L P M NZIMANDE: Thank you, hon Chairperson, and thank you for your
response, Deputy Minister. We committed ourselves to a developmental state
to be able to take our people on board in the fight against poverty and to
make sure that they themselves took of the cause of alleviating the
circumstances of poverty and also of promoting self-reliance.

I would like to know, in terms of the work of the department and, of
course, having seen the work through the drop-in centres, whether people
are taking up the call. We have been consistently making the call through
campaigns like Vukuzenzele and many others, encouraging our people to stand
up and participate in all the social developmental programmes that
government offers.

I’d like to know if the call is indeed being heeded by our people and if
they are being encouraged by state officials to make sure that they
participate.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Nzimande, via the Chair, in
the various provinces I have seen projects in terms of which vulnerable
youths are taught skills to make furniture – this is taken right up to the
point of export. In other cases, there are women doing crafts and selling
those crafts. There is even a project where disabled people are making
coffins.

Some of these projects have become the best-practice models for countries
in Africa – like Angola, for example, which we recently visited. This is
because we have developed a best-practice model for dealing with the
disabled and making them self-sufficient – being able to provide for
themselves through business and entrepreneurship.

So, I think, yes, our people are taking it up and, of course, the more
partnerships there are with NGOs and business, the more sustainable these
projects can become.

Ms H WEBER: Madam Chair, could the hon Deputy Minister give us the
assurance that emergency food will be given to the poorest of the poor in
an organised manner and not be used as a political ploy to get votes?
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, I don’t believe  that
question actually warrants an answer. The answer is obvious – that we try
our best. The disorder that has been created is not with regard to
political tools. The disorder that was created with regard to food parcels
was around the conflict that they caused within communities. This conflict
could never really be satisfied by the handing out of food parcels, because
you can never reach each and every hungry person.

That is why our department is much more in favour of creating sustainable
projects; not encouraging a dependency syndrome, but rather teaching people
or giving people access to the knowledge to be able to sustain themselves.
Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chair. Hon Deputy Minister, starter packs are
very good. They encourage our communities to fend for themselves. In fact,
I agree with the hon Nzimande when he says that they tie up with
Vukuzenzele – to get up and do it yourself.

I just want to know, Deputy Minister, whether a follow-up takes place to
see if further assistance is required by the people who implement this
project, when these starter packs are given out to the various communities.
Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, the way in which we
implement these projects is in an integrated way, working with other tiers
of government within the province and also at local government level.
Follow-ups do take place at the provincial and local government levels to
ensure that people succeed with food gardens. Social workers also visit
people. So, yes, definitely. Thank you.

   Sale by Deeds Office of title deeds containing confidential information
113.  Ms I Mars (IFP) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      (1)   Whether her department has been informed that the Deeds Office
          sells copies of title deeds which include the identity numbers of
          the buyer and seller; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (2)   whether her department supports this practice; if not, why not;
          if so, what are the relevant details;


      (3)   whether her department keeps track of who buys this confidential
          information; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
          details;


      (4)   whether the fact that such confidential information is so easily
          available increases the risk of identity theft; if not, what is
          the position is this regard; if so, what is being done to ensure
          that this information is not used for illegal purposes?
                                  1874E


The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Chairperson, no, title deeds
are public records and copies are made available to members of the public
upon payment of a fee.

The answer to the second part of the question is, “yes”. This practice is
necessary to ensure the validity and reliability of information regarding
persons or parties to transactions involving title deeds.

The reply to the third part of the question is as follows. Currently the
department doesn’t keep track of such information, but we are investigating
the possible implications of such a practice on the integrity and security
of identification. Upon completion of such an investigation we will engage
the relevant department and make a statement in this regard.

The answer to the fourth part of the question is: As you are all aware,
identity documents are normally made available by their holders upon
request by various institutions and organisations, both in the public and
the private sectors. Once the department has fulfilled the primary
responsibility to protect the processing and distribution of IDs, the
overall responsibility to ensure that they are not used for illegal
purposes lies with the law-enforcement agencies, working together with
members of the public or any other person with such information. Thank you.

Mrs I MARS: Chairperson, let me thank the Deputy Minister. I just want to
emphasise some of the questions we actually raised. Today I noticed a
newspaper headline reading: “SA fake IDs out of control”. However, the fact
is that they appear to be our genuine IDs, which are used with criminal
intent. Now we have the Deeds Office supplying personal ID data by direct
computer link to consumer-based companies at a price.

Whilst we support partnerships between the government and private
enterprise, we believe that this particular issue is going a little too far
in view of chapter two of our Constitution, which protects the privacy of
communication. Will the Minister give this matter further consideration? I
thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chair, hon member, thank you very
much. We surely will and are doing exactly that. I would like to reassure
this House that the South African identity document is not in a crisis.
Sure, we do have a problem with regard to attempts to forge our documents,
but it happens in other countries too. There are many people all over the
world who are trying to forge identity documents for whatever purpose and
South Africa is not unique in this regard.

But the South African identity document is in no crisis and in no danger at
all. Indeed we, as a department, are involved in means to further protect
or tighten the security of the production and distribution of our identity
documents in order to ensure that no person is able to access our identity
documents fraudulently and illegally.

We have even taken legal steps, as a department, to investigate and punish
people, within and outside the department, who are involved in such scams.
So we want to reassure all of you that the South African identity document
is in no danger and no crisis. Certainly, hon member, we will pay attention
to the genuine issues that you are raising. Thank you.

  Financial backing for local government in developing sport and recreation
                                 facilities

  87. Mof D M Morobi (ANC) o tla botsa Letona la tsa Dipapadi le Boithabiso:

      Na Sport and Recreation South Africa e na le maano a ho thusa mebuso
      ya selehae ka ditshehetso tsa ditjhelete, ka sepheo sa ho ntshetsapele
      disebediswa le mananeo a dipapadi le boithabiso setjhabeng; ha ho se
      jwalo, lebaka ke lefe; ha ho le jwalo, dintlha mabapi le maano ao ke
      dife?                  N1746S
      (Translations of Sesotho question follows.)


[87.  Mrs D M Morobi (ANC) asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

      Whether there are any plans by Sport and Recreation South Africa to
      assist local governments with financial backing in order to develop
      sport and recreation facilities and programmes in the communities; if
      not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        N1746E]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, you didn’t recognise my
efforts at reading Sesotho, but will you respond nevertheless? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Chairperson, I thought you were
speaking Yiddish or something. [Laughter.] The answer to the question is:
Yes; Sport and Recreation SA will continue endeavouring to secure funds for
addressing the backlog of sport and recreation facilities in all parts of
the country. And I dare say that South Africa is, in many parts, awash with
facilities, but they are where the people are not, thanks to the
unfortunate planning approaches of yesterday.

The past four years have seen us provide 365 sports facilities through our
“Building for Sport and Recreation” project. But since the 2005-06
financial year, funds for those projects have been incorporated into the
municipal infrastructure grant, which is in the budget of the Department of
Provincial and Local Government.

The focus of Sport and Recreation SA is now to assist local authorities and
federations in the advocacy of and lobbying for the inclusion of these
facilities in the IDPs of the local communities. In the provisioning we
also focus on appropriate assistance in the planning, monitoring and
implementation of these plans. We empower local authorities properly to
manage sports and recreation facilities where they have already been
created or built.

Mof D M MOROBI: Ke a leboha modulasetulo. Letona, ho totobetse hore mmuso o
ikemiseditse ho ntlafatsa maphelo a batho ka hare ho naha. Empa letona, ha
re ntse re etela mabatowa re eleletswe hore mebuso ya selehae ha e nke
lefapha la dipapadi e le la bohlokwa.

Disebediswa di teng, re a di bona ha re ile mono, empa ka lebaka la hobane
mebuso ya selehae ha e nke dipapadi e le ntho ya bohlokwa, ke rata ho botsa
letona hore na ebe ho ka etswa eng hore mohlomong ho buisanwe le Ntlo ya
Matona hore boikarabelo ba ho ntlafatsa le ho eketsa disebediswa tsa
dipapadi di be diatleng tsa hao ka ho otloloha? Mohlomong ka mokgwa o jwalo
naha ka bophara e tla anela. Ke a leboha. (Translation of Sotho paragraphs
follows.)

[Thank you, hon Chairperson. Hon Minister, it is clear that government is
prepared to better the lives of people in this country. But hon Minister,
when we visited the regions we realised that local governments do not take
sport seriously.
There are resources; we see them when we are there, but because local
governments do not take sport seriously, I would like to ask the hon
Minister what could be done to negotiate with the National Assembly so that
the responsibility for bringing about improvements and providing more
resources for sport could be placed directly in his hands? In that way, the
whole country will have enough. Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Hon member, as you can already see
from the statistics given, when our department was in charge of that budget
we were able to make strides in the provisioning of facilities in our
communities, but there is now a government decision regulating where the
money must reside.

Tomorrow, for the first time in the history of this government, in the
Minmec for the Department of Provincial and Local Government there will be
representation from the Department of Sport and Recreation, led by the
Deputy Minister, precisely because we take this matter very seriously.

Not only do local authorities not take sport and recreation seriously, and
not only do the officials of the DPLG not take it seriously, but as a
result of the pressures of our communities on the fiscus, we are not
surprised that people who do not understand the role of sport in society do
not readily see it as a priority. For that reason, we are assisting the
local authorities, and from tomorrow we will also be assisting DPLG and the
provinces, to understand the importance of sport and recreation.

Mr T D LEE: Voorsitter, terwyl ons nou bietjie Sotho praat, kan ons seker
bietjie Afrikaans ook praat. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Mnr die Minister, baie van dié geriewe wat aangebring is, is eintlik wit
olifante, want dit word geplaas in plekke waar die mense dit nie kan bereik
nie. ’n Voorbeeld hiervan is die sportgerief – die duur sportterrein – in
Kwanobuhle, wat veronderstel is om naby die mense van Kwanobuhle in
Uitenhage te wees. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit is ver van die mense, hulle kan
dit nie gebruik nie.

’n Ander probleem is die feit dat die munisipaliteite nie dié geriewe
onderhou nie. Wat gaan die Minister doen sodat dié goed onderhou word? En,
derdens, wat gaan die Minister doen sodat dié goed toeganklik is vir die
mense, want baie van hulle kan nie bekostig om dit te gebruik nie, dit is
baie duur? [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, since we are speaking a little Sotho now, I
suppose we can also speak a little Afrikaans. [Interjections.]

Mr Minister, many of the facilities that have been provided are in fact
white elephants, because they are located in places where the people cannot
reach them. An example of this is the sports facility – the expensive
sports grounds – in KwaNobuhle, which is supposed to be close to the people
of KwaNobuhle in Uitenhage. [Interjections.] It is far from the people and
they cannot use it.

Another problem is the fact that the municipalities are not maintaining
these facilities. What is the Minister going to do so that these things can
be maintained? And, thirdly, what is the Minister going to do to ensure
that these things are accessible to the people, because many of them cannot
afford to use them, since they are very expensive? [Interjections.]]

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMIDLALO NOLONWABO: Mhlalingaphambili, ngokucacileyo
uMhlekazi lo akeva kakuhle okanye isilungu akasiva kakuhle. Njengokuba
besele sitshilo, ingxaki yokuqala yeyokuba imali leya iphaya kwi-Municipal
Infrastructure Grant ayisetyenziswa.

Ukuba ubunokujonga kwizabelo zalo nyaka, ubungafumanisa ukuba bambalwa
oomasipala abenze izicelo zale mali, mali leyo enokusetyenziselwa ukwakha
nokuphatha kakuhle la mabala siwakhileyo. Yonke loo mali ikho phaya
kuhlahlo-lwabiwo-mali.

Yiloo nto ke, mntan’ enkosi, sisithi thina siqinisa izihlala kweli cala
lokuncedisa abantu bakuthi ukuba bayiqonde indlela yokufikelela phaya
emthonjeni. Anga naye, njengommeli wabo, angene kwelo phulo lokuncedisa
abantu bakuthi ukuze bangene emthonjeni.

Ndiyayiva ke le yelaa bala lakwaNobuhle, eTinarha. Bafumana kulula ke
oophopho ukutsho, xa imeko ibavumela, ukuba masingathethi ngezinto
zayizolo. Ngoku usibuyisela umva ngeminyaka elithoba. Asinakuyinceda into
eyenza kwiminyaka elithoba edlulileyo. Sibheka phambili ngoku.
Makasincedise ke sibheke phambili. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, clearly the hon member
does not hear properly or does not understand English. As we have already
said, the first problem is that money in the form of the Municipal
Infrastructure Grant is not being utilised.

If you look at allocations for this year, you will find that few
municipalities have lodged requests for this money - money that could be
utilised for construction and correctly to maintain the grounds we have
constructed. All the money is available in the budget.
That is why, Prince, we say that we are strengthening our efforts to help
our people so that they can understand ways of getting access to the
reserves. He should, as their representative, join the drive to help our
people so that they can utilise these reserves.

I hear the issue of KwaNobuhle playground in Uitenhage. Some find it easy
to say, when conditions are favourable, that we must talk about past
events. Now you are taking us back nine years. We cannot help an event that
occurred during the past nine years. We are moving forward now. He must
help us to move forward. [Applause.]]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Deputy Chairperson, I was partly covered by the Minister.
The Minister for Provincial and Local Government made an undertaking in
this House that the money for sports facilities in his department would be
ring-fenced particularly for sports facilities, because during the
“Building for Sport and Recreation” programme, the department was able to
build around 120 sports facilities, but now it’s only four. So my question
is: Has it been ring-fenced for sports facilities particularly in terms of
the municipal infrastructure grant? Thank you, Chair.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: We agree with you, hon member. The
Minister gave that undertaking here in September last year. We have an
assurance from that department that indeed that money will be ring-fenced.

The issue is not the depletion of the fund itself, but the understanding of
how to access the fund so that it can be made available for all those
activities. Now we are unable to say that the Department of Provincial and
Local Government has reneged on their promise to this House, because we
have not been able to maximise the utilisation of what is already
available, hence our plea to one and all, because we are all community
representatives here.
Let us acquaint ourselves with how the municipal infrastructure grant is
accessed so that, when we do our constituency work, we have people in the
field with us who are teaching these communities how to access the MIG.
Members of this hon House, because you are much more than we are, you can
make a huge contribution in enlightening our communities on how to access
this money. The money is sitting there, but it is not being applied for.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, firstly I bring greetings to you from the
KwaZulu-Natal MEC for sport and recreation. There has been tremendous
progress in the KZN area in respect of sport and recreation. I was in the
Illovo area with the MEC for sport and recreation and sports equipment was
being handed out for netball, football and other sports.

Hon Minister, my question is whether you are going to be working with all
the Ministers in the various provinces in respect of building
infrastructure in schools and other communities so that we can keep our
learners occupied after schools have closed to keep them away from
mischief. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Hon
member, thank you very much for the greetings from “The Tiger”. Will you
please assure him that we will be with him eThekwini next week, when all
the provinces of this country will be participating in the South African
Games – the supreme sporting event for our children in this part of the
country?

Now, in so far as interministerial co-operation in the provision of these
facilities is concerned, you will be pleased to note that we are discussing
how to plan together not only with the Department of Education but also
with the Department of Housing, because planning is where the problem is.
If Education decides where to build a school without consulting with us and
with the local government in terms of the facilities that must be there,
then there will not be any way in which we can meet all these aspirations.

We have also engaged Housing because as we build settlements, we must
include sports and recreation facilities in the planning of those
settlements. So, this is a very exciting development in that respect.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you very much. The time
allocated for questions has expired. Outstanding replies received will be
printed in Hansard.




                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                (The late Chief Rabbi Emeritus Cyril Harris)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chairperson, I hereby move without
notice:

   That the House -


   (1)      expresses its grief at the loss of Chief Rabbi Emeritus Cyril
        Harris, one of our nation's most significant and respected
        spiritual leaders;


   (2)      notes that –


        (a)      Chief Rabbi Cyril Harris came to our country before the
             end of apartheid and committed himself to guiding not only the
             Jewish community but all South Africans into the democratic
             era;


        (b)      he was a powerful and inspirational figure in building
             bridges between different communities and encouraged Jews and
             other minorities to become involved in building the new South
             Africa;


        (c)      he was a robust defender of Jewish values and also of
             those secular values of freedom, tolerance and compassion
             which he felt were essential to the building of a successful
             democratic society;


        (d)      his considerable learning and his insight were valuable to
             all who knew him and his spiritual teachings were used to
             great effect on many occasions, public and private; and


        (e)      the Bible says of Noah that he was ``a righteous man - in
             his generation'' (Genesis 6:9) and that Chief Rabbi Harris was
             not only righteous in the context of a transitional South
             African society but his moral guidance transcended the period
             of his service and will continue to enlighten South Africans
             as we grapple with new challenges in the future; and


   (3)      expresses its sincere condolences to Rabbi Harris's wife, Ann,
        to his family, and to the wider Jewish community which he led with
        pride.


Agreed to.

 SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) FOR PURPOSES OF CONDUCTING SECOND READING DEBATE
                      ON EDUCATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the
motion, as printed in the name of the Chief Whip, on the Order Paper:

   That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
   Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days
   have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for
   the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on the Education
   Laws Amendment Bill [B 23B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76) on
   Thursday, 15 September 2005.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, in the first instance no final printed copy of
the Bill, as amended, has been forwarded to members of the committee or to
members of Parliament and obviously, then, that means that no proper
reading and final reading of this Bill can take place.

Secondly, the DA has placed on the papers certain amendments to this Bill,
which if the three-days rule is waived, would probably mean that these
amendments will not be properly considered. So, consequently the DA cannot
agree to this. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I hope I’m going to get this right. I
have noted the objection of the DA. Shall I put the full question? Are
there any further objections to the Bill being read?

Mr S N SWART: Chair, yes, as the ACDP we also tabled a number of
amendments. We would also then have difficulty discussing them.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I will note the objection of the
ACDP.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, I just want to know what will happen. It is all
very well putting the question, but what about the amendments that, as the
DA, we have proposed? We need to know what procedure will be followed in
order to make sure that these amendments are dealt with?

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, with respect, a motion
has been moved. My understanding of normal meeting procedure is that we
then ask if people are opposed or whether they accept, if they’re opposed,
then we vote. And now we are opening some debate here that we don’t . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): . . . I am afraid that that is how I
understand the procedure to be; that I continue to put the question.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 216: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
   E; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S;
   Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J; Blose, H M; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha, N G
   W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chang, E S;
   Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N;
   Davies, R H; Dhlamini, B W; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W;
   Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Doidge`, G Q M; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs
   , J L; Gabela, L S; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E ; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M
   N; Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M;
   Hajaig, F; Hendrickse, P A C; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Huang, S;
   Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Kalako,
   M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J; Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S
   E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khumalo, M S; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M;
   Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G;
   Lekgoro, M K; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli,
   A N ; Maake, J J; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madasa, Z L;
   Madella, A F; Maduma, L D; Madumise, M M; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G
   B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X
   C; Malahlela, M J; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S; Manuel, T A; Mars, I;
   Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M;
   Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Matlala, M H;
   Matsemela, M L; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M;
   Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Meruti, M V; Mkhize, Z S; Mlangeni, A;
   Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O
   M; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T;
   Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M;
   Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D;
   Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E;
   Mzondeki, M J G; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-
   Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J;
   Ngwenya, W; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z;
   Nonkonyana, M; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T
   L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A;
   Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G; Phala, M J;
   Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S;
   Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni,
   S M; Saloojee, E; Scheemann, G D; Schippers, J; Schoeman, E A; Sekgobela,
   P S; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S ; Sibuyana, M
   W; Sikakane, M R; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Solo, B M; Solomon, G;
   Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E; Thabethe,
   E; Thomson, B; Tsenoli, S L; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den
   Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Wang, Y; Xingwana,
   L M ; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 41: Boinamo, G G; Coetzee, R; Cupido, H B; Davidson, I O; Delport,
   J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M;
   Jankielsohn, R; Joubert, L K; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D;
   Lee, T D; Lowe, C M; Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J; Mfundisi, IS; Mnyandu,
   B J; Morgan, G R; Nel, A H; Nkem-Abonta, E; Ntuli, R S; Pule, B E; Rabie,
   P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Smuts, M; Stephens J J M;
   Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, S N; Trent, E W; van der Walt, D; van Dyk, S
   M; Van Niekerk, A I; Weber, H; Zille, H.

Question agreed to.

Motion accordingly adopted


                      ROAD ACCIDENT FUND AMENDMENT BILL


                  (Decision of Question on Second Reading)

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.


Division demanded.


The House divided:
    AYES - 208: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
    E; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S;
    Bhengu, F; Blose, H M; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess,
    C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S;
    Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; Diale, L N;
    Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Doidge`, G Q M;
    Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza,
    N E ; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C
    H F; Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M; Hajaig, F; Hendrickse, P A C; Hogan, B
    A; Holomisa, S P; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B;
    Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J;
    Kekana, C D; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khumalo, M S;
    Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kotwal, Z;
    Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M K; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw,
    S K; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N ; Maake, J J; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C;
    Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M
    M; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N
    M; Mahote, S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Malahlela, M J; Maluleka, H P;
    Manana, M N S; Manuel, T A; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T;
    Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T
    M; Mathebe, P M; Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
    Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Meruti, M V;
    Mfundisi, IS; Mkhize, Z S; Mlangeni, A; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A;
    Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M
    R; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E;
    Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G;
    Moss, L N; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B;
    Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A;
    Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D;
    Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C;
    Nogumla, R Z; Nonkonyana, M; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, S B;
    Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P M;
    Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi,
    M G; Phala, M J; Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E ; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T;
    Rajbally, S; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T
    D H; Rasmeni, S M; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Scheemann, G D; Schippers,
    J; Schoeman, E A; Sekgobela, P S; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni,
    J B; Siboza, S ; Sikakane, M R; Skhosana, W M; Solo, B M; Solomon, G;
    Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E; Thabethe,
    E; Thomson, B; Tsenoli, S L; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den
    Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Wang, Y; Xingwana,
    L M ; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L L; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.


    NOES - 45: Bhengu, M J; Boinamo, G G; Chang, E S; Cupido, H B; Davidson,
    I O; Delport, J T; Dhlamini, B W; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J;
    Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Jankielsohn, R; Joubert, L K; Kalyan, S V;
    King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Lee, T D; Lowe, C M; Maluleke, D K; Mars,
    I; Masango, S J; Mnyandu, B J; Morgan, G R; Mpontshane, A M; Nel, A H;
    Nkem-Abonta, E; Ntuli, R S; Rabie, P J; Rabinowitz, R; Sayedali-Shah, M
    R; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Sibuyana, M W; Skosana, M B; Smuts, M;
    Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, S N; Trent, E W; van Dyk,
    S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Weber, H; Zille, H.

Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SAFETY AND SECURITY -
                        SAPS STATION MONITORING TOOL


Ms M M SOTYU: Hon Chairperson, hon members of Parliament, hon Deputy
Ministers, during his State of the Nation address this year, the President
highlighted the importance that oversight plays in achieving the democratic
society that we would like to achieve.

The Constitution, in section 42(3), sums up the functions of the National
Assembly. In section 55(2)(b), the Constitution states that
The National Assembly must provide for mechanisms -


  (b) to maintain oversight of, and –


       (i)  exercise of national executive authority, including the
              implementation of legislation and;


       (ii) any organ of state

During a strategic workshop in February 2005, the Portfolio Committee on
Safety and Security identified the need to develop a station-monitoring
tool to enhance our own oversight responsibilities.

During my speech in the Budget debate, I announced that intention to
develop such a tool. Thereafter, the portfolio committee established a
multiparty subcommittee to oversee and give input into the establishment of
this tool.

On Wednesday, 31 August 2005, the portfolio committee adopted the final
version of this tool. I am proud to present this tool to the House today.
The purpose of this monitoring tool is, firstly, to facilitate effective
oversight by the various parliamentary committees responsible for safety
and security over policing. These include those committees in provincial
legislatures and in the National Council of Provinces.

This tool enables us to draw comparisons between the problems and successes
experienced by various stations and the various provinces. This also
enables us draw from best practice. It will further provide the portfolio
committee, the select committee and the standing committees with useful
independent data with which to make recommendations to improve the
functions of policing. It will further provide important information useful
to the committee when engaging with departments during the budget process.

The monitoring tool will assist effective collaboration in oversight
functions between the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security and the
National Assembly, and the National Assembly, the Select Committee on
Security and Constitutional Affairs in the NCOP and the standing committees
within the various provincial legislatures.

An added advantage of the tool is that it provides Parliament with a
mechanism to ensure continuity, not only from year to year but from
committee members to committee members and from parliament to parliament.

That brings us to the issue of who should use this tool. Members of the
Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security will use it when undertaking
station visits as part of their constituency work and, also, it will be
used by the portfolio committee members as part of their programme.

In addition, the tool may be used by members of the Select Committee on
Security and Constitutional Affairs and the standing committees in
provinces when undertaking station visits as part of their constituency
work and committee work.

Furthermore, we would like to encourage any member of Parliament, when
undertaking station visits as part of their constituency work, to use this
monitoring tool. This tool will empower all MPs to conduct visits to police
stations from an informed position.

We discovered from other members when we interacted that members do visit
police stations but the problem they are faced with is that when they
arrive at the stations, they don’t know what information to get from the
station. Now this tool will be of assistance to members of Parliament so
that, when they visit police stations, they will know what questions to ask
the police or what it is that they need to get information on from the
police.

All the completed reports will be sent back to the committee secretary for
processing. In this way, the data that we will gather will not merely
gather dust on a shelf but will be captured in a database from which
important reports will be drawn and trends established.

I want to take this opportunity to thank the Information Technology
Department in Parliament for developing this database for the portfolio
committee. I believe that this tool embodies those very mechanisms that the
Constitution refers to when addressing the oversight responsibility of
Parliament.

It is a living document and it will change, when necessary. We are
currently monitoring the implementation of the Domestic Violence Act and
the Gun Control Act at station level. This, as a priority, might change in
the future.

The tool was introduced to the Minister for Safety and Security who
supported it wholeheartedly. Yesterday I informed National Commissioner
Jackie Selebi, about the tool; he supports the implementation thereof and
indicated that he will instruct the stations to co-operate with members of
Parliament and the members of the legislatures who conduct the oversight
visits while using this tool.

Already, three provinces have received training on how to use the
monitoring tool and the remaining provinces will follow within a month. The
portfolio committee will officially launch this tool during the next term.
We will invite the Ministry, all nine MECs and all nine standing
committees’ provincial chairs from provinces and the media to the launch of
this monitoring tool.

All MPs are urged to attend. This will be of great assistance to members of
Parliament when doing their oversight work. I thank you. [Applause.]
The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move that the
report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

  AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE
     GOVERNMENT OF MALAYSIA FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION AND THE
             PREVENTION OF FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES

Mr N M NENE: Madam Chairperson and hon members, in terms of section 231(2)
of the Constitution this House is required to approve agreements between
our government and other governments.

Today we present to you our government’s agreement with the government of
Malaysia for the avoidance of double taxation and prevention of fiscal
evasion with respect to taxes. This is the practices for income tax to be
imposed both on the worldwide income derived by residents of the country
and on income derived by nonresidents, which arises in that country.

The system has unintended consequences, of course, of discouraging foreign
investment because it subjects residents to tax in both countries. These
agreements are a mechanism to ensure that residents are not subjected to
this unfair situation. This agreement that South Africa has concluded with
Malaysia follows the OECD model, which has the following features:

Firstly, the convention applies to residents of one or both of the
contracting countries and not from a third country. The convention also
applies to any identical or substantially identical taxes that are imposed
after the date of the signing of the convention. This agreement provides
that the income of a particular nature will either be taxable in only one
of the two countries or may be taxed in both countries, with one of them
allowing a credit for the tax imposed by the other.

The benefits of our liberation from the rule of apartheid do not come
without obligations and responsibilities, as espoused in the People’s
Charter when it was declared that we shall extend the tentacles of freedom
beyond our own borders.

As a developing country emerging from the isolation brought about by the
evil system of apartheid, we have a duty to put our country and the
continent on the global economic and political map. These agreements are
but one of the agreements that are critical in our international relations
that should yield mutual benefits for all.

The Portfolio Committee on Finance considered this agreement and it now
recommends that this House approve it in terms of section 231(2).
[Applause.]
Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:48.
                                  _________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 14 September
         2005:


          i) Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 2B – 2005] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).
         ii) Close Corporations Amendment Bill [B 6B – 2005] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).
        iii) Armaments Corporation of South Africa Ltd Amendment Bill [B 14B
             – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75).
         iv) Defence Special Account Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2005] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).
          v) South African Abattoir Corporation Act Repeal Bill [B 21 –
             2005] (National Assembly – sec 75).
2.    Membership of Committees

    (1)    Ms L L Mabe has been elected as Co-Chairperson of the Joint
        Budget Committee with effect from 14 September 2005.


National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly (floor-crossing)

    Membership status of the following member has in terms of Schedule 6A
    of the Constitution (floor-crossing) changed, as follows:
      ▪ Mr C V Burgess and Mr Yi-Ju Wang have, on 14 September 2005, left
        the Independent Democrats (ID) and joined the African National
        Congress (ANC).

2.    Membership of Committees

    (1)    Mr N Nene has been elected as the Chairperson of the Portfolio
        Committee on Finance with effect from 13 September 2005.



TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces



 1. The Minister of Public Works

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent  Development
        Trust for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the financial statements for 2004-2005 [RP 129-2005].


 2. The Minister of Science and Technology


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the  South  African  Council
        for Natural Scientific Professions  for  2004-2005,  including  the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for 2004-
        2005.


 3. The Minister of Trade and Industry
    (a)      Report  and  Financial  Statements  of   International   Trade
        Administration Commission for 2004-2005, including  the  Report  of
        the Auditor-General on the financial statements for  2004-2005  [RP
        80 – 2005].


National Assembly

1. The Speaker

    (a)     Report on the Review of the Organisation and Post Establishment
        of the Office of the Public Protector, August 2003, tabled in terms
        of section 3(11)(a) of the Public Protector Act, 1994 (Act No 23 of
        1994).


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly


1.    Thirty-Second Report of Standing Committee on  Public  Accounts:  Land
    Bank and Agricultural Bank of South Africa, dated 7 September 2005:


        The  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts,  having  heard  and
        considered evidence on the Annual Report  and  the  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Land Bank (Bank)
        for the year ended 31 March 2004, reports as follows:

 1. Non-compliance with accounting requirements (AC 133), pages 23,  30, 79
    & 80

      The financial statements were not drawn up in accordance with South
       African  Statements  of  Generally  Accepted   Accounting   Practice
    regarding
      impairments (i.e. the difference  between  the  book  value  and  the
    expected
      recoverable amount). This statement requires:
      • Security values per individual loan to  be  discounted  to  current
        values;
      • Interest income to be determined on the impaired  value  of  loans,
        and
      • Impairment on individual loans to be the difference between the
      carrying amount and the expected recoverable amount.
    It is therefore important that the Bank  comply  with  this  accounting
    requirement, otherwise it would not know the correct amount recoverable
    from its debtors.


    The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:


    a) The new computer system that the Bank has decided on is adequate in
       terms of the key requirements of the Bank’s business processes;
    b) Policies and procedures are developed, documented and implemented
       that specifically address the requirements of the applicable
       accounting standard (AC 133); and
   c) All relevant staff - at Head Office and at branches - fully understand
      and comply with the requirements of AC 133 through formalised training
      programmes.


   2. Computer System, page 31

      The audit report reflected unresolved deficiencies in the banking loan
      module of the computer system used by the Bank during the  year  under
      review. There were also a number of control weaknesses identified.
      The Committee is concerned,  as  it  seems  that  the  Bank  has  been
      operating with banking and accounting systems which are not altogether
      appropriate for banking operations. The Committee is further concerned
      that the Bank only temporarily addressed the systems  shortcomings  by
      developing an arrears management system (the AMS),  which the branches
      use to proactively manage the arrears status of loans.

        The Committee recommends  that  the  Accounting  Authority  ensures
     that:
     a) The Bank acquires a banking module that  is  able  to  address  the
        reported deficiencies of the previous system, such as the inability
        to handle the number of logs that are generated;
     b) SCOPA is provided with the key timelines for the implementation  of
        the new computer system at laest sixty days after this  report  has
        been adopted by Parliament.
     c) Progress on (a) and (b) above be reported to SCOPA on a six monthly
        basis;
     d) Independent and regular reconciliations, monitored  by  management,
        of the loan book are carried out; as well as  continuous  risk  and
        credit analyses of the loan book by branch and top management; and
     e) The  arrears management system - whether AMS or another system - be
        improved in order to quantify the specific impairments as  well  as
        validate,  monitor  and  control  the  completeness  of  impairment
        information received from branches.

    3.      Bad debts, pages 24 and 31


         Bad debts (loans) to the value of R1,001 million were  written  off
         during February 2004..

         The Committee recommends  that  the  Accounting  Authority  ensures
    that:


   a) Data integrity is improved to enable the Bank to determine  write-offs
      more reliably;
   b) Policies and procedures for  writing  off  debts  are  formalised  and
      approved, and management reviews should  ensure  that  staff  strictly
      adhere to these procedures;
   c) Write-offs are properly approved and  authorised  at  the  appropriate
      delegated level; and
   d)  Disciplinary  action  is  taken  in  all  cases  where  policies  and
      procedures are not adhered to.

    4.      Capital adequacy, page 6
         The Bank’s key capital adequacy  ratio  fell  from  12,1%  to  9,8%
         during the year under review. Indications are  that  the  liquidity
         situation of the Bank is too low.

         The Committee recommends  that  the  Accounting  Authority  ensures
    that:

   a) The Bank’s capital base is built up to an acceptable level;
     b) Based on the Bank’s history in this  regard,  discussions  be  held
        with National Treasury on a way forward regarding the deterioration
        of reserves due to losses.

    5.      Governance  issues, page 111


        The Committtee noted  the following:

   a) The three-year contracts of the executive board members all expired at
      the same time in May 2005. This is bound to have a negative impact  on
      the continuity of governance at the Bank; and
   b) Since 1994 the Bank has appointed a private  audit  firm  as  internal
      auditors of the Bank, but teamed up with only three internal  auditors
      from the Bank; and
   c) There were approximately 12 Audit Committee meetings during  the  year
      under review, which seem a lot.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
   a) The Bank adheres to Chapter 5 of the Protocol on Corporate  Governance
      in the Public Sector regarding continuity of Board members[1];
   b) Ensures that transfer of skills, such as internal audit  skills,  take
      place urgently and effectively in  order  to  limit  reliance  on  the
      outsourcing of the internal audit function; and
   c) Given the high number of Audit Committee meetings, the Audit Committee
      report in detail, in the next annual  report  to  Parliament,  on  its
      effectiveness in facilitating corrective steps by  management  to  the
      findings of the internal auditors, as well as those  of  the  external
      auditor.

    6.      Perfomance information, page 69

    The Committee noted that the Bank paid out R3,436 million  as  bonuses,
    inlcuding an amount of R360 000 paid to the former CEO.

    The Committee was informed of the  reasons  for  the  awarding  of  the
    bonuses.  However, as the Bank had experienced losses during the period
    SCOPA is not convinced that the bonuses awarded were justified  in  all
    instances.

    The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:

     a) Clearly defined terms  and  conditions  (policies)  are  developed,
        documented and implemented for the awarding of bonusses;  and
     b) The policies must be provided to SCOPA within 60  days  after  this
        report is adopted by Parliament.


    7.       Non-compliance   with   rules,   regulations,   policies   and
        procedures, p30

    The audit report highlighted instances of non-compliance with the  PFMA
    and  Treasury  Regulations  with  regard  to  the  late  submission  of
    financial  statements,   their   incompleteness,   and   the   required
    materiality framework.  These were  not  presented  to  the  Accounting
    Authority for approval, nor included in the corporate plans for 2003/04
    and 2004/05.

    The  Committee  recommends  that  the  Accounting   Authority   ensures
    compliance with all requirements of the  PFMA  so  as  to  avoid  being
    liable for financial misconduct as provided for in  secton  83  of  the
    PFMA.

    Conclusion

    The Committee is of the view  that  no  further  interaction  with  the
    accounting authority of the Bank is necessary for  the  financial  year
    under review.

    The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
    the Auditor General.


Report to be considered.

2.     Thirty-Third  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public   Accounts:
    Accounting Standards Board, dated 7 September 2005:

           INTRODUCTION

    The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
    report and the Report of the  Independent  Auditors  on  the  Financial
    Statements of  the  Accounting  Standards  Board  for  the  year  ended
    31 March 2004, reports as follows:


    AUDIT OPINION

    The Committee noted the unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
    Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit  opinions  shall  be
    equally unqualified.


    CONCLUSION

    The Committee is of the view  that  no  further  interaction  with  the
    accounting authority of the Accounting Standards Board is necessary for
    the financial year under review.


    The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
    the Independent Auditors.


Report to be considered.

3.     Thirty-Fourth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:
    Corporation for Public Deposits, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION


        The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
        Annual Report and the Report of the  Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public Deposits for the
        year ended 31 March 2004, reports as follows:


    2.      AUDIT OPINION


        The Committee noted the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by
        Ernest & Young and trusts  that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be
        equally unqualified.


        CONCLUSION


        The Committee is of the view that no further interaction  with  the
        accounting authority of the  Corporation  for  Public  Deposits  is
        necessary for the financial year under review.


        The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
        Report of the Independent Auditors.


Report to be considered.

4.     Thirty-Fifth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public   Accounts:
    Development Bank of Southern Africa Limited, dated 7 September 2005:

1.    INTRODUCTION

    The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
    Report and the Report of the  Independent  Auditors  on  the  Financial
    Statements of the Developmental Bank Of Southern Africa Limited for the
    year ended 31 March 2004, tabled in  Parliament  and  referred  to  it,
    reports as follows:

2.    AUDIT OPINION

    The Committee noted the unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
    independent auditors and trusts that future  audit  opinions  shall  be
    equally unqualified.

3.    CONCLUSION


    The Committee is of the view  that  no  further  interaction  with  the
    accounting authority of  the  Developmental  Bank  Of  Southern  Africa
    Limited is necessary for the financial year under review.


    The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
    the Independent Auditors.


Report to be considered.

5.    Thirty-Sixth Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Export
    Credit Insurance Corporation of South Africa, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

        The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
        Annual Report and the Report of the  Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements of the Export Credit Insurance Corporation  of
        South Africa Ltd for the  year  ended  31 March  2004,  reports  as
        follows:

    2.      AUDIT OPINION

        The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
        Independent Auditors and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
        equally unqualified.


    3.      CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that no further interaction  with  the
         accounting authority of  Export  Credit  Insurance  Corporation  of
         South Africa Ltd is necessary for the financial year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Independent Auditors.


Report to be considered.


6.    Thirty-Seventh  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:
    Greater St. Lucia Wetland Park, dated 7 September 2005:

1.               INTRODUCTION

    The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
    Report  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the   Financial
    Statements of the Greater St. Lucia Wetland Park  for  the  year  ended
    31 March 2004, reports as follows:

2.          AUDIT OPINION

    The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
    Auditor-General and trusts that future audit opinions shall be equally
    unqualified.


3.          CONCLUSION

    The Committee is of the view  that  no  further  interaction  with  the
    accounting authority of the Greater St Lucia Wetland Park is  necessary
    for the financial year under review.


    The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
    the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.

7.    Thirty-Eighth Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Khula
    Enterprise Finance Limited, dated 7 September 2005:
    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
         Annual Report and the Report of the  Independent  Auditors  on  the
         Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance  Limited  for  the
         year ended 31 March 2004, tabled in Parliament and referred to  it,
         reports as follows:

    2.      AUDIT OPINION
         The Committee noted the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by
         Sizwe Ntsaluba VSP Inc. and trusts that future audit opinions shall
         be equally unqualified.


    3.      CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that no further interaction  with  the
         accounting  authority  of  Khula  Enterprise  Finance  Limited   is
         necessary for the financial year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Independent Auditors.


Report to be considered.

8.     Thirty-Ninth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public   Accounts:
    National Botanical Institute, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION
         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
         Annual report  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor  General  on  the
         Financial Statements of the National Botanical  Institute  for  the
         year ended 31 March 2004, reports as follows:

    2.      AUDIT OPINION


         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
         Auditor General and trusts that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be
         equally unqualified.


    3.      CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that no further interaction  with  the
         accounting  authority  of  the  National  Botanical  Institute   is
         necessary for the financial year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor General.


Report to be considered.

9.    Fortieth Report of Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  National
    Gambling Board, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

        The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
        Annual Report  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor  General  on  the
        Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board  for  the  year
        ended 31 March 2004, reports as follows:

    2.      AUDIT OPINION

        The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
        Auditor-General and trusts that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be
        equally unqualified.

    3.      CONCLUSION

    The Committee is of the view  that  no  further  interaction  with  the
    accounting authority of the National Gambling Board  is  necessary  for
    the financial year under review.


    The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
    the Auditor General.


Report to be considered.


10.   Forty-First Report of Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  South
      African National Accreditation System, dated 7 September 2005:

1.    INTRODUCTION

    The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
    Report and the Report of the  Independent  Auditors  on  the  Financial
    Statements of the South African National Accreditation  System  (SANAS)
    for the year ended 31 March 2004, reports as follows:

2.    AUDIT OPINION

    The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  Booysen
    &  Dry  and  trusts  that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be   equally
    unqualified.
3.    CONCLUSION

    The Committee is of the view  that  no  further  interaction  with  the
    accounting authority of the SANAS is necessary for the  financial  year
    under review.


    The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
    the Independent Auditors.


Report to be considered.

11.   Forty-Second Report of Standing Committee on  Public  Accounts:  South
African National Parks, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of the South African National Parks for the
         year ended 31 March 2004, reports as follows:

    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
         Auditor-General and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
         equally unqualified.


    3.      CONCLUSION
         The Committee is of the view that no further interaction  with  the
         accounting  authority  of  the  South  African  National  Parks  is
         necessary for the financial year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor General.


Report to be considered.

12.   Forty-Third Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  Finance,
    Accounting, Management Consulting and Other Financial Sectors, dated  7
    September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of the FASSET for the year ended 31 March
         2004, reports as follows:

    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
         Auditor-General and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
         equally unqualified.


    3.      CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that no further interaction  with  the
         accounting authority of FASSET is necessary for the financial  year
         under review.

         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor General.


Report to be considered.

13.    Forty-Fourth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public   Accounts:
    Transport Education and Training Authority, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION
         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
         Annual  Report  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
         Financial  Statements  of  the  Transport  Education  and  Training
         Authority for the year ended 31 March 2004, reports as follows:

    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
         Auditor-General and trusts that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be
         equally unqualified.


    3.      GENERAL MATTERS:

         The Committee also noted with disappointment the ineffective audit
         committee, which seldom meets and gives insufficient attention to
         the internal audit function.
         The Committee expects this issue to be rectified as a matter of
         urgency and SCOPA will monitor that in the next Annual Report.


                 CONCLUSION


         The Committee is of the view that except for the aspect highlighted
         above, no further interaction  with  the  Transport  Education  and
         Training Authority would be necessary for the financial year  under
         review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.


14.    Forty-Fifth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on   Public   Accounts:
    Insurance Sector Education and Training Authority,  dated  7  September
    2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of the INSETA for the year ended 31 March
         2004, reports as follows:


    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
         Auditor-General and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
         equally unqualified.




    3.      CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that no further interaction  with  the
         accounting authority of INSETA is necessary for the financial  year
         under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor General.


Report to be considered.

15.   Forty-Sixth Report of Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  South
    African Tourism, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of South African Tourism for the year ended
         31 March 2004, reports as follows:

    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
         Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
         equally unqualified.


    3.      CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that no further interaction  with  the
         accounting authority of the South African Tourism is necessary  for
         the financial year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.
16.    Forty-Seventh  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:
Banking Sector Education and Training Authority, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of the BANKSETA for the year ended 31 March
         2004, reports as follows:


    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
         Auditor-General and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
         equally unqualified.




    3.      CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that no further interaction  with  the
         accounting authority of the BANKSETA is necessary for the financial
         year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the
         Report of the Auditor General.


Report to be considered.


17.    Forty-Eight  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on   Public   Accounts:
    Information Systems, Electronics  and  Telecommunications  Technologies
    Services Sector Education and Training  Authority,  dated  7  September
    2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of the ISETT for the year ended 31 March 2004,
         reports as follows:

    2.      AUDIT OPINION
         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
         Auditor-General and trusts that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be
         equally unqualified.


        The Committee also noted with concern that no annual internal audit
         coverage plan has yet been approved for the 2004/2005 financial
         year.


         The  Committee  recommends  that   the   Management   expeditiously
         rectifies the issues in question.


    3.      CONCLUSION

         The  Committee  is  of  the  view  that,  except  for  the  aspects
         highlighted above,  no  further  interaction  with  the  accounting
         authority of the ISETT is necessary for the  financial  year  under
         review.
         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.

18.   Forty-Ninth Report of Standing Committee on  Public  Accounts:  Forest
    Industries Education and Training, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of the FIETA for the year ended 31 March 2004,
         reports as follows:


    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
         Auditor-General and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
         equally unqualified.


         EMPHASIS OF MATTER BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL
         The Committee noted with concern that the FIETA did not submit  the
         budget by 30 September 2003 as is required in terms of  Section  53
         (1) of the PFMA Act, 1999.


    3.      CONCLUSION

        The Committee is of the view that no further interaction  with  the
        accounting authority of FIETA is necessary for the  financial  year
        under review.


        The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
        Report of the Auditor General.


Report to be considered.


19.   Fiftieth Report of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  Health
    Welfare Sector Education and  Training  Authority,  dated  7  September
    2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
         Annual  Report  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
         Financial Statements of the Health And Welfare Sector Education And
         Training Authority (HWSETA) for  the  year  ended  31  March  2004,
         reports as follows:


    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
         Auditor-General and trusts that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be
         equally unqualified.


    3.      GENERAL MATTERS:

         SCOPA requests details of how and when the HWSETA plans to reduce
         its excessive cash reserves and be tabled in Parliament within 60
         days after this report has been adopted by Parliament.


    4.           CONCLUSION


         The Committee is of the view that except for the aspect highlighted
         above; no further interaction with the HWSETA  would  be  necessary
         for the financial year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.

20.    Fifty-First  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on   Public   Accounts:
    Diplomacy, Intelligence,  Defence  and  Trade  Education  and  Training
    Authority, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
         Annual  Report  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
         Financial Statements of the DIDTETA for the  year  ended  31  March
         2004, reports as follows:

    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
         Auditor-General, and trusts that future  audit  opinions  shall  be
         equally unqualified.


    3.      GENERAL MATTERS:

         The Committee noted that DIDTETA has not submitted written reasons
         as to why DIDTETA should not be amalgamated with another SETA.
         The Committee expects this issue to be rectified within 60 days
         after this report has been adopted by Parliament.


                 CONCLUSION

        The Committee is of the view that except for the aspect highlighted
        above, no further interaction with the DIDTETA would  be  necessary
        for the financial year under review.


        The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
        Report of the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.



21.   Fifty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Media,
    Advertising, Publishing, Printing and Packing Sector Education Training
    Authority, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION
         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
         Annual  Report  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
         Financial Statements of the MAPPPSETA for the year ended  31  March
         2004, reports as follows:


    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
         Auditor-General and trusts that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be
         equally unqualified.


    3.      GENERAL MATTERS


        The Committee requests that the MAPPPSETA report to Parliament
        within 60 days after this report has been adopted by Parliament
        regarding: inadequate terms of reference for the audit committee;
        progress report regarding the forensic audit into the discretionary
        grant payments; and       details of how and when MAPPPSETA plans
        to reduce its high cash reserves.


    4.           CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that except for the aspect highlighted
         above, no further interaction with the MAPPPSETA would be necessary
         for the financial year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.

22.   Fifty-Third Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  Tourism,
    Hospitality, and Transport Education and Training  Authority,  dated  7
    September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
         Annual  Report  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
         Financial Statements of the THETA for the year ended 31 March 2004,
         reports as follows:


    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
         Auditor-General and trusts that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be
         equally unqualified.


    3.      GENERAL MATTERS:

        The Committee noted with disappointment that: the administration
       costs exceed 10% of total expenditure; and VAT registration procedure
       not followed.


        SCOPA requests details of how and when the THETA plans to reduce
        its excessive cash reserves and be tabled in Parliament within 60
        days after this report has been adopted by Parliament.
    4.          CONCLUSION


         The Committee is of the view that except for the aspect highlighted
         above, no further interaction with the THETA would be necessary for
         the financial year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor-General.

Report to be considered.


23.   Fifty-Forth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  Chemical
    Industries Education and Training Authority, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

        The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
        Annual  Report  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial  Statements  of  the  Chemical  Industries  Education   &
        Training Authority (CHIETA) for  the  year  ended  31  March  2004,
        reports as follows:

    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
         Auditor-General and trusts that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be
         equally unqualified.


    3.      GENERAL MATTERS:

The Committee also noted with disappointment that the CHIETA:  did not have
a fraud prevention plan as required by Treasury regulation 27.2.1; Bank
reconciliations not done on a weekly basis as per PFMA; and has incomplete
asset register.


    4.          RECOMMENDATION


         The Committee recommend that the CHIETA report to Parliament
         within 60 days after this report has been adopted by Parliament:
         on the status of  implementation of fraud prevention plan; and on
         whether the asset register has been completed and up to date.


                     CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that except for the aspect highlighted
         above, no further interaction with the CHIETA  would  be  necessary
         for the financial year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor-General.



Report to be considered.


24.    Fifty-Fifth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on   Public   Accounts:
    Education, Training and  Development  Practices  Sector  Education  and
    Training, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.  INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts,  having  considered  the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on  the  Financial
      Statements of the Education, Training and Development Practices Sector
      Education and Training (ETDP SETA) for the year ended 31  March  2004,
      reports as follows:

    2.  AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
      Auditor-General and trusts that future audit opinions shall be equally
      unqualified.


    3.  GENERAL MATTERS:

The Committee also noted with disappointment that the ETDP-SETA:  did not
have a fraud
              prevention plan as required by Treasury regulation 27.2.1 and
has incomplete asset register.


    4.      RECOMMENDATION


         The Committee recommend that the ETDP SETA report to Parliament
         within 60 days after this report has been adopted by Parliament:
        on the status of an effectively implementation fraud prevention
         plan; and
        on whether the asset register is it complete and up to date.


    5.      CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that except for the aspect highlighted
         above, no further interaction with the ETDP SETA would be necessary
         for the financial year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.


25.   Fifty-Sixth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Food  and
    Beverage SETA, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
         Annual  Report  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
         Financial Statements of the FOODBEV SETA  for  the  year  ended  31
         March 2004, reports as follows:


    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
         Auditor-General and trusts that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be
         equally unqualified.


    3.      GENERAL MATTERS

        The Committee noted with disappointment that:
        the FoodBev SETA did not have fraud prevention plan as required by
        Treasury regulation 27.2.1 should explain how interest was incurred
        on a bank overdraft when FOODBEV SETA has such high cash reserves.


    4.         RECOMMENDATION

         The Committee recommend that the FOODBEV SETA report to Parliament
         within 60 days after the receipt of the resolution: on the status
         of an effectively implemented fraud prevention plan; and how
         FOODBEV SETA intend to rectify the issue of bank overdraft.


    5.          CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that except for the aspect highlighted
         above, no further  interaction  with  the  FOODBEV  SETA  would  be
         necessary for the financial year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.


26.   Fifty-Seventh Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  Energy
    Sector for Education and Training Authority, dated 7 September 2005:

    1.      INTRODUCTION

         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  having  considered  the
         Annual  Report  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
         Financial Statements of the Energy SETA for the year ended 31 March
         2004, reports as follows:

    2.      AUDIT OPINION

         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by  the
         Auditor-General and trusts that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be
         equally unqualified.


    3.      GENERAL MATTERS:

         The Committee noted with disappointment that the Energy SETA:
        has submitted their financial statements late; did not have fraud
        prevention plan as required by Treasury regulation 27.2.1; has
        incomplete asset register.


    4.           RECOMMENDATION
         The Committee requests details of how and when the Energy SETA
         plans to reduce its excessive cash reserves and report to
         Parliament within 60 days after the receipt of the resolution.


         The Committee also requests a report to Parliament on whether the
         asset register is complete and up to date within 60 days after the
         receipt of the resolution.


    5.           CONCLUSION

         The Committee is of the view that except for the aspect highlighted
         above, no  further  interaction  with  the  Energy  SETA  would  be
         necessary for the financial year under review.


         The Committee therefore awaits  the  next  Annual  Report  and  the
         Report of the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.


27.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Education on the Education Laws
    Amendment Bill [B 23-2005] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 13
    September 2005:

         The Portfolio Committee on Education, having considered the subject
         of the Education Laws Amendment Bill  [B 23 - 2005] (National
         Assembly - sec 76), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 23A - 2005].



-----------------------
[1]  See par 5.1.6.4


