---
title: 'National Assembly - 07 September 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-09-07
---

WEDNESDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2005
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                               FLOOR-CROSSING

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed with today’s business I
wish to announce that the following change in party membership has occurred
as a result of floor-crossing. The hon Ms M M Mdlalose left the Inkatha
Freedom Party on 6 September 2005 and joined the National Democratic
Convention.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the ACDP:

   That the House debates the global scourge of human trafficking in which
   South Africa is playing an ever-increasing role, with specific focus on
   the measures being implemented by departments to prevent trafficking and
   to protect and compensate those who are trafficked.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, I give notice that I shall move:

   That the House -

   (1)            notes that the PAC of Azania has received with jubilation
        a report that four South African universities, namely the
        University of KwaZulu-Natal, the University of the Witwatersrand,
        the University of Pretoria and the University of Cape Town, have
        been named among 500 top universities in the world for academic
        excellence;


   (2)      The PAC sends warm congratulations to the four South African
        universities and to Cambridge University in Britain and Harvard
        University in America, which, for a long time, have maintained high
        academic standards; and


   (3)      The PAC encourages universities in our country to maintain high
        standards of learning and acquisition of knowledge for human
        development and service, particularly in the fields of science,
        technology and commerce; for rapid economic, social and
        technological development of our country, especially in the rural
        areas and African townships so that the two-nations syndrome of the
        extremely rich and white and the extremely poor and African can be
        consigned to the dustbin of history.


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I address
you on a point of order?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your point of order?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I think there’s an agreement amongst
us as parties that we differentiate between a statement and a notice of
motion. In so far as a notice of motion is concerned, it must actually make
a suggestion for a particular action to be taken, whether it be a
discussion or whatever, so that we don’t have confusion between it and a
statement.

It’s correct to make a statement to praise whatever event has taken place
or to recognise whatever achievement, but that was a statement not a
motion. So that little differentiation becomes very important, otherwise
we’re going have statements named motions, and when we call for statements
it will be the same thing.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we note your intervention, Chief Whip. We now come
to motions without notice. What I also observe is that Mr Pheko has made
the Minister of Education extremely happy.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would have been happier
if Mr Pheko had put it as a motion without notice, rather than a notice of
motion, because then we would have acclaimed the motion.

             MOTION OF CONDOLENCE FOR THE LATE MR ETTIENNE BOTHA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr J H VAN DER MERWE: Agb Adjunkspeaker, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

   Dat die Huis –


   (1)            met skok kennis neem van die tragiese afsterwe vanoggend
        van die briljante rugbyspeler Ettienne Botha in ’n motorongeluk;


   (2)            verder kennis neem dat hierdie jong Blou Bul ’n uiters
        belowende rugbytoekoms in internasionale rugby voor hom gehad het
        en dat sy afsterwe ’n onherstelbare leemte in die Springbokke en
        die Blou Bulle laat;
   (3)      daaraan erkenning gee dat die naam van Ettienne Botha in
        Bloubulland sal voortleef saam met die name van Naas Botha, Frik du
        Preez en Hannes Brewis; en


   (4)      sy innige meegevoel uitspreek teenoor Ettienne se geliefdes en
        naasbestaandes en almal wat deur die tragiese gebeurtenis getref
        is.


(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr J H van der Merwe: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -


   (1)      notes, with shock, the death of the brilliant rugby player
        Ettienne Botha in a tragic motor car accident this morning;


   (2)      further notes that this young Blue Bull had a promising rugby
        career in international rugby and that his death will leave a void
        that cannot be filled in the Springbok and the Blue Bulls teams;


   (3)      recognises that in Blue Bull country the name Ettienne Botha
        will forever resound alongside the names of Naas Botha, Frik Du
        Preez and Hannes Brewis; and


   (4)      conveys its deepest sympathy to the loved ones and relatives who
        were struck by this tragic event.]


Agreed to.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Now that I get the opportunity, Madam
Deputy Speaker, we support that motion.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought the motion was on behalf of the House, and I
thought it was supported earlier in your own caucuses where you met
privately.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: That’s right, Madam.

         SALARIES PAYABLE TO CONSTITUTIONAL COURT JUDGES AND JUDGES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

      That the House approves the draft notice and schedule received
      from the Presidency determining the rate at which salaries are
      payable to Constitutional Court judges and judges annually,
      with effect from 1 April 2005, in terms of section 2 of the
      Judges’ Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, Act 47
      of 2001, as amended by section 15 of the Judicial Officers
      (Amendment of Conditions of Service) Act, Act 28 of 2003.


Agreed to.

                       SALARIES PAYABLE TO MAGISTRATES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House approves the draft notice and schedule received from the
   Presidency determining the rate at which salaries and allowances are
   payable to magistrates annually, with effect from 1 April 2005, in terms
   of section 12(1)(a) of the Magistrates Act, Act 90 of 1993, as amended by
   section 3 of the Judicial Officers (Amendment of Conditions of Service)
   Act, Act 28 of 2003.

Agreed to.


                       ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE SERVICES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M SOTYU (ANC): Deputy Speaker, as we continue to celebrate 50 years of
the Freedom Charter, our people in the health sector are working hard to
ensure that more and more of our people have access to health services that
are provided by our government.

Access to health care is not a luxury, but a necessary condition for all-
round human development. We, members of the ANC, will continue to strive
for better access to health care for all our people. The recent
announcement by the Minister of Health, Comrade Manto Tshabalala-Msimang,
to cut hospital fees by up to 70% to ensure that the poorest of the poor
are able to access health care without any problem, is a welcome
initiative.

The ANC calls on all health workers and our activists to assist the
government in the provision of a better and efficient health care system
for all our people. I thank you. [Applause.]

                 ANC ELECTION CAMPAIGN FINANCED BY TAXPAYERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R MORGAN (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, no election in South Africa can
be free and fair if the ANC is being financed inappropriately by taxpayers.
[Interjections.] The Government Communication and Information System
continues to abuse taxpayers’ money to promote the electoral interests of
the ANC.

Today the DA submitted a private member’s Bill intended to regulate
government advertising during an election period, specifically from the
date an election is called to the date the result of the election is
determined.

Last year the massive advertising and communication campaign surrounding
the 10 years of democracy celebrations, which in many cases rehashed ANC
election manifestos, was designed largely to generate an enabling
environment for the ANC during the 2004 election period. This year the ANC
has made it clear that it intends to base its local government election
campaign on and around the Freedom Charter.

We already saw a conflation of party and state when the SABC effectively
launched the ANC’s election campaign in Kliptown during the Freedom Charter
celebrations. Government advertising, which seeks to advance the ruling
party, is wrong, undemocratic and a misuse of public money for party-
political purposes. I thank you. [Interjections.]

                       PERSONNEL EDUCATION EXPENDITURE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, according to the third
quarter provisional budget report for the 2004-05 financial year, personnel
expenditure in provincial education departments posed the biggest spending
risk to provincial education budgets and squeezed out spending on capital
and learner support material in the process.

According to this same report, the biggest risk appeared to be in the
Northern Cape, with 76,7%; Limpopo, with 76,4%; followed by the Eastern
Cape, with 75,4% of the budget going to personnel expenditure. This state
of affairs must not be allowed to continue, and we call upon the provincial
departments of public works and education to allocate larger budgets and to
ring-fence the budgets for infrastructural improvements where possible, so
that the constitutional right of children to basic education is not
compromised. I thank you.


                              MATHEMATICS WEEK


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B MTHEMBU (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the provision of quality
education that will ensure that our people are able to move out of the
shackles of poverty, and basic infrastructure, providing for conducive
conditions of learning, are fundamental education policies of the ANC-led
government.

Monday, 5 September, till Sunday, 11 September, is National Mathematics
Week. The purpose of Mathematics Week is to highlight the beauty, utility
and applicability of mathematics; and also to dispel the myth that it is
cold, difficult, abstract and only accessible to a selected few.

Activities around this week are designed to make it more interesting,
attractive, relevant and challenging to learners and the community at
large.

Mathematics Week forms the basis for social transformation in mathematics
education, ensuring that the imbalances of the past are addressed and that
equal education opportunities are provided for all sections of our
population.

The ANC urges the learners - educators of all of us - to make use of the
benefits that are generated by a knowledge of mathematics. I thank you.
[Applause.]


               HORRIFIC DISCOVERY AT FUNERAL PARLOUR AT UMLAZI


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N C NKABINDE (UDM): Deputy Speaker, the UDM expresses its outrage and
horror at the discovery yesterday of 40 decaying corpses at an apparently
abandoned funeral parlour at Umlazi. At this stage the identity of these
bodies remains unknown due to the absence of records at the funeral
parlour.

This situation is so horrific it defies description. We can only speculate
at the sorrow and anger that the families of these people will feel once
these bodies are identified, or for that matter, the horror that the
neighbouring community must be feeling at this stage. It is also unclear at
this stage whether all or some of these people were simply not buried, or
whether more nefarious motives lie behind this saga. The police will have
to determine whether these people were victims of murder.

What this sordid incident has highlighted, once more, is the fly-by-night
status of many funeral parlours and similar businesses purporting to assist
bereaved families. There are simply too many reckless and heartless people
out there who are willing to exploit grieving families when they are at
their most vulnerable.

It is part of South African tradition, across all cultural groups, to spare
no expense in sending off a loved one in a proper way. The result is that
funerals and related issues have become a massive, multimillion rand a
month industry.

The need for this industry cannot be disputed, but no caring government can
simply stand by whilst these fly-by-night businesses operate in this
fashion. Hence regulation and policing of these businesses are urgently
required. I thank you.

         CORRUPTION AND BRIBERY IN SA POLICE EXPOSED ON NATIONAL TV

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF Plus): Agb Adjunkspeaker, die VF Plus neem met
ontsteltenis kennis van die korrupsie en omkopery van polisielede by die
Booysen Polisiekantoor wat gisteraand in die televisieprogram Special
Assignment uitgesaai is. Die optrede van hierdie polisielede strek die hele
polisiemag tot oneer. Die indruk begin by die publiek ontstaan dat die
polisiemag in sy geheel korrup is, en daarom vier misdaad hoogty.

Dit opsigself is ’n belediging vir hardwerkende en pligsgetroue lede van
die Polisie. Meer kommerwekkend is egter die gebrek aan optrede van die
Polisie en die Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit. Die VF Plus versoek
die Minister om dadelik in te gryp en die betrokke polisielede onmiddellik
te skors, hangende ’n verdere ondersoek deur die Polisie self.

Die hele Suid-Afrika het die korrupsie aanskou, maar sien geen daadwerklike
optrede van die Minister of die Kommissaris daarteen nie. Die onmiddellike
skorsing van die betrokke lede sal toon dat korrupsie nie geduld word in
die SA Polisiediens nie. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF Plus): Hon Deputy Speaker, the FF Plus notes with
dismay the corruption and bribing of members of the Police Service at the
Booysen police station, which was broadcast last night on the television
programme Special Assignment. The conduct of these members of the Service
compromises the integrity of the whole Police Service. The impression
arises among members of the public that the Police Service as a whole is
corrupt, and that is why crime is rife.

That in itself is an insult to the hardworking and conscientious members of
the police. What is even more disturbing is the lack of action on the part
of the Police and the Minister of Safety and Security. The FF Plus calls on
the Minister to intervene immediately and to suspend the members concerned
with immediate effect, pending a further internal investigation by the
Police.

The whole of South Africa saw the corruption, but we have seen neither the
Minister nor the Commissioner take any real countermeasures. The immediate
suspension of the members concerned will show that corruption will not be
tolerated in the SA Police Service.]


        GAUTENG MEC HANDS OVER HOUSES TO 23 ELDERLY ORANGE FARM WOMEN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D C MABENA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, on 28 August 2005, Women’s Month, the
MEC for housing in Gauteng, Nomvula Mokonyane, caused tears of joy to flow
by handing over title deeds to 23 elderly Orange Farm women, the eldest
being 81-year-old Mrs Selina Pisco. Social and economic inequalities which
were generated in our history by colonisation, segregation and patriarchy
brought pain and suffering to the majority of South Africans, especially
women.

Blacks did not own land; instead they were given a 99-year leasehold
agreement. Thanks to our Constitution, which amongst other things upholds
the values of human dignity, equality and freedom, the ANC-led government
must be commended for upgrading tenure of the previously disadvantaged and
for forcing the promotion of equality and the prevention of discrimination.
I thank you. [Applause.]


                          CORRUPT POLICE OFFICIALS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, we regularly hear of police
targeting immigrants, both legal and illegal, to extort money in the form
of bribes. Last night’s Special Assignment programme showed explicit
footage of police officers at Booysen Police Station, extorting money from
immigrants.

It appears that corrupt police officers target immigrants in the
Johannesburg area on a weekly basis to line their own pockets at the
expense of vulnerable members of society. They are also failing in their
primary duty to uphold the law with regard to illegal immigrants. Those
officers caught on camera must immediately be suspended, pending an
investigation.

The DA calls on the Gauteng police commissioner, Perumal Naidoo, to act
urgently on this evidence of police corruption. The subject is now in the
public domain and investigations cannot happen behind closed doors.

This investigation must not only be confined to those officers caught on
camera, as the corruption reaches much further. An immediate, comprehensive
investigation is the only thing that will restore public confidence in the
Police.


                         ACCESS TO HIGHER EDUCATION


                            (Member’s Statements)

Mr P H K DITSHETELO (UCDP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the issue of access to
higher education in our country is a challenge that we seem to attend to
seriously. We have been beating about the bush as to how government is
going to deal with this pertinent issue of access to quality education at
tertiary institutions.

Reality points out that most needy and gifted learners will not be able to
further their studies at institutions of their choice as most of these
institutions have reintroduced a new form of exclusion by not allowing our
learners to register through technicalities, such as paying higher entrance
fees or deposits.

We are aware that the department is exploring means of increasing funding
to student financing facilities. We need clear guidance and government
intervention regarding admission policies. We cannot defend this situation
by encouraging our learners not to pursue university education in favour of
further education at institutions that were previously know as technikons.
This will not solve skills shortages, but will worsen it.

Career choices are about individual strengths and abilities to succeed in
chosen fields. We can only build a solid pool of skills by allowing our
children to follow their dreams, and not by being channelled because of
lack of funding.

We have to attend to this issue as a matter of urgency as the year is
almost over. We do not want to read in the media again about financial
exclusion from universities in a country like South Africa with an ugly
past.


                               HERITAGE MONTH


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H P MALULEKE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, September is Heritage Month and, as
decided last year, we continue to celebrate our living heritage. The focus
this year is on indigenous knowledge systems - food, dance, music,
storytelling and poetry. This particular focus is crucial to the African
Renaissance project. This strengthens the campaign to reassert indigenous
values that are tested and it destigmatises things African in general. We
congratulate the national and provincial departments and municipalities for
the co-ordination of a vast array of activities for heritage month.

The Minister released a comprehensive list of activities to the media
yesterday, showing the month promises a creative explosion of talent to
showcase our heritage. The ANC calls on all of us to participate fully and
bring to bear all our creative support on these programmes throughout this
month and the year. [Applause.]


                           FF PLUS MISLEADS VOTERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Adjunkspeaker, die VF Plus mislei die kiesers.
Gedurende die laaste week in Augustus is die VF Plus in die Parlement op ’n
punt van orde aangespreek dat hulle die kiesers mislei. Die agb Corné
Mulder is in die Parlement daarop gewys dat hy vir tien minute die Staande
Komitee oor Openbare Rekeninge se vergadering bygewoon het en nie gewag het
tot vraetyd nie.

In die Parlement het hy beweer dat daar nie geleentheid is om vrae te stel
oor die Oilgate-sage nie. Dit is nie waar nie. Indien die VF Plus komitees
behoorlik bywoon, sal hulle weet wat in die Parlement aangaan. ’n Dag
daarna het die agb Pieter Groenewald gesê dat die VF Plus teen oorlopery is
en oorlopers nie welkom is nie. Weer eens word die kiesers deur die VF Plus
mislei, want in die Tshwane Metroraad is ’n enkele oorloper van die NNP na
die VF Plus toe ontvang soos die verlore seun.

Die agb dr Pieter Mulder het by geleentheid ’n hartlike uitnodiging gerig
aan LP’s en LPW’s om by die VF Plus aan te sluit. Toe hulle ’n lid in
Mpumalanga verloor, toe sing die VF Plus skielik ’n ander deuntjie. Dit is
duidelik dat die VF Plus sy brood aan albei kante gebotter wil hê. Die
kiesers moet hulle nie steur aan die desperate krete om oorlewing van die
VF Plus nie. Trouens, die kiesers het dit reeds agtergekom, want daarom
stem die oorgrote meerderheid Afrikaners vir die DA. Dankie. (Translation
of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Deputy Speaker, the FF Plus is misleading the voters.
During the last week in August the FF Plus were addressed in Parliament on
a point of order that they were misleading the voters. It was pointed out
to the hon Corné Mulder in Parliament that he had attended a meeting of the
Standing Committee on Public Accounts for ten minutes and had not waited
until question time.

He alleged in Parliament that there was no opportunity to ask questions
about the Oilgate saga. That is not true. If the FF Plus attended
committees regularly, they would know what is happening in Parliament. A
day later the hon Groenewald said that the FF Plus were opposed to floor-
crossing and that floor-crossers were not welcome. Once again the voters
were being mislead by the FF Plus, because in the Tshwane Metro Council a
single floor-crosser from the NNP to the FF Plus was received as if he were
the prodigal son.

On occasion the hon Dr Pieter Mulder extended a hearty invitation to MPs
and MPLs to join the FF Plus. When they lost a member in Mpumalanga, the FF
Plus suddenly changed their tune. It is clear that the FF Plus wants its
bread to be buttered on both sides. The voters must ignore the desperate
cries for survival of the FF Plus. In fact, the voters are already aware of
this, that is why the vast majority of Afrikaners are voting for the DA.

Dr C P MULDER: Oubaas se honne! [His master’s voice!]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Jy’s bekommerd! [You’re worried.]


                        STRIKES BY THE WORKING CLASS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Strikes in many sectors in
the country seem to have increased lately. There is no definite reason why
this is the case compared to the general decrease in strike action after
1994. However, one of the perceived causes may be the fact that workers’
patience has worn thin after the many promises of a better life for all.

Trade union leaders seem to base their demands on researched economic
facts, unlike before when their demands were wide, emotional and untested.
The South African working class has waited beyond patience for the magic
wand of a better life for all. Instead the country’s economy is striving
for a growth of 4%, with no hope of an immediate solution.


                       SEA POWER FOR AFRICA SYMPOSIUM


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms L L MABE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the vision of the African Renaissance is
to promote peace and security, end wars and conflict on the continent,
instil good economic and political governance and fight social challenges
facing Africa. In step with the vision of the African Renaissance and in
the spirit of collective action, the SA Navy hosted a Sea Power for Africa
Symposium. The symposium attracted naval officers from across the
continent.

The symposium recognised that today Africa heavily depends on seaborne
trade. Our offshore oil and gas are increasingly becoming more important
resources for industrialised countries.

The African fishing resources are feeding more people in many parts of the
world. The management and sustainable usage of these maritime resources
become a necessity and not an option. The ANC applauds the initiative taken
by the symposium to co-operate in combating maritime crimes along the
coasts of the continent. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is an extra slot for the ANC.

    ANNOUNCEMENT TO DECLARE PONDOLAND WILD COAST A NATIONAL PARK WELCOMED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz N M MAHLAWE (ANC): Sekela Somlomo, umbutho wesizwe i-ANC izele
luchulumanco ngesibhengezo esenziwe nguMphathiswa weZisingqongileyo
noKhenketho uQabane uMartinus Van Schalkwyk, sokuba unxweme
lwaseMampondweni lungumyezo wemveli wesizwe. Esi sibhengezo sithetha
lukhulu kubemi bala mmandla waseMampondweni kuba lo mpoposho uza kubeka le
ndawo yabo kuluhlu lweendawo zokhenketho kweli lizwe lakuthi.

Lo myezo wolondolozo-ndalo uzakuba neentlobo-ntlobo zentyatyambo, imithi
yemvelo, nezilwanyana zasendle ezisemngciphekweni wokutshabalala ngoku.
Abantu balo mmandla wase Mampondweni bayakuxhamla ngokuthi baqeqeshelwe
ezokhenketho kunye nolondolozo lwendalo. Amasebe ombutho wesizwe i-ANC kula
mmandla siyawabongoza ukuba asebenzisane nabahlali njengoko siqhele
ukwenza. Senzela ukuba sincedisane nabahlali ukuze baxhamle amathuba adalwe
sesi sibhengezo. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa member’s
statement follows.)

[Ms N M MAHLAWE: Deputy Speaker, the ANC welcomes the announcement by the
Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Mr Martinus Van Schalkwyk,
that the Pondoland coastline would now be a national park. This
announcement means a lot to the people of Pondoland as this area will be
included on the list of tourist destinations.

This area will ensure biodiversity and will have protected flora and fauna,
indigenous trees and endangered wild animals. Educational programmes will
be planned and people will be trained in tourism and conservation. We ask
that the ANC wards in that area consult with and convey this information to
their constituencies, as they usually do. We are doing this to ensure
collaboration with community members in order that they should fully
benefit from the opportunities created by this important decision. I thank
you. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I just wanted to enquire.
Could we be kind enough to act on behalf of some of the Ministers who are
not here?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is allowed, as long as all of that is done
within 10 minutes.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: I was worried that the opposition would complain.
[Interjections.]


                ALLEGATIONS REGARDING MISUSE OF PUBLIC FUNDS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Deputy Speaker, I have been informed by the
Minister of Education that the DA raised all horrid stories again. They
must not abuse this time here in Parliament. If they have such a serious
allegation - that we are systematically using public funds for party-
political propaganda purposes, let them come and debate this matter
properly, and let them write to me and make these accusations so that we
can respond to them.

But this business about abusing parliamentary privilege here is a bit out
of order. Do they have something to say? They have raised this before and
we have told them that they did not have any evidence to show. If they
didn’t want to participate in the celebrations of 10 years of freedom and
democracy, it’s because they didn’t like the 10 years of freedom and
democracy. [Applause.]


                       PERSONNEL EDUCATION EXPENDITURE


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, with respect to personnel
education expenditure that the member has referred to, the hon member knows
that we are trying very hard to address this matter. Having succeeded in
the majority of provinces to bring these costs down, we remain challenged
by needing to ensure that we address both nonpersonnel and personnel
expenditure much more accurately. But certainly, it is a matter that each
of our provinces is attending to.

On the budgets for infrastructure, we provided significant ones. The
member, as member of the portfolio committee, would know that many
provinces have even underspent in this area of infrastructure. Where we
have provided budgets, they have not been utilised to provide increased
classrooms and other resources for our children. We have an accelerated
programme where I think we are co-operating very well with the Department
of Public Works. In some provinces, we still need to correct the manner in
which we work together more efficiently.

Certainly, in terms of reports I got from six out of the nine provinces, we
are moving well in terms of infrastructure provision and the new framework
of agreement with the Department of Public Works. I agree that we will
intensify our efforts. I am not sure that the ring-fencing needs to be
done. It is more appropriate administratively and with other procedures
that we ensure that it works effectively; and we will attend to this.

On the matter of higher education: it is not true that this government is
not addressing access to it. Through this government’s intervention we are
now able to support poor students who are academically able, to the amount
of R1,2 billion from public finances. This assists thousands of young
people who would not have had the opportunity to access higher education,
indeed to do so.

It is not the view of government that Further Education and Training
colleges should be the sole access point. They are not technikons, but FET
colleges. What we are proposing is that we should make our FET colleges
become capable of offering high-level skills opportunities, which then form
a credible alternative for the young people of South Africa. Because the
character of many of our former technical colleges was of a nature that
just offered basic and simple level technical skills training.

The recapitalisation by government to the tune of R1,5 billion seeks to
transform the FET colleges into sectors of skills development, that provide
high-level, technical training to young people in our country and then
begin to become a competitive set of institutions. These are the
universities which are seen as the only postsecondary school training
opportunity by many young people.

Let me say that our government has done a great deal to enhance accessing
many more young people who would never have had an opportunity for higher
education study, they can now have it through the national financial aid
scheme. The government made sure that indeed the matter of upfront fees is
addressed from this year – January 2005.

Through action taken by this government, for the first time young people
who do not have the funding to pay the upfront registration cost - I
created the mechanism with the support of government for them – can access
the national student financial aid scheme for that payment. It happened
this year and will continue to happen next year as well. We are attending
to these matters. We are a caring government. We want to develop human
resources and we are doing so successfully. I thank you. [Applause.]

       FIGHTING CORRUPTION – A MATTER ON THE AGENDA OF OUR GOVERNMENT

                           (Ministerial Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the issue of corruption,
sometimes inefficiency of the Public Service, is a matter that is
continuously being raised. On behalf of the government of the ANC, I do
want to place on record that made not only we have the fight against
corruption a matter on the agenda of our government. For instance, with
regard to the issue in Gauteng, the MEC for Safety and Security has already
announced steps that are being taken to detect and deal decisively with it
whilst we are able to establish where this alleged corruption started from
and the extent to which it expands.

I think that there should be no doubt whatsoever with regard to the
position of the ANC government that, on this issue, the ANC is not
prevaricating. The critical element in fighting this has to do with us as
public representatives - national, provincial and local government - to
educate the masses of the people on the ground to know how to use the
instruments set out at constitutional level, so that we and them
collaborate in detecting, identifying corrupt elements, and then act
decisively on that.

I would like to assure the public at large, and I appeal to my colleagues
in the House, both the ruling party and the opposition party, that we carry
a collective responsibility on this issue of educating the masses of the
people on how they can work with us to root out corruption. There are old
and new elements that are being recruited in the Public Service who do not
respect the provisions of the Constitution and the direction of policy. But
we must act as one. On this issue South African leaders must not and cannot
afford to work as a divided House. I thank you. [Applause.]


                       ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE SERVICES


                           (Ministerial Response)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Deputy Speaker, I’d like to thank hon Maggie for
her comment on how we try as the Department of Health and the ANC to
improve the quality of health care that we provide for the citizens of our
country. We will continue to do so, and we are committed to doing so. For
example, you know that we have made efforts with regards to ensuring the
affordability of medicines of quality - medicines that are safe and
efficacious.

One other tool that we are using at the moment is to develop a health
charter so that we can bridge the gap between the private and the public
health sectors. We have been working together with the Medical Aids Council
to investigate the high costs of hospitalisation in our country with a view
to significantly bring them down. And I must say the submissions that were
made to us by the various stakeholders on the issue of a health charter
have been very, very positive. Consultations have been inclusive and indeed
we are sure that we will reach consensus around this issue.

We have just had a very positive meeting in Britain this weekend with over
250 members of the Association of South African Nurses in the UK. The vast
majority of them are really looking forward to coming back to contribute in
the country to provide quality health care to our people.

So, thank you very much for these comments. We will continue to do so. We
are committed to transforming the health care system in our country. Thank
you. [Applause.]


                               HERITAGE MONTH


                           (Ministerial Response)

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Madam Deputy Speaker, Heritage Month is
the time during which we celebrate our South Africaness. And we appreciate,
of course, that our South African heritage is rooted in the pluralist
nature of our society – a society that is pluralist in terms of race,
languages, religion, lifestyles and preferences that, as stated on our
national Coat of Arms, is the source of our strength as South Africans.

During this September, in addition to a number of activities at the
municipal, provincial and national levels, we shall also be unveiling
significant new projects, including the mounting of an exhibition of the
works of 20th century African artists at the South African National Gallery
here in Cape Town. We shall also be taking steps to have the kramat of
Sheik Yusuf of Macassar incorporated into our national heritage estate.

In addition to mounting the second Albert Luthuli Memorial Lecture at the
University of KwaZulu-Natal, national Heritage Month offers an opportunity
for every South African to reaffirm that his or her identity is not
understood as being in conflict with that of other South Africans or a
negation of the unity of our nation. Diversity, as we say, is South
Africa’s greatest strength, and it is by unity in our diversity that we
actually affirm our South Africaness. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order: The idea
of Member Statements is for members to bring matters to the attention of
the executive and government to answer. This has not happened . . .
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was going to speak on that matter. I know that you
and Mr Groenewald were mentioned in a statement earlier on and you have no
. . . [Interjections.]

Dr C P MULDER: And the member ran away. He is no longer in the House.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t know whether he walked away or ran away, but I
mean he is no longer here. I wanted to also raise that point: That is
unfair for members who are not in the executive because they cannot respond
on their behalf. The statement was made in the names of . . . What do we do
with a member who has run away or walked away?

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon Dr Pahad only used about 20
seconds of his time and I was wondering . . . [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: But unfortunately it has to be members of the
executive. I haven’t heard of any promotions so far. [Laughter.]

Dr C P MULDER: I know, Madam Deputy Speaker. But isn’t there any member of
the executive who would like to assist that member who has attacked us on a
personal basis and then ran out of the House? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Met graagte. [With pleasure.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it’s just very important that
we point out to the FF Plus that in actual fact they started this some time
ago and that they must learn to practise what they preach.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did they also run out of the House or walk out of the
House? What is it that they have started?

Mr M J ELLIS: They started the whole process, Madam Deputy Speaker, of
attacking other parties and so on, and they must learn to practise what
they preach.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon member from the FF Plus is pleading with
members of the executive to please use the 20 seconds left just to say
something on their behalf.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: it’s not so much
the time as a factor. They were allowed five ministerial responses. We have
had five ministerial responses. Therefore Minister Manuel cannot say
anything at all. It’s over.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this time Mr Ellis is correct, hon Minister.
You may not say anything.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Is the entire party cowardly? Hon Van Dyk runs
away, Ellis doesn’t want to hear the story. It’s pathetic.

Mr M J ELLIS: None of us wants to hear you. Not even your own members want
to hear you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, Mr Mulder and Mr Groenewald, I did try . . .
[Interjections.] You must please go and talk outside.




 DEBATE ON INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION TOPIC: THE IMPORTANCE OF CIVIL SOCIETY
     AND ITS INTERPLAY WITH PARLIAMENTS AND OTHER DEMOCRATICALLY ELECTED
         ASSEMBLIES FOR THE NURTURING AND DEVELOPMENT OF DEMOCRACY.



Nksz N M MAHLAWE: Ndiyabona ukuba ndixhelelwe exhukwane namhlanje.
Ndizibone sele ndifunda isitatimente ndingasilendelanga. Ngoku ndizibona
ndivula ingxongxo. Naleyo bendingayilindanga bendicinga ukuba
ndisekugqibeleni. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Ms N M MAHLAWE: I can see things are in my favour today. I found myself
reading a statement unexpectedly. Now, I find myself opening the debate.
And that I did not expect either. I thought I would be the last speaker.]

Also, I think there is something wrong with the formulation of this topic.
I think the word that should have been used is “nurturing” not “maturing”.
It should read “ . . . assemblies for the nurturing and development of
democracy”.

Because so many countries have established more democratic regimes in
recent years, there has been renewed interest in popular engagement . . .
[Interjections.] . . . - I am not so short - in political life and
everything else that relates to the way that political cultures or basic
values and beliefs affect the way the state is governed. More recently,
there has also been growing interest in strengthening civil society. That
is from Charles Hauss.

The UN Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, shared this view in Montreal in 1999
when he said:

  If the UN Global Agenda is to be properly addressed, a partnership with
  civil society at large is not an option; it is a necessity.

While some believe that civil society and civil culture tend to frustrate
social change and progress towards a more just and equitable society, there
is a growing agreement that civil society, civic culture and social capital
are all important for strengthening and nurturing democracy.

There are various views in South Africa as to what civil society is. One
writer says:


  Civil society is a heterogeneous collection of organisations and groupings
  coming from grassroots initiatives, acting according to own ideas and
  organisational models.


Yet another writer says:

    Civil society - I see it as a sector that belongs neither to the public
    or private sector, but find its play somewhere in-between proving to be
    vigorous and fully able to make use of the opportunities offered by the
    international networks and global communications.

Whichever school of thought we may think befits the definition of civil
society, civil culture and social capital are all-important for
strengthening and deepening democracy.

We are told that constitutional and parliamentary democracies work best in
an environment wherein the general population is well informed and able to
exercise their rights and where organisations of civil society and other
democratic institutions play an active role in the society.

Having emerged to represent and articulate interests of a large part of the
society, organisations of civil society strengthen social forces, which
provide a balance and counterweight to the powers of the state. We talk of
the organisations, which include the trade union movement, student
movements, churches, religious associations, professional associations and
other nongovernmental organisations.

In South Africa, with intense state repression and the adoption of the 1983
Constitution, which purported to further divide and rule the black majority
of our country, the liberation struggle reached its peak in the years
between 1970 and 1980. This period saw the convergence of trade unions,
student movements, religious groups, and nongovernmental organisations
behind the liberation forces led by the ANC.

These are the periods that also saw the emergence and rise of the United
Democratic Front, a mass-based - I am not referring to the new one -
umbrella body which resulted from a call that was made by the leadership of
the ANC for convergence and unity of purpose and action among all the
organisations of civil society in advancing the liberation struggle in
South Africa. This mass movement was made up of various disparate forces,
which included trade unions, student movements and alternative structures
of local governance that had mushroomed as a result of the unwillingness of
the apartheid government to provide proper services in black areas.

As a result of the interventions of these organisations of civil society,
the crisis in South Africa reached unimagined, unmanageable proportions,
and apartheid became unworkable. Because of the involvement of civil
society, our constitutional democracy reflects the demands of various
organisations of civil society and therefore the aspirations of the
population.

Even the period following the 1994 democratic breakthrough saw the
influence of civil society continuing to manifest itself in the processes
or formulation and development of governmental policies and in the law-
making processes.

With regard to the relationship of Parliament with civil societies, one
Saras Jagwanth tells us that the Constitution appears to envisage a
continued relationship of co-operation between state and civil society,
which relationship is premised on civil society having a crucial role to
play in service delivery and policy-making with a state where similar goals
of transformation and social change are shared. The relationship between
civil society, Parliament and the legislature should be geared towards
jointly ensuring success of governmental efforts to reconstruct and develop
our society, in particular, towards the encouragement of the civil society
organisations to consult with communities on the issues of service delivery
and jointly to monitor realisation of the socio-economic rights.

In assuring effective oversight, which is one of the tenets of our
democracy, our Parliament must intensify its encouragement of civil society
to make both written and oral submissions on social issues, which adversely
affect poor, marginalised communities. During this process and interaction,
civil society organisations would feel fully integrated in legislative
processes. Needless to mention, the relationship between organisations of
civil society and Parliament should be extended to both the joint
monitoring of implementation of the legislative policy of Parliament and
legislatures, and the collective drawing on the experiences for future law-
making.

The most disadvantaged and vulnerable sections of our society, which are
trapped in the highest levels of poverty, underdevelopment and lower levels
of education, are frequently the least organised in society. Hence, we
require organisations of civil society that could easily access state
institutions and articulate their interests. I thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Hon Deputy Speaker, the topic of our debate is also the
title of a report by two rapporteurs, one from South Africa and one from
Sweden, which will be presented at the assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union in Geneva on 19 October this year. There is today a growing
realisation regarding the importance of civil society. Correctly so, civil
society is our Parliament’s electorate in a different form. Thus when
Parliament pays heed to the views of civil society, it pays heed to its own
electorate.

The report stresses an important point when it says that civil society can
play its proper role only if there is, and I quote, “respect for its
diversity and relative independence”.

As Afrikaanssprekende uit daardie gemeenskap wil ek van hierdie geleentheid
gebruik maak om Afrikaanse burgerlike en kerklike organisasies te loof vir
hul onmeetbare bydrae om skool, kerk, maatskaplike versorging en kulturele
aktiwiteite in stand te hou en uit te bou.

Ek sou graag hierdie organisasies wou opnoem, maar tyd laat my nie toe om
dit te doen nie. Laat ek net sê, van kunstefeeste tot tehuise vir kinders
en bejaardes, van landbou tot sport, op byna elke terrein is Afrikaanse
gemeenskappe in georganiseerde vorm besig om ’n bydrae te lewer. Dankie ook
aan almal wat so mooi op die programme van hierdie organisasies reageer en
dit ondersteun. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[As an Afrikaans speaker from that community, I would like to use this
opportunity to praise Afrikaner civil and religious organisations for the
immeasurable contribution with regard to maintaining and extending schools,
churches, social care and cultural activities.

I would have liked to name these organisations, but time does not allow me
to do so. Let me just say that from arts festivals to children’s homes and
old age homes, from agriculture to sport, at almost every level Afrikaans
communities in organised form are making a contribution. Thank you to all
those who have responded so wonderfully to the programmes of these
organisations and who support them.]

To come back to the report, it states categorically that there are certain
prerequisites for creative involvement of civil society. Mention is made,
inter alia, of the following: first of all, political pluralism. Of course,
if Parliament wishes to stay tuned to the needs of its people, it must
accept not only the fact of a constitutionally sanctioned, multiparty
system but also the consequence of this concept. The consequence is that
the voicing of different views is not only to be tolerated but in fact to
be heard, heeded and, as far as possible, accommodated.

The second prerequisite says, and I quote, “diversity and respect for
expressions that reflect different positions and approaches is needed”. The
important point is that a view or position taken is not true or false,
right or wrong merely depending upon the numbers that support or reject
such view. If a small segment of society projects a certain view, it is for
Parliament to evaluate it, view and judge it on the basis of an objective
evaluation.

A third prerequisite says, and I quote, “Meaningful engagement of ruling
political parties is required”. This means that a ruling party will accept
the fact that they will be engaged and even confronted.

Ek sluit af met ’n paar opmerkings ten opsigte van ons eie Suid-Afrikaanse
situasie. Eerstens moet die Parlement baie meer bewus word van die politiek-
maatskaplike pluraliteit en diversiteit van ons Suid-Afrikaanse gemeenskap,
en moet groter begrip en waardering hê vir die rol van alle burgerlike
organisasies.

Tweedens moet die regerende party weg beweeg van die idee dat diversiteit
net binne die ANC geakkommodeer moet word en dat slegs die aktiwiteite van
organisasies binne daardie, soos hulle dit noem, “broad church of the ANC”
in tel is en na geluister moet word. Trouens, om die demokrasie te dien
moet die regerende party se oor méér oop wees vir die minderhede wat tot
die regering ’n appél rig.

’n Idee is nie goed of sleg afhangende van die affiliasie van die outeur
nie. Idees kan ontstaan en gebou word in die godgegewe intellek en gees van
álle Suid-Afrikaners. Laat ons die dag bereik dat dit ook die rigsnoer van
hierdie Parlement word, want dan dien ons waarlik die uitbouing van die
demokrasie in Suid-Afrika. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[I conclude with a few remarks with regard to our own South African
situation. Firstly, Parliament must become much more aware of the political-
social plurality and diversity of our South African community and must have
greater understanding and appreciation for the role of all civil
organisations.

Secondly, the ruling party must move away from the idea that diversity
should only be accommodated within the ANC and that only the activities of
organisations within that, as they call it, “broad church of the ANC”, have
legitimacy and should be listened to. In fact, to serve democracy the
ruling party should be more open to the minorities that lodge an appeal to
the government.

An idea is not good or bad depending on the affiliation of its author.
Ideas can originate and develop in the godgiven intellect and spirit of all
South Africans. Let us arrive at the day when it serves as a guide to this
Parliament as well, because only then are we truly strengthening democracy
in South Africa.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, it is trite to say
that the participation of civil society in Parliament is important for the
maturation and development of democracy. It is for this reason that the
drafters of our Constitution specifically provided for public participation
in the activities of Parliament.

Two major challenges remain, however. Firstly, the constitutional
permission to participate does not necessarily translate into actual
participation by civil society. Accessibility to Parliament is hampered by
a lack of information among civil society role-players about the topics
being discussed in Parliament and the ways in which they can participate.
Often, they only discover that a matter is under discussion in Parliament
when the media reports about public hearings by which time it is too late
to enter the process or to properly prepare submissions.

The second and perhaps more critical question regarding civil society
participation in Parliament is whether there is actually something in which
to participate

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: I thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am also making it very difficult for you to
participate.

Mr L ZITA: Deputy Speaker, Deputy President and colleagues, I was wondering
about what the hon Delport was asking us in discussing the plurality of
civil society - that we must give hearings to minorities. What I’m not so
sure about is which minorities he was talking about.

Does he mean the DA, which is a minority opposition? Or, does he mean the
IFP, which is losing so many members that it really is becoming a minority,
or was he talking about the ACDP? I’m not so sure. I’m curious to know
which minorities he was talking about. [Interjections.]

In the next few weeks in Geneva the IPU will be discussing the challenge
for parliaments to work with civil society. In an important intervention on
this question, Monty Nasu in the popular progressive journal Work in
Progress in the early 90s had this to say about civil society, and I quote:


   A broad definition of civil society is that it is located between the
   public sphere of the state and the private sphere of the individual.
   Households and the individual as a citizen are part of the institutions
   of civil society. Party politics included is also an essential element of
   it. In addition, the state, as part of its coercive function, plays a
   major role in this arena. Public education and the state media are but
   two of the areas which engage civil society.


   Civil society is not only about social movements. The institutions of
   capital are an essential part of it as well. It is thus the marketplace
   of economic activity, hegemonic battles, ideological skirmishes, cultural
   formations, resistance struggles and state interference.

It is precisely because of the complexity of the concept and the experience
of civil society that there is no unanimity about its essence and purpose.
There is also confusion about the words themselves. The origins of the
words are German: Bürgerliche Gesellschaft, which has two translations in
English: civil society or bourgeois society.

It is therefore not surprising that even some of the most outstanding
analysts of the modern era, whilst agreeing on the spatial location of
civil society, differ in their understanding of its essence. As
fundamentally a terrain of market activity, Karl Marx saw civil society as
a space of domination and exploitation.

However, his student, the Italian Antonio Gramsci, saw it not merely “as a
sphere of individual needs but of organisation” and that it had the
potential of natural self-regulation and freedom. But purely because of
this ambiguous legacy, Alain Touraine more recently periodises the
protagonist of the space for civil society. He says, and I quote:


   In the struggle against absolute monarchies it was the economic actors or
   the bourgeoisie who defended civil society. In a society dominated by the
   market economy, movements to defend cultural rights are civil society’s
   best representatives.


What then should be the approach of the democratic parliament to the
challenge of civil society? Our Parliament operates in a relatively
developed society with mutually reinforcing yet contradictory impulses.
There is the impulse of capitalist modernisation, a potentially progressive
development to the extent that it develops the levels of development of our
society.

However, the operation of the capitalist economy in the context of global
maldevelopment means that our capitalism is not completely progressive and
demands an alternative impulse to protect the popular classes from the
violence of our maldevelopment.

In our situation, therefore, we need both the combative vigilance of Marx,
the perceptive innovation of Gramsci and both the principal classes - the
bourgeoisie and the working class that Touraine refers to - equally
harnessed to the challenge of national, democratic transformation.

Like everything in our past we had two civil societies. There was the civil
society of the dominant classes - the social world of the whites. It was
the racially defined business chambers, the Rotary clubs, the whites-only
churches and the racially exclusive media, etc.

In the confines of the village and the township the majority had their own
experience of civil society. The majority had spaza shops, shebeens, the
media, for instance Imvo ZaBantsundu, as early as the 19th century, and
Drum magazine, the black theatre of Gibson Kente, choral music, trade
unions, etc.

Apartheid in all its ferocity could not put out the light of civil society.
It is always important for us to appreciate the broader and more textured
concepts of civil society, and not only reduce the concept of civil society
to societal, political relations, important as these are.

With regard to the Constitution and social organisations of political
power, civil society has played a problematic, suggestive and anticipative
role. There is the more recent experience of the nongovernmental
organisations and protest movements, sometimes referred to as social
movements. Though important, their common feature is their limited
ambition. They seek to critique power, but not to reconstitute it. They are
an important reservoir of alternative perspectives that we in Parliament
should listen to and engage with.

However, the democratic movement that the ANC leads traverses a tradition
whose understanding of civil society not only embraces but also goes beyond
NGOs and social movements. It is essentially a tradition that talks about
the socialisation of politics.

Civil society has, over the past 300 years, critiqued the public
organisation of power in modern society. In this context we are talking
about the committee participation and control of the affairs of the state.

In her book On Revolution, Hannah Arendt, in a chapter entitled, “The
revolutionary tradition and its lost treasure”, traces an alternative
concept of governance in which the people are at the epicentre of politics.
Arendt convincingly shows that Thomas Jefferson, one of the leading
American constitutionalists, argued for what he called “a division of the
counties into wards”. He called for the establishment of elementary
republics at a local level.

Arendt says that these elementary republics could be found in the Paris
commune of 1871 and in the popular societies during the French Revolution.
These were instances in which the people, not their leaders, were the
mainstay of political life, something far deeper than what we have.

Arendt makes the profound point, and I quote:


   Both the Jefferson plan and the French society’s revolutionaries
   anticipated with an almost wide precision those councils, soviets and
   Räte which were to make their appearance in every genuine revolution
   throughout the 19th and 20th centuries.


As we discuss the relationship of civil society to the people’s parliament,
it is advisable that we ponder together with no greater figure than Thomas
Jefferson, and ask ourselves how complete our system of democratic
governance is if it is not based on and does not derive its strength from
Jefferson’s elementary republics.

In undertaking this exercise, it is important that you understand that we
had an embryonic Jefferson moment both in the Inkundla system of the
democratic determination in the context of traditional governance in
precolonial South Africa and in the experience of people’s power at the
height of the 80s uprising. The street and area committees in the context
of dual power of that era were nothing less than the elementary republics
and soviets that Arendt refers to.

It is from this point of view that we need to start, support and improve
the ward system, as well as the integrated development plans that we have
established over the past five years. This Parliament needs to study the
experience of the ward system and the IDPs. We need to check whether
ordinary South Africans are mobilised to participate in defining the
content of their development in public life in their communities, as
against the present, predominant role that consultants play.

We need to evaluate the extent to which these institutions measure up to
the ideal of popular governance and actual popular control of the
democratic system. Only then, we, together with Jefferson, would agree that
“the wit of humanity cannot devise a more solid basis for a free, durable
and well-administered Republic”. I thank you. [Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Deputy Speaker, I don’t have the time to indulge in a
lecture like the previous speaker. The interplay between civil society
organisations and parliaments is important. The commonality between these
two institutions is that they are both in daily contact with the people.
Together they can enhance democracy by ensuring that the government is
responsive to the needs of the people.

Parliament should therefore consolidate its relationship with civil society
to ensure that Parliament is friendly and responsive to the demands of
civil society. For example, languages used in Parliament ought to reflect
the demographics of the population. Both institutions should work with
governments and ensure vigilance to corruption and abuse of power.

The ACDP would like to caution though that as much as civil society and
Parliament ought daily to articulate the needs of people, they must ask
these questions responsibly and avoid fostering a mob spirit of
ungovernability. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Deputy Speaker, there is no doubt that civil society,
organised movements or voluntary associations have played an important role
in bringing about changes in this country. It is through civil society
formations that today we are able to celebrate more than 10 years of
freedom and democracy.

When most political parties were banned during the apartheid era the most
vocal and localised institutions of people’s assemblies were in the form of
these organisations. Most of these formations’ role and activities were not
only confined to the fight for political changes, but also dealt with the
fight against poverty and helping the poor overcome their daily social
struggles.

The challenge to foster a healthy working relationship between civil
society and the elected assemblies is for these assemblies to recognise and
acknowledge the power that these formations can wield in the deepening of
democracy in our country. [Time expired.]

Mr N T GODI: Deputy Speaker, comrades and hon members, it is a truism that
for democracy to evolve and mature you need more than just democratically
elected assemblies. There are vital, ancillary entities like organs of
civil society that play a pivotal role in that evolution and consolidation.

Thus democracy means much more than the practice of electing
representatives and includes the capacity of civil society to input and
critique their work, put proposals, hold representatives accountable,
challenge people and institutions and keep them on the straight and narrow.

Democracy requires eternal vigilance. A democracy without a vibrant and
organised civil society is a process without watchdogs. Elected assemblies
must view civil society as complementary to their work. A robust engagement
without necessarily being confrontational is a progressive standpoint.

The challenge, especially for developing countries, is twofold: firstly,
some civil society structures do not have a mass standpoint or a mass
character. They are elitist entities that espouse elitist views in the name
of the people and want to make the people believe that those elitist views
are theirs. These entities are made up of a few people with a lot of money
and connections, and they make a lot of noise.

Some civil society structures are pawns of foreign interests. They’re
Trojan Horses in the broader and concerted schemes of imperialist forces’
designs on developing countries. Such structures do not help to advance
democracy and should thus be rejected.

Civil society should be mobilised on a patriotic platform to hold
accountable public institutions in the interest of the nation, to protect
and advance the fundamental interest of the masses, and to ensure that
democracy benefits the vast majority of our people and not a few. A civil
society mobilised on that platform should be able to interact productively
with public institutions to serve the common good of the nation. I thank
you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the MF strongly agrees with this
report. South Africa as a democracy governed by the supreme law, our
national Constitution, and is built on the values of democracy: a people’s
government, human rights, transparency and accountability.

The people of our nation, rightfully, have access to all information and
offer to partake in the parliamentary process through contributions made to
us as MPs. Meetings that are open and often include interaction with NGOs
have seen many of this country’s issues addressed and delivered upon.

This report rightfully acknowledges the valued contribution made to
effective governance by civil society. The MF finds it a duty and incumbent
upon all in the House to return to their constituencies and engage in
active discussions with persons, as well as NGOs on issues pending and
issues that may be coming to the House.

In this way not only are we opening up a gateway for civil and
parliamentary interaction, but we may also receive valued input and
direction on what the people really want. We are often called a people’s
government, a democracy that exists for the people, by the people.

Further, such interactions ensure greater awareness regarding our progress.
The MF supports this report by the IPU and would like to engage in more
effective means to enhance interaction between Parliament and civil
society. We need to make ourselves more accessible to our people. Thank
you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr M J BHENGU: Madam Deputy Speaker, parliamentarians around the world can
and should actually enhance democracy in their countries by providing an
appropriate support for civil society. Civil society has played a crucial
role in the liberation movements of many countries in the entire world.
This is an open area for the most oppressed because of its unique nature
since it is a collection of groups and organisations built on grassroots
initiative, and shaped by the free will of individual communities.

Civil society organisations are grassroots-based, nonprofit, voluntary and
they pursue a social or cultural purpose that is directed at satisfying the
desire of the public to benefit. They are self-governed and not directly
part of the apparatus of government.

Therefore it is a concern that some formally established civic society
organisations have problems with declining civic participation and a
shrinking membership base. Parliament can and should play a central role as
a bridge between various local civil society organisations, government, the
private and business sector, and the public.

Government and parliament cannot function in a vacuum. Interaction between
civil society, governments and parliaments offer many opportunities that
should be utilised. An expected outcome of this is that an action started
by civil society can go beyond a particular case and have a broader
cultural, political, or institutional impact on society. Parliaments can
play a crucial role in providing an enabling, financial environment for
civil society organisations that could introduce new opportunities for
collaboration and greater local ownership.

It is therefore recommended that parliaments around the world should have a
responsibility to pave the way for people-oriented socioeconomic policies,
which enhance the bonds of mutual trust, confidence and reciprocity among
citizens.

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Madam Deputy Speaker, I must say that it is quite
encouraging to hear even the other political parties expressing the
importance and vitality of the interplay between civil society and
parliaments. But it is also important to caution regarding the fact that
people are uneasy about ungovernability and mob spirit.

I think that in the past 11 years our government, through legislation and
the executive, has been able to ensure more than adequate political and
economic stability. It is also good that issues such as elitist groups and
the role of international donors are also highlighted.

Albeit the case, in South Africa the basic vision of achieving the
objectives contained in the RDP remain valid today because the enormous
inequalities that we have addressed since 1994 remain rooted in the
structural legacy of the apartheid regime. Therefore it becomes clear that
the developmental role of the state remains key to a meaningful
transformation of any society.

To overcome poverty and inequality, promote economic development and
employment can only be achieved through the landing and enabling role of
the state, including Parliament, a thriving private sector, as well as
active involvement of all sectors of civil society. In combination, these
will lead to sustainable growth and development.

Even in his autobiography, Nelson Mandela described civil society as a mass
movement consisting of several independent groups, a vital factor in the
transition from apartheid to democracy and a vital factor in the process of
transforming our society.

The idea of civil society has achieved considerable attention in political
and development discourse over the past two decades. Even the IPU, which is
going to discuss the very topic, has already addressed it at various
occasions, and has emphasised its central role in broadening democratic
participation, and I quote:


   Whilst the existence of an active civil society is an essential element
   of democracy, the capacity and willingness of individuals to participate
   in the democratic processes, and make governance choices cannot be taken
   for granted. It is therefore necessary to develop conditions conducive to
   the genuine exercise of participatory rights whilst eliminating obstacles
   that prevent, hinder or inhibit this exercise.


The world’s civic society movement established in 2002 attracted about 1
000 participants who represented 500 organisations from 70 countries, a
majority of whom were developing countries. The aim of this world civil
society forum is to strengthen international co-operation, particularly to
facilitate co-operation between civil society and the UN system, promote co-
operation on civil society organisations across the world working in
different fields of activity, especially developing countries and
indigenous people, and consider the constitution of a permanent forum.

With regard to the Cardoso panel, which was set up by the UN regarding the
relations between the UN and civil society, it was agreed that the IPU
should take the lead in seeking the views of the international
parliamentary community on how this relation can best evolve.

The interplay between parliaments and civil society manifest itself through
general and specific political relations between parliaments and civil
society. The guiding values and principles of the interplay should
emphasise the importance of diversity and variations of organisational
expressions of civil society in different political, national, cultural,
social and religious contexts in modern societies.

The role of parliaments has become more clearly defined and presupposes the
active involvement of many role-players, not the least, civil society. The
role of civil society is very important, both in established and fledgling
democracies. The experience in the DRC is a clear model of how active
players of civil society were able to help rebuild a country that had gone
through the political doldrums.

Democracy is not a static process; it is constantly changing and,
hopefully, qualitatively growing. The interaction between parliament and
civil society is frequently discussed in many countries as part of their
efforts to refine their democracy and, in doing so, to broaden, enhance and
refine the interplay between parliament and civil society. The prospects of
efforts may even lead to higher levels of democracy that is highly
participatory in character.

Since 1989, in Porto Alegre, Brazil, three mayors and their staff have
increasingly promoted popular and innovative programmes. Participatory
budgeting is the centrepiece of Porto Alegre reforms. Citizens thus take a
healthy chunk of responsibility for governing the city, including deciding
on practical matters such as the location of a new pavement or park. What
is even more important is that the citizens become conscious of the new and
better possibilities for their lives.

One index of success of the participatory budgeting process is the
increasing level of participation. The number of participants in Porto
Alegre grew from a few thousand in 1990 to 16 000 in 1998, to 40 000 in
1999.

Here in South Africa, the emergence of the law for traditional health
practitioners was a consequence of initiatives of traditional health
practitioners, traditional leaders as well as other components of civil
society. The state had to respond to such a call because of the need for
recognition of such practitioners, that they also had a vital role to play
in health care. The reinforcement of their ethical conduct was necessary
and the protection of patients’ rights and welfare was essential.

However, civil society can be threatened from different political angles
and directions. The main threats are generally from repressive and
authoritarian regimes that try to suppress independent movements or co-opt
them into official structures. Excessive restrictions and inflexibility
from the state also tend to undermine the nurturing of the interplay.

But, what about the interests of the international donors? Is it not high
time they are also placed under the spotlight because the redesignation of
focus of some of the NGOs, at times, through specific political agendas,
tends to result in demobilisation of the very masses they claim to interact
with? The debate on the accountability of civil society . . .
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon members, can I ask you
please to pay attention to the member who is speaking at the podium. You
are all busy with your own meetings. There is not one of you that is
sitting and listening. Can we please pay attention to the debate before us.
This is an order on the Order Paper, so we are obliged to pay attention.
Thank you.

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Thank you, Chairperson. The debate on the accountability
of civil society organisations cannot be properly understood without
examining several of the key trends affecting current notions of
governance, democracy and public participation.

When The Economist posed the now famous question, “Who guards the
guardians?” it pointed implicitly to a dramatically changed political and
social backdrop in which citizen groups and movements, the guardians of
political interests in many societies, have assumed a much higher profile
and level of influence than ever before. These new guardians must in turn
be subject to vigorous control and self-control.

I would like to caution that, at times, placing too great a faith in civil
society; and vaguely defined, glossed over, important differences between
NGOs, grassroots organisations, social movements and other forms of civic
actions is a risk. It also ignores an array of problems inherent in local
politics and social relations. However, the interaction between civil
society organisations, government and parliament does also result in
generating civil pride, allowing people to exercise a degree of control
over actions and decisions of governments and parliaments.

In conclusion, civil society today is part and parcel of a nation acting in
continuous confirmation and enrichment of the national identity and
homeland values, fully participating in the processes for the development
of its cultural entity, and defending the most solemn principles and
interests of its ideals. The most beautiful and inspiring promise that
civil society carries within its formation is the ideal and prospect of a
people’s power, and empowerment of the individual citizen.

People gather their strength and act together to fulfil small and larger
dreams in order to realise universal ideas and local hopes of an improved
everyday life. We, the parliamentarians in South Africa and the rest of the
world, must work not only to enable this ideal to be formulated but also to
give it credibility.

If we parliamentarians from South Africa as well as across the world
succeed in guaranteeing the freedom of action for this force, if it
succeeds in offering this sector viable platform for positive initiations,
then we will also help to enhance democracy in all our countries.

Whatever the actual role of civil society is at present, or should be, the
reality is that civil society organisations are becoming an integral part
of the primary actors in our political lives. May this Parliament then give
full and active support as well to the delegation that will be going to
Geneva to the 113th General Assembly next month, in October. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.


                  STUDY TOUR TO WEST COAST OF WESTERN CAPE


    (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and
                                  Forestry)

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, Comrade Deputy President and hon members, we
live in a world of inequality where abundance lives side by side with
deprivation. We know that the world has enough resources for everybody to
be adequately fed and clothed and to have access to basic services
necessary for healthy living, safe water and sanitation.

At the dawn of democracy in South Africa, there were an estimated 12
million people or more without adequate water supply services and nearly 21
million people without adequate sanitation services. However, our
inequalities have specific historic roots and our ability to deal with the
services backlog is greater than that of most developing countries.

South Africa has made great strides in reducing this gross inequality. It
is estimated that more than 10 million people have been provided with basic
water supplies during the last 11 years. This report presents a broad
picture of the capacity of the three municipalities on the West Coast of
the Western Cape province visited in February this year, namely the
Matzikama, the Cederberg and the Berg River municipalities.

To contribute to the successful implementation of the social contract to
create work and to alleviate poverty, a key issue for the oversight visit
to the West Coast was to determine how far municipalities have come in
implementing projects that would ensure access by the people to basic water
and sanitation, as well as other governance and finance issues facing
municipalities. In addition, the report highlights problems experienced by
communities in order to gain access to water and hygienic sanitation.

This is based on information that we have received from communities and
relevant committees, the municipalities, Dwaf housing committees that we
met at meetings hosted by the portfolio committee and onsite observations
during the oversight visit.

The report is intended to provide a stimulant both to the portfolio
committee, and hopefully to all of you today, as well as the relevant
provincial and national departments, to provide targeted support to
municipalities to enable the fulfilment of their constitutional mandate.
This mandate relates directly to the objectives of government’s broad
poverty alleviation programme.

The municipalities visited indicated that they were already in the process
of implementing legislation, such as the Local Government: Municipal
Systems Act and the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act. There are,
however, challenges in the implementation of the Local Government:
Municipal Finance Management Act, as well as the national water resource
strategy.

There is a need for the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry to build
capacity within these municipalities so that these municipalities can
complete the section 78 assessments, as these assessments are an important
factor for the municipalities to also complete their water services
development plans.

It appears that the design of the water services development plans by all
the municipalities in the Western Cape is a bit of a challenge faced by the
department in the Western Cape. We were told by representatives of the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry that a study has been undertaken
by Dwaf to quantify and verify water services in the municipalities.

The Masibambane campaign has, in the interim, identified a few projects to
assist municipalities to assess water and sanitation issues, especially on
farms and in informal settlements. The municipalities indicated that they
were providing free basic services to their communities and that this was
informed by the existence of an indigent policy and a register that they
kept.

It therefore appears that the municipalities have made progress in their
provision of free basic services - a policy adopted by the Cabinet, aimed
at providing free basic municipal services to every poor household in the
country. These services are often referred to as a basket of services. They
include solid waste removal, water, sanitation and electricity.

Municipalities must develop the infrastructure required to provide quality
and health services in terms of sanitation. Optimum use, to implement
capacity-building programmes, should be made of funds that are allocated
from the municipal infrastructure grant, through the ring-fencing of funds
for these particular purposes.

Municipalities, in the committee’s view, also need to implement the subsidy
policies for emerging small farmers, many of whom we saw on the West Coast,
as it seemed that there was no existing policy in place for them at that
time.

Water user associations must also ensure that farmers have equal access to
water, another feature that we’ve seen during the visit. Consideration
should be given to ways to provide emerging small farmers with sufficient
water from the canal, as this would improve the chances of the emerging
small farmers becoming commercial farmers.

Municipalities need to familiarise themselves with the national water
resource strategy to enable them to identify roles and responsibilities
when it comes to water provision. More efficient and effective water-
management strategies should be implemented, as it would seem to the
committee that the management of the supply of water to emerging small
farmers is a major problem.

One of the communities we met, called the community of Ebenezer, owed the
municipality about R14 000 in unpaid debt for services rendered. By the
time that we met them, R10 000 of the R14 000 in unpaid debts had been
paid, and this reflects the communities’ commitment to pay for their
services. We want to thank the community of Ebenezer for adhering to the
Masakhane campaign.

The basic problem in the distribution of irrigation water arises there
through bad management. The water user association needs to establish
better management systems to ensure that the distribution process remains
fair and equal. The irrigation supply infrastructure there also, in our
view, needs to be upgraded.

Dwaf has made progress in this regard and we are thankful that through the
launch of the water allocation reform process this issue will be taken care
of. Communities there have requested that the Clanwilliam Dam be raised so
that the dam could store more water, in this way particular communities,
like the Ebenezer community, could be supplied with water.

Dwaf and the municipalities should determine whether this is realistic. The
canal itself is very narrow and if, in addition, more water flows into the
canal, it can create major problems for the infrastructure there.

We are challenged with regards to basic services, in particular to farm
dwellers and some families that are living on informal settlements. Some
families living on farms have no sanitation and no effluent water
facilities at all. In addition, a pipeline on a farm that we visited,
called Nuwehoop farm, had been cut and closed off and they were denied
access to water on the farm. The committee was informed that they had to
walk to the canal to retrieve water for their use.

It is obviously an unacceptable situation. It is our view that we need to
have a dispensation that allows farm dwellers, in particular, to also enjoy
the policies government has created for water and sanitation.

As it is Arbour Week, let me say something about Arbour Week also. This
Arbour Week we call on all South Africans to help us invest in our future
by planting indigenous trees throughout our country. Indigenous trees are
essential to the protection of the environment. We live in an arid country
and we are particularly prone to droughts and erosion in South Africa.

Indigenous trees play an important role in stabilising our topsoil,
safeguarding our water table and even purifying our air. In addition,
indigenous trees are an integral part of the ecosystem - providing food and
shelter to hundreds of species. Finally, trees are beautiful, and in a
place like this it is good to be reminded of the fact that our world is a
beautiful place.

This year’s Arbour Week is a particularly important one in the history of
forestry in our country. It comes at a time when the forest sector is
poised for growth and the opportunity within the sector exists to
contribute to broad-based black economic empowerment, and is being tackled.

The forestry charter process that the Minister initiated in April this year
is progressing well, and she has tasked the steering committee to provide
her with a draft charter by the end of this year.

Arbour Week is also the time when we acknowledge the contribution that the
forestry sector plays in the economy of our country, and it also allows us
to showcase how forestry contributes to the national priorities of poverty
alleviation and job creation, especially in the deep, deep rural areas of
South Africa where the greatest need exists.

The oversight visit to the Western Cape has allowed us to see the need for
water allocation reform. The allocation of water should therefore promote
equity, address poverty, generate economic growth and create jobs.

The water allocation process must also recognise that redressing the
effects of previous discriminatory legislation also provides social
stability, which in turn promotes economic growth. Moreover, the water
allocation process must allow for the sustainable use of water resources
and must promote its efficient and nonwasteful use. Accordingly, water
allocation will initially be rolled out in areas experiencing water stress.

I want to pay a special tribute the late Glen Corker who was the researcher
of the committee, and who died in a very tragic accident this year. This
was the last piece of work that he was able to put together for us, and we
can only say: May his soul rest in peace.

We also thank the departmental officials that were with us on the trip to
the West Coast and, most importantly, we want to thank the people of the
Western Cape’s West Coast who so warmly accepted our meeting with them and
asking them many, many questions.

We trust that this report, tabled in Parliament today, will change the
lives of the people on the West Coast of the Western Cape for the better. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mev D VAN DER WALT: Agb Voorsitter, Adjunkpresident, Ministers en ander
lede, die Voorsitter het vergeet om te sê dat dit baie warm was en dat die
bus ook gebreek het! [Hon Chairperson, Deputy President, Ministers and
other members, the Chairperson forgot to say that it was very hot and that
the bus also broke down.]

The Constitution recognises that legislatures have a critical role to play
in overseeing better performance by departments and public entities. The
challenge facing members of Parliament and provincial legislatures is to
improve the capacity of portfolio committees to hold departments and
entities to account for their performance using their strategic plans,
budget documents and annual reports.

Die missie van die portefeuljekomitee is om te verseker dat die doelwit
uitgevoer word om aan elkeen in ons land sy reg van toegang tot skoon,
lopende water en veilige, gesonde sanitasie te gee.
Die toer onderneem deur die komitee het egter ook rede tot kommer vir die
komitee gelewer, veral as in ag geneem word hoe sekere munisipale amptenare
geskerm het wanneer daar vrae was met betrekking tot groot en ernstige
agterstande met diensverskaffing in bykans al die areas wat besoek is.

Die swak, indien enige, administrasie met betrekking tot die registrasie
van behoeftiges is onaanvaarbaar. Die meeste amptenare het nie eens geweet
wat die kriteria is om ‘n inwoner as sodanig “behoeftig” te registreer nie.

Hoe kan daar dan enigsens voorsiening vir dienslewering aan die mense in
die begroting gemaak word - en mag ek byvoeg dat geen mens as sodanig
“behoeftig” bekend wil staan nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The portfolio committee’s mission is to ensure that the aim of providing
everyone in our country with their right to have access to clean, running
water and safe, healthy sanitation is carried out.

However, the tour undertaken by the committee also gave the committee cause
for concern, especially when taking into consideration how certain
municipal officials became guarded when questions were asked relating to
huge and serious backlogs in service delivery in nearly all the areas
visited.

The poor, if any, administration with regard to the registration of the
indigent is unacceptable. Most officials did not even know what the
criteria were for registering a resident as so-called “indigent”.

How, then, can any provision be made in the budget for service delivery to
the people, and may I add that no person wants to be known as being so-
called “indigent”.]

In my days as a councillor, I warned the ANC that if not planned, funded
and managed extremely well, the IDPs are likely to stay wish lists in
Christmas stockings.

On this tour it was clear that there is a serious lack of funding available
to implement priority projects and project management skills within
municipalities.

Met die toekenning van die nuwe munisipale infrastruktuurfonds behoort die
munisipaliteite hul infrastruktuur drasties te verbeter en uit te brei,
mits die fondse korrek bestuur word.

Die invordering van dienstegelde moet drasties by al die munisipaliteite
verbeter om sodoende die uitbreiding van dienslewering aan meer gebiede te
verseker.

Vanweë die droogtetoestand kry al die boere in hierdie area werklik swaar.
Inderdaad moet daar indringend aandag gegee word aan die nood van opkomende
kleinboere sodat hulle ekonomies houdbaar kan boer.

In Lutzville maak die kleinboere gebruik van munisipale water, wat bykans
dubbel die koste is, omdat daar nie vir hulle in ‘n kanaalstelsel
voorsiening gemaak is nie.

Groot dank en erkenning moet egter uitgaan na die boere in die areas wat
reeds daar betrokke is by die gemeenskappe om hulle te voorsien van kennis
met betrekking tot boerdery, die verskaffing van water deur middel van
boorgate, ens. Dis deur hierdie aksies wat ons werklik saam vorentoe sal
kan beweeg.

Wat egter vir my onaanvaarbaar is, was die aksies deur die ANC om mense
doelbewus uit hul kulturele omgewing te neem en in ander provinsies te
plaas ter wille daarvan om polities te kan oorneem. En geen wonder dat daar
tereg by so ‘n vergadering deur die gemeenskap aan u gewys is: (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[With the allocation of the new municipal infrastructure fund,
municipalities should be able to improve and extend their infrastructure
drastically, providing the funds are managed correctly.

The collection of service fees should drastically improve at all
municipalities, in so doing to ensure the extension of service delivery to
more areas.

Due to the drought situation all the farmers in this area are truly
suffering. Indeed, attention should be given in great detail to the plight
of emerging small farmers for them to become economically sustainable
farmers.

In Lutzville the small farmers are making use of municipal water, which is
nearly double the cost, because provision has not been made for a canal
system for them.

Many thanks and recognition should, however, go to the farmers in the areas
who are already involved in the communities by providing them with
knowledge with regard to farming, supplying water by means of boreholes,
etc. It is through such actions that we will truly be able to move forward
together.

However, what was unacceptable to me were the actions by the ANC
deliberately to take people from their cultural environment and to place
them in other provinces in order to take over politically. And no wonder
that, rightly so, the community pointed out to you at such a meeting:]

“You put us here for the vote, but left us without anything.”
En soos ons in Afrikaans sou sê, “Boontjie kry sy loontjie”, maar in die
geval, Minister, werk ons met mense se lewens.

U het mense uit die Oos-Kaap aangery om hier in haglike omstandighede te
kom woon, weg van hul eie kultuur en taal, met beloftes van
werksgeleenthede, behuising en dienste. Wat u inderdaad bereik het, is om
die mense wat sedert geboorte daar woon, te ontneem van werk wat dikwels
net seisoenaal is, en nou word hulle laaste op die behuisingslys geplaas en
laaste van dienslewering voorsien.

Ek sluit af deur te sê water is lewe, en sanitasie bring waardigheid.
Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[And as we would say in Afrikaans: “Every dog has his day”, but in this
case, Minister, we are dealing with people’s lives.

You brought people from the Eastern Cape to come and live here in dismal
circumstances, away from their own culture and language, with promises of
job opportunities, housing and services. What you did achieve, however, was
to deprive people who have lived there since birth of work that is often
only seasonal, and now they are placed last on the housing list and
provided with service delivery last.

I conclude by saying that water is life, and sanitation provides dignity.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Chairperson, hon members of Parliament, the report of the
Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry on the West Coast of the
Western Cape is a clear and true reflection of what we saw, observed and
heard from the different stakeholders.

Prophet Jeremiah expressed his grief at his people’s suffering when he
said, “The harvest has passed. Summer is at an end, and yet we are not
saved.” It remains a stark reality in so far as service delivery by public
representatives in many municipalities is concerned.

I ntiyiso leswaku khume ra malembe ya demokhirasi ya fikile. Nakambe i
ntiyiso leswaku ma hundzile, kambe vaaka-tiko va ha ri ku vileleni. A va na
mati na mintirho, va pfumala na swihambukelo. Hakunene i ntiyiso leswaku
ririmi i xongela n’wini.(Translation of Tsonga paragraph follows.)

[It is a fact that 10 years of our democracy has came and passed. It is
also true that our communities are still complaining. They do not have
water, jobs and sanitation. It is also true that people take pride in their
languages.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chairperson, on a point of order . . . [Interjections.] I
did not cross the floor yet, and I will never cross the floor.

I want to say that it is not correct for a member to tell Parliament lies,
when speaking in Xitsonga, as if we cannot understand that. What he said is
really not correct, and he must not continue telling these lies. There is a
public broadcaster that shows these things.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G M Q Doidge): Hon member, we will have a look at
the Hansard, and rectify it if it needs to be done. Please proceed, hon
member.

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Chairperson, if what I am saying is not true, let him tell
me that he understands Xitsonga. Let him tell me that what I am saying is
not true.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chair, is it parliamentary for the hon member there to
say to another member that he is lying?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): No, I don’t think that is what he
said, but I am going to ask the member at the podium to stick to the
debate. [Interjections.] Order! I did give a ruling that I’d look at
Hansard and come back if necessary. If necessary. If it’s not necessary,
there will be no response to the House. I am appealing to the hon member at
the podium to proceed with the matter before the House.

Nkul M W SIBUYANA: Inkomu. A hi mina ndzi faneleke ndzi rhwala nandzu wa
lava va nga swi tiveki ku vulavula tindzimi ta van’wana. Kumbe va nga sola
laha va tswariweke kona ni ku pfumala ka vona vutwisisi bya tindzimi.

Leswi ndzi swi vulavulaka i ntiyiso. Vaaka-tiko va hava mati, a va na
mintirho, va pfumala na swihambukelo. Hakunene ririrmi i xongela n’wini.
Leswi komiti yi swi vonaka ni ku swi twa, swi hambanile kule . . . [Nkarhi
wu herile.](Translation of Tsonga paragraphs follows.)

[I should not be held responsible for people’s failure not to speak other
languages. Perhaps they should lay the blame squarely on the environment in
which they were born for their lack of understanding of other languages.

What I said is very true. Communities do not have water, jobs and do not
have sanitation. It is a fact that people take pride in their languages.
What we as a committee see and hear is different from ... [Time expired.]]

Ms S N (Sylvia Nomatamsanga) SIGCAU: Chairperson and hon members, the study
tour by the portfolio committee was a reminder of the scarcity of water in
our country.

The West Coast of the Western Cape had, at that stage, been in the grip of
a severe two-year drought. By all accounts, the past winter was not
promising, despite some late rain in the past month.

The committee attended to a multitude of water-related issues during the
tour, covering both the social and economic impact of water and sanitation
provision. The overall impression that one was left with after the study
tour is of a region fighting a constant battle to access water for all its
needs. It was amply evident that municipalities are struggling with water
provision on various fronts, including capacity, financial management, IDPs
and infrastructure in all these respects.

The UDM supports the report’s recommendations for improved assistance and
monitoring of municipalities by the national Department of Water Affairs
and Forestry.

The other undeniable reality that the committee experienced was the impact
of the water shortages on the economy of the region, which is closely
linked to agriculture. It is especially the smaller and emerging and
farming communities who are suffering. Government assistance in this regard
is imperative, because the economic and social toll that the drought is
taking is quite devastating. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairman, the PAC supports the report of the Portfolio
Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry on the oversight visit to the West
Coast of the Western Cape.

Since I have one minute in which to speak, I simply want to state that the
portfolio of water and forestry plays an important role in our country.
Water, like land, is life. All living things, including human beings,
animals and plants, cannot live without water. Many industries would also
not exist without water. Water is rapidly becoming scarce throughout the
world, but the added danger to this in modern times is privatisation of
water.

Water, once a resource obtained free by all, rich and poor, is now
increasingly privatised and commercialised for profit. Corporations seize
this water scarcity as a huge money-making opportunity. They see water as
the new oil. Unfortunately, the government’s policy of privatisation and
prepaid water meters dances to this tune of making water unaffordable for
the poor. [Time expired.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Thank you, Chairperson. The MF acknowledges our hon
President’s undertaking in the state of the nation address, that by 2009
all households will have been provided with easy access to clean running
water. By December 2004 ten million South Africans will have clean potable
water. During 2004 more than 300 0000 households will be provided with
basic sanitation. The programme to ensure easy access to clean water for
all the households within five years will also help in fighting against
cholera and other water borne diseases.

Reality is that we cannot survive without water, and it is incumbent upon
us and our duty to ensure that our people have access to clean, potable
water. The MF firmly supports the hon President’s undertakings. The
findings in this report are of great concern. The MF acknowledges that the
portfolio committee needs to conduct another oversight visit to these areas
to properly evaluate the situation and thereby make the necessary
recommendations. The MF further acknowledges the constraints placed on
municipalities in delivering. We feel that this needs to be earnestly
addressed. Finance for such delivery needs to be prioritised. The MF thanks
the portfolio committee for an eye-opening report. I thank you.

Mr B G MOSALA: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, a key objective of the
oversight visit was to ensure that municipalities on the West Coast of the
Western Cape are answering the call of the President for the roll-out of
free basic services in relation to water and sanitation. It is through such
services that the government seeks to reduce poverty and to restore human
dignity to poor urban and rural communities. This is extremely significant
due to the decades of neglect by the apartheid government.

We must applaud the policies of the government that put people first, by
ensuring that there is an equitable distribution of resources and that the
basic needs of people are addressed. The visit reveals that whilst there
are huge challenges faced by municipalities, the political will to overcome
them exists. Some of the challenges are deliberately created by commercial
farmers who deny small emerging farmers, mainly black, of their right of
access to sufficient water to irrigate their plots. This we found in the
Lutzville area.

The report has highlighted several recommendations with regard to how and
why it is important to redress the lot of the emerging farmers. The
recommendations also accommodate the reality that there is a scarcity of
rainfall on the West Coast. In the past, Dwaf was the main financier of
water infrastructure, as well as operational and maintenance costs. This
responsibility has shifted to local authorities. The role of Dwaf remains
that of monitoring to ensure that water and sanitation projects are
sustainable.

Our visit revealed that Dwaf officials in the Western Cape are playing this
role. We can only observe that they must ensure that all parties are
treated uniformly. Dwaf must become more vigilant in it’s operational
processes, especially when it comes to providing communities with access to
water and sanitation. The committee’s visit to Khayelitsha, an informal
settlement in the Cederberg municipality, brought us face to face with some
of the challenges that municipalities have to contend with.

The water and sanitation problems of this area need to be  prioritised.  The
commitment that we have from the municipality gives  us  hope  that  service
delivery will be accelerated.

Batho ba ha bo rona ba ntseng ba eso fumane ditshebeletso ka botlalo, ba be
le mamello. Mmuso o ke ke wa ba lahla, etswe mmuso ona o ikemiseditse ho
phethahatsa ditokelo le ditlhoko tsa baahi bohle ba naha ena ya ha bo rona,
Afrika Borwa eo re e ratang.

Batho ba ha bo rona ba tseba moo re tswang teng tebe tebeng ya kgethollo e
re baketseng mathata ana kajeno. Ha re tshwaraneng ka matsoho re beng
ngatana nngwe ho ya fihla moo re yang teng, eleng tokolohong e
phethahetseng. Ha re beng bahlodi bohle ntweng ena. Dinokwane tse le
nanarelang le masiu di le jwetsa hona le hwane, ka ditshebeleso tsa mmuso,
le di bolelelle hore lefapha la metsi le meru le ntlafaditse maemo a
phepelo ya metsi metseng le metsaneng ya rona. (Translation of Sotho
paragraphs follows.)

[We implore our fellow citizens who have not received all the necessary
services to have patience. The government will not abandon them because it
is committed to meeting the needs of all South African citizens.

Our fellow South Africans are well aware of our dark past of
discrimination, which is the source of the problems we are facing today.
Let us unite and work together until we achieve our goal, that is, full
liberation. Let us all be triumphant in this war. Tell those nocturnal
criminals who walk about at night misleading you about government services
that the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry has improved the standard
of water supply in small towns and villages.]

This visit, and many more that will follow elsewhere, will continue to
strengthen our resolve to improve the water and sanitation status in the
country. The ANC-led government is fully capable of fulfilling this role.

Swak administrasie, agb Mev Van Der Walt. [Poor administration, hon Mrs Van
Der Walt.]

You quote your days as a councillor; you failed to recognise the commitment
that those municipalities out there have to deliver quality services to our
people. It is not true that the ANC has bussed people to those areas, what
is true is that those people have been put there by the very commercial
farmers. They went there as seasonal workers. Those farmers never provided
housing for them, they were left to rot there. The municipality has
embraced those people and, under very difficult conditions, they are doing
their best to provide them with basic sanitation and water.

You come here to Parliament and you tell the whole world that the ANC
brought people there for the vote; it is not true and you know it. It is
not true! [Interjections.] You are one of those people who feel and believe
that the Western Cape belongs to certain people and not to others.
[Interjections.] You must be told today that you are wrong in your
assertion, you apparently have not changed and this democracy is having a
very minimal impact on you. It is not true what you have been saying about
the ANC.

This committee will continue to do what is best for the people of this
country, and we need to support it fully. Water is life; it is not
important for cheap politics in this debate because we are talking about a
commodity that is so important in the lives of our people. Water is life;
yes, indeed, it is life. And the portfolio committee for Water Affairs and
Forestry will continue to do what is best in spite of the likes of you.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr C M LOWE: Chairman, thank you very much, indeed. On a point of order, I
wonder if it’s parliamentary to call the hon member of my party a cheap
woman.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G M Q Doidge): That did not come from the podium,
hon member.

Mr C M LOWE: Chairperson, no, it came from one of the hon members sitting
over there, and it was quite distinct to a number of people here, and I
wonder if you’d ask him to apologise and withdraw that comment. Thank you.

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G M Q Doidge): Hon members we must appeal to you. You
are hon members. If any of you did say that, we would like you to approach
the microphone and withdraw the remark.

Hon members, I’m appealing to you, please approach the microphone and
withdraw that remark. I must warn hon members ... Order! I must warn hon
members that that’s unparliamentary, and we shouldn’t be making remarks of
that nature about other hon members. I heard the remark but also can’t say
where exactly it came from, but the remark was made.

Mr C M LOWE: Hon Chairman, I would just like to thank you for the
intervention; it’s a great shame that the person isn’t man enough or woman
enough to own up. But thank you very much.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I hope I won’t
lose time to this activity that has been going on.

I am quite grateful to the member who was last on this podium for
responding to the hon member over there. I really got confused when she
started speaking about removals, forced removals and the ANC being
responsible for that, because I know for a fact that we do not have such
policies, as the ANC government. But also, I wish she could have done her
homework in terms of finding out for how long that settlement has been
there, because it looks like her facts are not correct. How long has it
been there, who was responsible for establishing such a settlement there
and what has been the situation in terms of the services that should be
given to those people?

If you had done that homework you would have known that this is part of the
legacy of apartheid and we are cleaning up that mess. We are very committed
to cleaning up that mess because it is our people who are affected. I am
sure you would have known that. That is why we are struggling. That is why
municipalities are struggling. It is because of the extent of the mess that
was left by the apartheid government.

I must say that we are thankful for this opportunity to engage with the
portfolio committee on the report before the House in the spirit of the
executive being held accountable to Parliament, and also in the spirit of
co-operative governance.

This day also marks the end of Arbour Week where we have been promoting the
planting of trees and the greening of townships; again cleaning up the mess
of the apartheid government according to which the dusty townships were for
blacks to live in, whereas the greener, better-environment areas were for
whites to live in. That was the situation and we are redressing that
situation.

That is why you find that in our townships the value of our houses is much
lower than the value of houses in the suburbs. That is the situation, that
is the fact and we are beginning to redress that. By sharing this
information gathered from your meetings, as the portfolio committee, with
the Matsikama Municipality in Vredendal, the Cederberg Municipality in
Clanwilliam and the Berg River Municipality, you are creating the platform
to evaluate to what extent the delivery departments are providing the
necessary regulation and support to the other spheres of government.

It is the duty and responsibility of local government to provide the
necessary basic services for communities to lead healthy lives. As your
report indicates, our role as national government is to monitor and ensure
that government is able to serve and, above all, we are committed to
serving the poorest of the poor.

I must say that some of the speakers have highlighted that there is a
problem of capacity in municipalities. That is a fact. As we by now know,
138 have been identified as municipalities that have a problem of capacity
under the Project Consolidate programme and we are beginning to address
this as the departments involved in the delivery of basic services.

As the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, we are making sure that we
will be monitoring and regulating the activities of municipalities, given
that we are the sector leader in the water area. So, we have just adopted
three strategies that will look into giving support, developing the
institutional capacity, as well as regulating the municipality in the
delivery of water services.

The recommendations that you are making in your reports are practical and,
indeed, there are steps that have been taken to implement some of the
recommendations.

There is good progress with regard to developing a framework for a policy
on indigency. It is surprising to hear the hon member saying that the
officials do not know what an indigent person is. I think by now almost
every South African knows that if anybody is earning below R1 200 in any
household, that household falls under the indigent category. Everybody
knows that. It is surprising to hear that there will be officials found
wanting, because that is common knowledge.

This is collaborative work involving the Department of Provincial and Local
Government, Salga, as well as ourselves. But also, with regard to the issue
of the delivery of water services on private land, we are establishing a
policy. It is still in a draft stage following concerns that farmworkers do
not have access to these basic services. I think it is a point that was
raised by the chairperson of the portfolio committee. Of course we are
aware and are dealing with the matter in the manner in which I have alluded
to.

The department does have officials with expertise to assist municipalities
to complete the water service development plans and their IDPs. Indeed, we
are going around the country to all the provinces and holding water
summits. We are also visiting municipalities and localities under Project
Consolidate to look at or to have first-hand experience of the capacity
problems that municipalities are facing.

At the summit we looked at other things such as analysing the national
water resource strategy and from there we assist the municipalities to
determine what water and sanitation services can be provided. The technical
data is there and it is a matter of applying it, which we are doing.

The Water Resource Strategy is also a blueprint in terms of available water
for emerging farmers. We invited the portfolio committee to a number of
izindaba that the department had held recently on water sector reform and
on water allocation reform. And, in due course perhaps, the committee will
propose a motion so that we can have a full debate in the House on the
implications of the changes happening within the department. I assure you
that I have listened to all of these contributions and we take them very
seriously. We appreciate your oversight role and surely we will ensure that
they find their way into our policies and our strategies.

I must say that on the question that was raised about a certain area not
having access to clean water and sanitation because this particular group
speaks a certain language; surely, there is no way we as the ANC government
can support such an approach. The reality of the situation is that no
developing country has ever delivered at the rate we have. We have given
access to water to 10 million people over 10 years and I do not think that
it has happened anywhere else in the world. That is why South Africa is
hailed internationally for this particular achievement.

It is a fact that we have 3,8 million people that still do not have access
to clean, potable water, and government has committed itself to deliver
clean, potable water to all South Africans by 2008. I have no reason to
doubt that we will be able to deliver on this, given the rate at which we
have been delivering.

I think it is not correct to say people are discriminated against because
of their language. The reality of the situation is that the 3,8 million,
which is a backlog, is spread all over the country. I wish to categorically
say to this member that it is just not possible that we can discriminate,
especially with regard to basic services, which are there to ensure that we
reduce poverty for all South Africans, especially the poorest.

So, those who do not have access to water now, certainly we will be giving
them that access; by 2008 all South Africans will have clean, potable
water. We still need to do more with regard to the delivery of sanitation
and I hope to get more clever ideas from this House.

Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move that the report be
adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

    COMMONWEALTH ASSOCIATION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT 10th
                       ANNIVERSARY BIENNIAL CONFERENCE

    (Consideration of Report of PC on Public Service and Administration)

Mr R S NTULI: Chairperson, hon members, I wish to express my gratitude for
the opportunity afforded to me by Parliament and the DA to attend the
Commonwealth Association of Public Administration and Management 10th
Biennial Conference in Singapore.

The theme of the conference was “networked government”, and focused on
three subthemes that progressed concurrently. The first was “many agencies,
one government,” which focused on the public service as a learning
organisation, a lean and efficient bureaucracy, and citizen-centred service
delivery.

The second subtheme was “engaging citizens”, and focused on building
capacity for efficient engagement and partnership with stakeholders. The
third was “networking beyond borders”, which concentrated on partnership
with international organisations for servicing and building a globalised
citizenry.

The prelude to the conference was a workshop to allow participants to share
views on the results of a survey that Capam conducted to determine why
governments embark on new organisational and service delivery arrangements.
This workshop, in many ways, shaped the discussion of the conference, and
gave delegates a sense of direction and context of things to come.

The workshop reflected on the survey results emanating from findings of
research experts from Australia, Canada, Ghana, India, Jamaica, Malaysia,
Malta, New Zealand, Singapore, South Africa and Uganda; clearly, it was a
very representative sample.

The conclusions of the survey, among other things, indicated that public
servants are the key change agents in dealing with organisational change
and social delivery, followed by politicians and development agencies. The
report also mentioned that countries that are undergoing societal
transformations are faced with challenges such as the need to increase
capacity to deal with such changes.

In order to do so, it is necessary that they implement best management
practices and activities, to facilitate the necessary social delivery
through proper networking with civil society and business. This also calls
for prudent management of scarce material and financial resources.

The observations and findings of the Capam survey have a lot of relevance
to our situation in South Africa. I intend to dwell on those without
elaborating on what transpired there. We need to pay attention to many
challenges, and our challenges include the following: building on the
legislative framework, management systems, political ethos and practices as
well as political formulations of the public service since 1994; isolating
and dealing with cases of resistance to change and nonconformity to current
legislation and practices, especially corruption; and strengthening human
resource capacity and management competence at all levels, in particular
provincial and local levels, given the fact that the last two levels are at
the coalface of delivery. Incompetence at these two levels in some
provinces, as we all know, and in many municipalities, has caused a lot of
conflict, protest and civil disobedience.

Local government capacity development has moved to the centre stage simply
because it is at the coalface of service delivery, and also because the
majority of municipalities, especially outside the metro areas, are
dysfunctional, as has been noted even today. This is largely because their
municipal managers lack necessary competencies and also because of
inadequate financial resources and plain financial mismanagement and
corruption.

It is therefore heartening and commendable to note that the SA Management
Development Institute, Samdi, is soon coming on board. Samdi, in
partnership with the Department of Local Government, will formulate a joint
capacity strategy.

The sooner these things are done and then effectively implemented, the
better for our country. Related to this is the need for an accelerated
programme for the development of basic skills, given the fact that the
Public Service is the largest employer with the largest number of employees
at low-skill level. Hence we need to embark on an extensive Adult Basic
Education Training, Abet, programme to ensure basic literacy throughout the
public sector.

Capacity-building through massive Abet programmes at this level will
contribute to improvement of government capacity and productivity, and will
also impact on social inclusion.

Above all, we need to improve tremendously the quality of education in our
schools, so that FET and higher education institutions have a bigger well
from which to tap learners to our senior institutions of education. Only in
that way can we build a better and more efficient Public Service and
stronger economy.

We also need to find a way of accelerating the pace of having more
mathematics and science teachers, because the lack thereof also impedes our
developing a stronger Public Service and stronger economy. Related to that
we also need innovative ways of limiting the brain drain of our scarce
human resource. I am aware that this is a very difficult task, given the
fact that First World countries have the financial ability to poach our
professionals and technical, scarce resources. Thank you. [Time
expired.][Applause.]

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Thank you, hon Chairperson. Hon members, the report on
Capam is pertinent, as it raises a number of important challenges for
Public Service delivery.

It is universally acknowledged that an efficient Public Service is central
to good governance and sustainable development. The heart of the conference
focused on engaging citizens or networked government.

It is evident that democracy is not just about citizens exercising their
rights, their freedoms, and their responsibilities. We know that citizens
want to have a say in public policy, they want to know what’s happening.
This filters down into consultation and participatory governance. Apart
from being a connecting government, government has to be responsive to the
needs of its people, and government has to be responsive to the needs and
expectations of its citizenry.

Chapter 10 of our Constitution is quite clear on the principles of Public
Service, transparency and accountability. Citizens are increasingly
unwilling to accept government services that are deemed substandard, and
what they basically want is hassle-free service. They want service that is
fast; they want service that is efficient and effective. This means that
public servants need to live up to the principles of Batho Pele.

There is now an even greater demand for customer focus, service charters,
and customer feedback than ever before. Engagement is not just about
government informing the public about what it is doing, but it is about
making the public part of policy making, decision-making, and the
implementation process. Coupled with this, public servants need to develop
the right capabilities. There must be no room for complacency.

Public servants need to be reminded that they are there to serve the public
rather than themselves. Also, they need to be responsive. What we need is
more customer-centric services, because often too many telephone calls go
unanswered; very often, waiting queues are too long and sometimes people
have to interface with very rude public servants.

It is a well-known fact that red tape bogs down implementation, stifles
creativity, causing unnecessary frustration to its citizens. The political,
administrative interface is important, as communication is often a
challenge for public servants. In addition to this, public servants need to
become the social capital of this country.

What was clear in the report is that networking is crucial, and networking
cannot be seen in isolation. Also emanating from the report was the fact
that the public sees government as one, and therefore seeks simplicity when
interacting with it.

The report is quite short, it is just two pages long, but on the website
there is an interesting quote, which I would like to use to end my speech:


   Principles are empty words, unless public officers believe in them, share
   them across agencies, and translate them into policies and practices.


The IFP adopts the report. Thank you.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, the 10th Anniversary Biennial
Conference of the Commonwealth Association for Public Administration and
Management had three important themes on the agenda, and these were:
firstly, improving the Public Service to become a learning organisation,
citizen-centred and unbureaucratic; secondly, enhanced engagement with the
citizens; and, thirdly, providing public servants with international
contacts and perspectives.

There is no doubt that the bureaucracy associated with the Public Service
remains one of the single, biggest obstacles to effective service delivery.
The Public Service is far too often a maze of strange, complicated forms
and long queues that baffle the average citizen. When one has reference to
our history and the unfamiliarity of the majority of our citizens with the
concept of Public Service, it is even more important to reduce the red tape
and complications. It means that we must constantly be pursuing a Public
Service with more helpful public servants and simplified processes.

Access to the Public Service is technically open to all but, in practice,
the frustration of the process translates into inaccessibility. As we
address this issue, we also discover that it addresses the second theme of
the conference, namely enhanced engagement of citizens, which, in turn,
brings us to the third theme of the conference, and that is, the
international sharing of experience.

We should not be too proud to admit that there are many things that we can
learn from our partners in the Commonwealth and in other international
forums. We do not need to reinvent the wheel; we can learn from the
mistakes of others, as well as from their successful innovations. We would
therefore support the report’s recommendations of greater interaction and
participation in the activities of Capam. I thank you. [Time
expired.][Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the ACDP welcomes the initiative to enhance the
functioning of our Public Service institutions. We believe that networking
with foreign civil service institutions holds significant implications for
the transfer of skills and knowledge and the comparison of operating
procedures.

We do, however, issue a word of caution in this regard. One has to bear in
mind that each country is faced with unique challenges and dynamics. It is
therefore not feasible to simply copy the methods of external organisations
without taking into account the practicality and sustainability of
implementation in South Africa.

It is our recommendation that the Public Service should view our citizens
as esteemed and valuable clients. This will ensure that people are treated
with dignity and respect and that a commitment to service excellence is
displayed at all times.

Service delivery across public institutions has been slow and ineffective.
One of the major contributing factors is the lack of synergy within and
across departments. For example, land reform benefits have had little or no
impact on subsistence farmers in rural areas who are suffering from Aids.
It has been reported that the relevant departments have not displayed the
ability to co-operate and communicate in such a way that health policies
and interventions are closely linked with the land reform process.

Computer technology - of course, technology systems - provide the best
solution for uniform and rationalised operating procedures and
communication, and it is encouraging to note that the Commonwealth
Association of Public Administration and Management places emphasis on
advanced information systems technology.

The Public Service cannot function as a truly citizen-centric institution
without active engagement with civil society. In the same way that large
corporations need to know that they are meeting their clients’ needs, the
Public Service must engage in two-way communication with the communities
they serve.

Civil society contributions are generally taken into account with regard to
parliamentary portfolio committees, and the same level of engagement must
take place between civil society and Public Service institutions. It would
be worthwhile for the South African delegates to Capam to review and
enhance the existing means of communication. I thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, the MF thanks the Portfolio Committee on Public
Administration for participating in this conference and bringing home
important issues that humbled us in how we carry out our duties. We were
amazed by the findings of the Commonwealth Association of Public
Administration and Management, Capam.

The MF acknowledges the vital role public servants play in our democracy,
and finds Capam’s finding that public servants are the key change-drivers
in dealing with organisational change and service-delivery arrangements
before politicians and international development agencies to be very
enlightening. We also find it necessary to pay attention to the challenges
related to South Africa and to apply means to beat these challenges.

The MF agrees with the portfolio committee that government should humble
itself in terms of self-praise and competitive attitudes at such
conferences, as fruitful and co-operative engagement or discussion between
participants would pave the way to being exposed to fresh ideas and new
ways that may assist our personal journey to have the best government for
our people.

The MF thanks the portfolio committee for this informative report, and
supports the signing up of individuals and organs to Capam and the benefits
it provides. I thank you.

Mr N E GCWABAZA: Hon Chairperson and hon members, the principal motive for
convening the Capam conference was to facilitate and enhance co-operation
between and within member states through the exchange of experiences among
the extensive network of elected and appointed public officials, academics
and representatives of non-governmental organisations and the private
sector.

The central theme of the conference was “networked government”. There were
three subthemes, namely “many agencies, one government”; “engaging
citizens”; and “networking beyond borders”. On the first subtheme, the
focus of the discussion was around three areas: the Public Service as a
learning organisation, unbureaucratic bureaucracy and citizen-centric
service delivery.

Secondly, on “engaging citizens” the conference discussed how capacity
should be built for enhanced engagement, building partnerships with
stakeholders and citizen-centric service delivery. Thirdly, “networking
beyond borders” concentrated on networking with international
organisations, equipping officials for international discussion on public
administration and management, and serving a globalised citizenry.

When we dealt with the question of “many agencies, one government”, we
explored ways in which government could collaborate with different agencies
in delivering services, and yet maintain a coherent network of delivering
integrated customer-centric services. For this to happen, it is important
to develop values, structures, systems, processes and tools to encourage
networking, collaboration and the sharing of knowledge across the agencies.
Also, Public Service officials should have the necessary competencies to
build a shared understanding and a shared purpose.

The conference recognised further that the more government delivers, the
more the citizens expect. They expect delivery to be done quicker and more
efficiently. Such expectations necessitate that governments make use of
agencies to meet the citizens’ expectations. If we acknowledge that the
Public Service is a learning organisation, then we must ensure that an
institution, in our situation Samdi, continues to improve the role it plays
in skills development interventions and in the advancement of learning in
our Public Service.

The debate on engaging citizens highlights the need for governments to keep
contact with the electorate. It is about giving information; it is about
consultation with the citizens. It is about ensuring that the citizens
participate in policy formulation and legislative processes, in decision-
making, in budgetary processes and in service delivery.

Our own Minister for the Public Service and Administration, Comrade
Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi, demonstrated at this conference how the South
African government initiated and sustained engagement with the citizenry
through izimbizo, citizens’ forums, community mass meetings and door-to-
door visits.

Furthermore, the use of information communication technology, multipurpose
community centres and community development workers facilitates the
interface between government and the communities. The people’s
participation in creating a better life for all is encouraged through
campaigns such as Letsema and Vukuzenzele.

Whilst engaging citizens took the form of giving information through ICT
and election campaigns in some instances in some countries, especially the
developed countries, there was a lack of engagement in other situations, as
in the developing countries - the South African experience, as clearly
enunciated by the Minister, showed the emergence of a balance between
physical contact with the citizens and the use of ICT, for instance. It
clearly demonstrated that democracy was not just about the citizens
exercising their right to vote the government into power, but that it was
also about involving them in policy-formulation processes, in decision-
making, in generating new ideas on matters of governance, in budgeting
processes and in service delivery. It was about empowering the citizens to
tell the government where it was succeeding and where it was failing to
deliver services, without fear of victimisation.

In acknowledging that the Public Service is a learning organisation, the
conference highlighted the following: that the Public Service needs
leadership that builds teamwork and a leadership that understands that
cohesion in the team allows flexibility, growth, learning and change; that
a learning organisation should have leadership that encourages and
facilitates learning; that effective organisational learning calls for an
adequate balance between action and reflection; that a learning
organisation is about interdepartmental and intradepartmental
communication; that the Public Service should develop the capacity to
actively participate in a globalised environment; and that the development
and deployment of managers who are visionaries becomes critical in this
instance if we are to develop a Public Service that is a learning
organisation.

Given the reality of globalisation, it is possible for governments to form
partnerships with organisations beyond their borders for the purposes of
sharing knowledge, networking and providing peer remedial solutions to
problems and challenges. An example, for instance, is of networking between
local governments of different cities across borders.

Arising from the “many agencies, one government” debate, the following
challenges were identified, even for our own country: firstly,
consolidating the political will, which has been demonstrated through
legislative and policy-formulation processes into accelerated and efficient
service delivery; secondly, the challenge arises as to how we manage the
use sometimes in terms of domination of consulting agencies or consultants;
thirdly, accelerating effective engagement with the academic community;
fourthly, improving horizontal communication among the state organs;
fifthly, improving vertical communication between the government and the
people; sixthly, dealing with strategic deployment and retention of public
servants to ensure that there is a professional and an efficient way of
delivering services; seventhly, intensifying the fight against corruption;
and, lastly, managing delivery in the face of scarce resources.

In conclusion, we want to recommend to this House that it adopt this
report. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 16:48.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

Referrals to committees of papers tabled

1.    The  following  paper  is  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
   Provincial and Local Government and Administration.  The  Report  of  the
   Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to  the  Standing
   Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

   a) Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation Board for
      2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
      Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 149-2005].

2.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Labour
   and the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry. The Report of the
   Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
   Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
   a) Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
      Manufacturing Sector and Training Authority (Foodbev SETA) for 2004-
      2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 91-2005].


3.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts
   and Culture. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent
   Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to the Standing
   Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

   a) Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre Foundation for
      2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
      Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

   b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
      Foundation for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
      on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 144-2005].

   c) Report and Financial Statements of the Voortrekker Museum for 2004-
      2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements for 2004-2005.

   d) Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2004-2005,
      including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements for 2004-2005.

   e) Report and Financial Statements of The Playhouse Company for 2004-
      2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements for 2004-2005.

   f) Report and Financial Statements of Iziko Museums of Cape Town for 2004-
      2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 53-2005].


   g) Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South Africa for
      2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
      Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


   h) Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
      Republics for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
      on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 127-2005].


   i) Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of South
      Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
      the financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 145-2005].


   j) Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language Museum for
      2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
      Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


4.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home
   Affairs. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
   referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

   (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 66-2005].

5.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home
   Affairs and the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
   Development. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
   Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
   consideration:

   (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission
        (IEC) on the Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Fund
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 67-2005].


6.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
   and Constitutional Development. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
   Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts for consideration:


   (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Public Protector of South
        Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


7.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
   Works. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
   referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

   (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Department of Public
        Works for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 175-2005].

8.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
   Agriculture and Land Affairs. The Report of the Independent Auditors on
   the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts for consideration:

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products Export
         Control Board (PPECB) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

9.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Communications. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
    Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
    for consideration:

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
         Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA) for 2004-2005,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 106-2005].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing
         Council (IMC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

10.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
     Education. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
     consideration:


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African
         Qualification Authority (SAQA) for 2004-2005, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
         [RP 154-2005].


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
   (a)      Draft Notice and Schedule in terms of section 2(4) of the Judges
          Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of
          2001), determining the rate at which salaries are payable to
          Constitutional Court judges and Judges annually, with effect from
          1 April 2005, for approval by Parliament.


   (b)      Draft Notice and Schedule in terms of section 12(3) of the
          Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), determining the rate
          at which salaries are payable to magistrates annually, with
          effect from 1 April 2005, for approval by Parliament.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

   (a)      Government Notice No R.741 published in Government Gazette No
          27813 dated 29 July 2005: Amendment of Regulations relating to
          Debt Collectors, 2003 in terms of the Debt Collectors Act, 1998
          (Act No 114 of 1998).

COMMITTEE REPORTS


       National Assembly

      1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land
Affairs on
            the International Plant Protection Convention, dated 6 September

      2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
        considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
        International Plant Protection Convention, referred to it,
        recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, approve the said Convention.

      Request to be considered.

      2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on Oversight
Visit
    to Immigration Office, Cape Town International and the Cape Town
    Harbour on 24 May 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having undertaken an oversight
    visit to the Cape Town International Airport and the Cape Town Harbour
    reports as follows:

    A.      Introduction


    On 22 February 2005 the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs and
    immigration officials held a meeting at the Cape Town International
    Airport whereby a lot of problems affecting the officials, especially
    the junior officials, were raised and discussed. It was resolved in
    that meeting that the senior officials should attend to those problems
    affecting the staff and address them. In respect of this, the committee
    visited the airport again on 14 June 2005 to get a briefing on the
    progress made so far about the issues raised during the meeting in
    February.

    This document reports on the deliberations of the follow-up meeting
    held at the Cape Town International Airport on 14 June 2005 whereby Mr
    Gideon Christian, Senior Immigration Official at the Cape Town
    International Airport, and Lorraine Makola from the Department of Home
    Affairs made verbal presentations before the committee about the
    progress made with regard to addressing the concerns of the staff.
    Reflections would also be made on the committee’s oversight visit to
    Cape Town harbour, which followed the meeting.


     B.     Procedures


    Prior to the meeting, the Committee Secretary sent correspondence to
    the Department of Home Affairs to inform them about the meeting of 14
    June 2005 and the intentions of the Committee. Transport was also
    arranged for the trip while the immigration office assisted with the
    provision of the boardroom for the meeting, at the Cape Town
    International Airport.

    The meeting at the airport took place at 10h00, after which the members
    and the officials proceeded to the harbour for an oversight visit,
    which began at 14h00.

    The following persons were in attendance: Mr H P Chauke: ANC; Mr K W
    Morwamoche: ANC; Mr M P Sibande: ANC; Ms N B Gxowa: ANC; Ms S V Kalyan:
    DA; Mr M Swart: DA; Mr M R Mankge: Committee Secretary and Ms L Martin:
    Committee Assistant.

    The Department was represented by Ms L Makola; Mr G Christians; Mr J
    Mamabolo and Ms M Mgxashe. Mr A Fraser apologised and sent Ms Makola on
    his behalf.


    C.      Findings


    This section presents the findings of the oversight visit undertaken
    over the two ports of entries in Cape Town. It would start with what
    has emerged from the Cape Town Immigration Office, International
    Airport, and lastly the harbor.


    Cape Town International Airport


    Deliberations


    The Chairperson of the Committee tabled a list of concerns which had
    transpired during the February meeting with the immigration officials,
    and asked the senior officials to brief the committee on the extent
    they went to address them as they were mandated to do. The concerns
    raised during the February meeting included the following:

     a. Moratorium on the appointment of staff.
     b. Shortage of staff which affected service delivery.
     c. Low salaries of officers.
     d. Unclear promotion and recruitment policy – influence of racism.
     e. Strenuous shift work – recruitment of more staff  as  suggested  by
        officers.
     f. Low moral of staff due to lack of feedback on  issues  raised  with
        the department and parliamentarians.
     g.  Lack  of  uniformity  on  dealing  with  issues  by  management  –
        favoritism.
     h. Inconsistent disciplinary measures.
     i. Lack of transport for staff working irregular  hours  and  promises
        not honored.
     j. Lack of follow-up and monitoring on policy  implementation  by  the
        department.
     k. Need for management to assist staff to acquire drivers licences.
     l. Need to employ staff on permanent basis as opposed to contracts.
     m. Late payment of salaries, especially overtime salaries.
     n. Improper communication between officers and senior  management  and
        irregular staff meetings.
     o. Inadequate communication  between  national  head  office  and  the
        regions.
     p. Establishing an academy for staff training.


    Responses


    It must be noted that the officials, Ms Makola and Mr Christian, were
not able to


    provide answers to all the questions raised, perhaps due to time
    constraints. They however pledged that a formal written report or
    responses to the concerns raised would be sent to the Secretary of the
    Committee. Below are some of the responses provided by the officials on
    the questions raised:


    With regard to the moratorium on the appointment of staff, the
    officials stated that the Department has already trained sixty-two new
    recruits and they were ready for distribution at ports of entry where
    there is a shortage of staff. It was further indicated that the
    Department uses a new system to properly train officers before putting
    them to work. Officers are given uniform training to make them fit for
    airports, harbors and border ports of entry. The training is three-
    month theory and three month practical. Practical starts by July 2005
    at busy ports of entry.


    The committee asked follow-up questions whereby they wanted to know how
    many immigration officers were required for Cape Town Airport and how
    many were male and female. In response, Mr Christian indicated that
    there was a need for 21 officers. He said that currently there were
    sufficient staffs, but they needed to start planning for peak periods
    when more officers would be required.


    According to the Department, as reported by Ms Makola there is a long-
    term need for 1000 officers to cover the shortage of staff in many
    areas. Consequently on this issue, the Chairperson requested the
    officials to pass the full information to the Committee Secretary
    together with the new programmes so as to see if the department was
    dealing with the challenges facing the airport.


    On the problem of shortage of staff, which affected service delivery,
    officials mentioned that the department was intending to appoint nine
    provincial immigration heads to beef up the system.


    Regarding low salaries of immigration officers, it should be noted that
    the committee was also concerned about this and asked why Home Affairs
    couldn’t pay immigration officers at the level of their counterparts at
    the South Africa Revenue Service (SARS). In addition, the Committee
    indicated that they were not happy about the lack of movement by the
    department on this.


    Responding to the above, the officials mentioned that they have already
    looked into addressing this wage dispute. They reported that the new
    recruits would get R76 000, per annum, after training and R43 000 in
    training. They further promised that the Director General (DG) would
    take up the issue to the Human Resources, and there was an undertaking
    that current officers would be upgraded to upper level before the new
    recruits joined in.  They further promised that salary matters would be
    emphasized in the next Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) in
    September.


    Apart from increasing the salaries of the immigration officers, the
    department is looking at ways and means to declare the work of
    immigration officials an essential service. The Department of Public
    Service and Administration (DPSA) would be involved in this matter.


    It should be emphasized however that the committee viewed increasing
    the salaries of the immigration officials in a serious light, as it
    would help to prevent corruption.


    On the question of unclear promotion and recruitment policy – influence
    of racism,


    Mr Christian mentioned that racism was an issue but they managed to
    deal with it. An example of a person working on a contract who was
    racist and as a result his contract was not renewed was cited.


    The follow-up question or concern by the committee was that black
    immigration officials were never promoted. They wanted to know the
    demographics of officers at the airport – asking if the airport had a
    plan of representivity at high level. Replying to these questions, the
    immigration official, Mr Christian, mentioned that the head office does
    interviews. The unions and the head office oversee the interviews and
    appointments. The department uses equity policies for the appointment
    of staff.


    The committee felt however that demographics at Cape Town International
    Airport’s immigration office were still a challenge. This was shown by
    the fact that top management had only 1 indian female. The committee
    argued that advertising must be generally spread as to avoid the
    obvious status quo. They saw a need for racial break down on new
    recruits, as the airport is the mirror of the country and its
    population.


    The Chairperson stated that he was satisfied that the issue of racism
    was dealt with and explained by the officials. And he further indicated
    that the committee would invite Ms Mgxashe, the head of Cape Town Home
    Affairs regional office, to Parliament to give a briefing on
    demographic issues.


    Concerning strenuous shift work – recruitment of more staff as
    suggested by officers, Mr Christian and Ms Makola argued in response
    that shift work was dealt with as more new recruits would be joining
    the office to assist.


    Low moral of staff due to lack of feedback on issues raised with the
    department and parliamentarians, concerning this the officials reported
    that the DG had two meetings with staff and one on one interview with
    immigration officials had shown that they are now happy. The office has
    also enhanced information sharing with officers using meetings. Mr
    Christian reported that since the last meeting with the committee the
    immigration office had had three staff meetings. He argued that it is
    however difficult to have regular meetings due to shift work, but
    informal meetings are used instead. Mr Christian asserted that to show
    that there is a moral change amongst staff, officers also come to work
    even if they were off-duty when requested to assist.


    The chairperson argued that it is important to have regular meetings
    and the staff needs to be given feedback of the meetings they held with
    them. Regular meetings help to build interactions amongst staff. The
    Department also needs to have a strategy to change leadership of Cape
    Town International Airport and a system of communicating information
    from the head office to the regions.


    On the problem of lack of transport for staff working irregular hours
    and promises not honored, Mr. Christian reported that the problem was
    not sorted out yet. The immigration office uses a Kombi so they feared
    to transport the officers with it because of the taxi violence in Cape
    Town.  On the other hand, Ms Makola indicated that Johannesburg Airport
    has transport for staff working awkward hours, and the new structure
    has drivers for that.


    Regarding a need for management to assist staff to acquire driver’s
    licenses, Mr. Christian mentioned that Cape Town immigration officials
    would be given letters to go to the traffic department to get licenses.
    The letters would indicate that they are immigration officers. Ms
    Makola mentioned that in Gauteng, the Home Affairs Department
    encouraged officials to get drivers licenses and reimbursed them. The
    department encourages the staff to take initiatives and even bursaries
    are in place for staff to improve themselves.


    On the question of a need to employ staff on a permanent basis as
    opposed to contracts, the committee discovered that even the head of
    the immigration office at the airport, Mr Christian, was a temporary
    employee. The committee wanted to see the Department giving people
    permanent jobs.


    In response to this, Mr Christian stated that permanent posts were
    advertised and staff members were told to apply.


    On late payment of salaries - especially overtime salaries, the
    official said that the Deputy Director General (DDG) had spoken to
    provincial administration and that the matter is being addressed. The
    officials indicated that if the airport doesn’t have money, the DDG
    undertakes to pay for them.


    Responding to concerns over inadequate communications between national
    head office and the regions, Mr. Christian stated that they have
    established a directives’ office to ensure that information is
    cascading to regions. In addition, internally at the airport, they use
    the GroupWise email system for communication. Emails are sent to
    everybody and it is an individual’s responsibility to check their
    emails from the computer. Attempts were also made to simplify the use
    of English language in the forms to make them user-friendly for staff.


    Concerning the establishment of an academy for staff training, it was
    noted that the academy was not fully established, but training
    institute is used for that purpose.





    Cape Town Harbour





    Deliberations


    Discussions with the officials at the harbour revealed serious problems
    affecting the flow of work at that port of entry. These problems are
    outlined in the next section below.

    Problems discovered

    Shortage of staff.  The harbour operates with only 12 staff members.
    Only one immigration official works at night. Not only this is
    attributable to the lack of human resources at the harbour, but also
    because the harbour receives few ships at night, said Mr Tshukudu
    (Senior Immigration official at the Cape Town Harbour). It was further
    discovered the night shift is only reserved for men because it
    perceived unsafe for women to work at night.

    Lack of computers.  The immigration office, at the harbour, does not
    have computers to assist with the clearing and processing of
    immigration documents. They still use the old methods of paper files.


    Lack of control over the yards and fishing vessels.  Officials reported
    that they have no control over fishing vessels and yards. Hence this
    could pose serious security risks.


D. Committee recommendations


The committee made the following recommendations with regard to what has
transpired during the meeting at Cape International Airport:

   1. Department should employ staff permanently.
   2. A need for racial breakdown on new recruits.
   3. Salaries of immigration officials should be increased.
   4. Need for officials to have regular staff meetings and enhanced
      communication.
   5. Department needs to submit a formal report on how they dealt with the
      issues raised.
   6. The committee needs to visit the Johannesburg International airport to
      address its problems.

Regarding Cape Town Harbour the committee recommended the following:

   1.       A need for technology (computers) to assist with the clearing of
   documents.
   2. A port terminal should be built at the harbour.
   3. Need to double the staff numbers at the harbour.
   4. Training of officials even on intelligence matters - to improve
      security - is essential.
   5. New regulations should be put in place to control vessels’ movement.
   6. A need for a formal meeting to be held with the harbour officials.

Report to be considered.



3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on Oversight Visit
   to Department of Home Affairs, Eastern Cape, dated 1 June 2005:

   The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having undertaken an oversight
   visit to the Eastern Cape on 01 June 2005, reports as follows:


 A. Background

  The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs undertook a surprise visit to the
  Department of Home Affairs in Port Elizabeth on 01 June 2005.

   The following members made up the delegation: Mr H P Chauke: ANC
   (Chairperson); Mr P Sibande: ANC; Mr W M Skosana: ANC; Ms S V Kalyan: DA;
   Mr I S Mfundisi: UCDP; Mr M T Likotsi: PAC and Mr. MR Mankge (Committee
   Secretary).


   The Deputy Minister of Home Affairs, Mr Melusi Gigaba, MP, invited the
   Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs to the National Conference Against
   Child Pornography from 01- 03 June 2005 at Coega Conference Village Port
   Elizabeth, Eastern Cape. While there was not much work to be done on the
   first day of the conference, which was set aside for the arrival of
   delegates and registration, the committee decided to pay a surprise visit
   to the Department of Home Affairs, including the Immigration Office, in
   the province as part of its oversight responsibility.


  Upon the arrival at the department, the committee firstly observed how
  the officials were doing their work without interruption and being
  noticed. Committee members talked to the people queuing to receive the
  public service. Secondly, the committee proceeded to the offices of
  senior officials who took them to different sections of the department. A
  number of issues were discovered at the department, and these are
  summarised below.


    B.      Issues discovered by the Committee


  In its observations and discussions with the officials and recipients of
  the public service at the Home Affairs Department, Port Elizabeth, the
  committee raised or realised the following issues:


Shortage of staff


  The committee discovered that the Home Affairs Department runs only with
  seventy-eight staff members, with only one person working at the harbour.
  On the other hand, there are twenty-five vacancies in the Immigration
  Office. This causes a problem since people from all the districts in Port
  Elizabeth and elsewhere come to this department to apply for passports
  and others essential documents. The department has, however, employed
  interns to assist in the immigration office.





 Shortage of cameras


  There was only one camera in the passport section of the department.
  Clearly there is a need for more cameras given the many people coming
  there for their passports.

 Nametags


  Officials were working without nametags on. The committee warned that
  this behaviour would not be tolerated, as people would not know whom they
  are dealing with. Nametags are also important to help prevent corruption.







 Scrap papers


  Committee members picked up waste papers with fingerprints on the floors
  of the department. Home affairs officials were requested to destroy such
  spoilt papers completely or tear them apart. Alternatively the department
  can use shredding machines to do that since those papers could be picked
  up by criminals to produce fraudulent documents.





 Long queues


  Outside the immigration office there was a group of refugees mostly from
  Somalia and Zimbabwe in a large group. There were only three women
  amongst this group of asylum seekers at the office. Refugees and asylum
  seekers told the committee that they stand in long queues for many days
  before they receive any help from officials. They often have to sleep in
  queues. For example, those who were found by the committee at 15h00 said
  that they would remain there until the offices open again the following
  day.

  Overcrowding or everyday long lines at the offices are exacerbated by the
  fact that immigration officials attend to only twenty asylum seekers per
  day. They cite lack of human capacity as the problem because there is
  only one official who interviews the immigrants and captures their data
  on the computer.





 Death threats and conflicts


  Officials told the committee that Nigerian thugs or drug-lords often
  don’t want to stand in queues and threaten to shoot those who question
  that. The asylum seekers themselves confirmed this.

  Another problem was the division amongst the asylum seekers themselves.
  Zimbabweans claimed that Somalians always want a queue of their own in
  which non-Somalians are thrown out. Consequently there are always two
  queues at the department, which render the officials confused because
  they end up not knowing whom to start with since every one claims to be
  first.



   C. Committee recommendations


  Based on its deliberations and view of the situation at the Home Affairs
  Department, Port Elizabeth, the committee makes the following
  recommendations:

   1. The department should employ more staff.
   2. The officials should increase the number of asylum seekers they
      interview from twenty to forty per day.
   3. Police should be called to investigate the death threats and also to
      monitor and protect the people queuing.
   4. The department should look into the possibility of going back to the
      system of utilising a numbering system or appointment times to spare
      the asylum seekers from having to stand in long queues for days.
   5. All the Home Affairs officials should have nametags displayed during
      working hours.
   6. The department should acquire shredding machines to destroy spoilt
      papers completely.


Report to be considered.

1. Report of the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Home  Affairs  on  the  National
   Conference Against Child Pornography  held  in  Port  Elizabeth,  Eastern
   Cape, from 01-03 June 2005:

   The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having attended the National
   Conference Against Child Pornography held in Port Elizabeth, Eastern
   Cape, 01 - 03 June 2005, reports as follows:


   A. Background

   The Deputy Minister of Home Affairs, Mr. Melusi Gigaba, invited the
   Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs to the National Conference Against
   Child Pornography held from 01- 03 June 2005 at the Coega Conference
   Village, Port Elizabeth.  The conference was hosted by the Films and
   Publication Board (FPB) in conjunction with the Department of Home
   Affairs.  The conference aimed to come up with a sustainable program of
   action that seeks to educate and inform the South African public about
   the effects and dangers of child pornography to society at large.
   Further, this was an attempt to strengthen the relations between
   government, business and civil society organisations based on the program
   of action


   The following members made up the delegation: Mr H P Chauke: ANC
   (Chairperson); Mr P Sibande: ANC; Mr W M Skosana: ANC; Ms S V  Kalyan:
   DA; Mr I S Mfundisi: UCDP; Mr M T Likotsi: PAC and Mr. MR Mankge
   (Committee Secretary).


   The conference followed the launch of the Child Pornography Hotline (0800
   148 148) by the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs in December 2004 to
   engage in a united campaign against child pornography. This report
   presents the proceedings of the conference:


   B.Opening and Welcome


   The Deputy Minister of the Department of Home Affairs, Mr. Malusi Gigaba,
   opened the conference and welcomed everyone present. The list of guests
   included amongst others: Mr Patrick Hlomane Chauke, Chairperson of the
   Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, and Committee members; the Minister
   of Home Affairs, Ms Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula; the Deputy Minister of
   Safety and Security, Ms Susan Shabangu; detectives from United Kingdom;
   former Miss South Africa, Ms J Ramagoshi; as well as representatives from
   the SACP, ICASA, business and civil society at large.

         C. Country perspective on child pornography – by Shoki Bopape-
            Dlomo, CEO:
      Film and Publication Board

  Ms Bopape-Dlomo stated that there is too much pornography driven through
  cell phones, media and other modes of transmission. Hence there is a need
  for parents, caregivers and South Africans to educate and protect
  children from these harmful images.

  Research has shown a link between child trafficking and child
  pornography. As an attempt to campaign against child pornography, she
  appealed that children and adults should be aware of the Child
  Pornography Hotline (0800 148 148) and report this scourge.

D. Keynote address – by Ms Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula: Minister of Home
   Affairs

  In her keynote speech, the Minister welcomed the Members of Parliament
  and guests from within and outside the country.

   The Minster stated that the International Day of the Child was celebrated
   on the 1st of June 2005. The world is not becoming safe for children and
   that is why they had gathered at this conference in Port Elizabeth. They
   needed to address the plight of the children in South Africa and the
   world. The Minister cited President Mbeki’s speech, made at the
   Commonwealth Conference, whereby he said we must show in the children
   that the world is better.

  The Minister further indicated that she received many letters from
  parents, amongst which the letter from a parent from Wynberg was an eye
  opener, which depicted the abuse of children. In response to the problem,
  the Minster mentioned that she called parents to register their children
  since many abused children were not registered. A hotline against child
  pornography was also launched last year. She appealed to the public to
  call the hotline to report those showing child pornography. The Act
  (Films and Publication Act and others) makes it an offence to posses,
  produce or show any forms of child pornography. She congratulated the
  judiciary, and the Durban court, for sentencing a Russian couple to
  twelve years in prison for possessing child pornography.


   Parents and caregivers are requested to monitor children’s use of the
   internet and understand the fight against child pornography. There is a
   need to offer orphans and vulnerable children care and support as they
   have rights as required by the Bill of Rights. The Minister hoped that
   the conference would emerge with a sustainable program of action to fight
   child pornography and forge partnerships between government and private
   sector, while drawing lessons from previous conferences (for example 1999
   in Cape Town) which had called for parental participation. The department
   had managed to tighten up legislation in this regard.


   Lastly, the Minister indicated that the child pornography industry
   generates, in Asia alone 2.5 million dollars a year. There is therefore a
   need to join a united force of friends – UNICEF and others – to fight
   this.

E. The effect of pornography on children – by Ms Michel Human: Standing
   Together to Oppose Pornography (STOP)

   Ms Human stated that adult pornography is associated with effects on
   child pornography. She confined the definition of a child to under the
   age of 18. Pornography is material, which can be used to sexually arouse
   the viewer.


   According to STOP, 90% of pornography is caused by crime like drug
   trafficking. Pornography is widely available in computer games, cell
   phones, chart lines, films, magazines (men and women magazines) and
   graphics. There is pornography in DVDs and newspapers. Newspapers like
   Voice in the Western Cape portray explicit sex. Only a quarter of sex
   shops in the Western Cape are legal, according to STOP.

   The effects of pornography on children are:


    • Imitationary sexual material – films such as Emmanuel on e-tv is
      watched by children.
    • Acceptance of promiscuous standards from parents/ adults – with risks
      of HIV/ AIDS.
    • Inability to form a relationship with someone.
    • Child and child sexual abuse – 90% of sex offenders have been exposed
      to child porn.
    • Sexual addiction.
    • Carry over from childhood to adulthood.
  She further believed that there is a strong correlation between child
  pornography and commercial sex. If we need to protect children we need to
  be vigilant and “make every child my child”, she said. Television must be
  cleaned up, and the work of FPB must be expanded to include TV material.
  The board must also enhance public education on child pornography.
  Licensing procedures for sex shops must be tightened (regulated by
  Business Act of 1993). Lastly, custom officials must be vigilant on
  importation of child pornography.
 F. Strategies to combat Child Abuse: Imagery International Experience – Mr
    Russel
      Penny: Detective Superintendent Metro Police Service, New Scotland
      Yard (UK)


  Detective Penny told the conference that they deal with child pornography
  on the internet. They have a database of child exploitation and
  trafficking in human beings. They are involved with the G8 and Interpol
  and all countries are urged to send images of victims so they can learn
  and share good practices.


   The detective stated that they have a task team which offers education to
   parents, subgroups and partners using various communication technologies.
   Internetwatch Foundation says the child pornography industry is worth 20
   billion USD. Association of Child Pornography organisations has a
   committee which does paedophile investigations.


   There is also a visual Global Task Force which include the Royal Canadian
   Mounted Police, Australian High Tech Crime Centre, US Department of
   Homeland Security and National Crime Squad, which generally do
   partnerships, prevention and enforcement to protect children.  Detective
   Penny views child pornography as child abuse. He argued that they are the
   most vulnerable members of society, so they deserve our protection.

G. Assessment of government interventions on child pornography



   Mr van Vuuren: National Youth Commission


  South African youth offered themselves for the liberation struggle in
  1976 Mr van Vuuren stated that the commission is today once again
  committed to the fight against child abuse. He mentioned that some
  members of the commission are engaged in surprise visits to Northern Cape
  to check child labourers, which is part of June 16 campaign.


   He maintained that apartheid was the route cause of poor education,
   unemployment, substance abuse, etc. The present focus is now on
   prevention and youth development – empowering young people to become
   active participants in society. The National Youth Commission says no to
   child abuse and child trafficking. The young ones are in need of help.
   Multi-purpose centres are playing a role – arts and culture, sports and
   recreation, etc, also assist.


   Strategic interventions on child pornography entail:


    • Forming partnerships with NGOs and government.
    • Adoption of national youth development framework by Parliament.
    • Umsovumbu youth fund and creation of thousands of leanerships for
      young people.
    • Working with the South African Police Service for crime prevention and
      strategy development.


   Change has to go beyond talk-shows to implementation. “Make my child your
   child”.

   MEC for social Development: Eastern Cape
   The MEC sent an apology and was represented by Ms Thoko Qasa who
   delivered her speech.


  The speech opened with a quote of former President, Nelson Mandela, which
  puts children as vulnerable citizens and national treasurers. Children
  are measures of the countries well-being and a move away from apartheid.
  The speaker indicated that more than forty children are raped in the
  country every day. But only twenty-two cases end in conviction of
  offenders, which is a concern. This problem needs the involvement of
  parents, teachers, NGOs, churches and children themselves.


   A green ribbon launch, by the Social Development Department, should be
   taken as a sign to fight this abuse. A directorate needs to be set up
   wherein children get help even from effects of HIV/ AIDS. People should
   understand and know what is happening around them and act before it is
   too late.

   Mr Patrick Chauke, Chairperson: Home Affairs Parliamentary Portfolio
   Committee

  Mr Chauke indicated that the committee is happy with changes in the FBP
  with the new CEO and board members.  In his speech, he noted that all
  presenters never made mention of the current laws which regulate the
  films and publication industry such as the Films and Publications
  Amendment Act.


   Further, he mentioned that when there is an amendment to legislation,
   inputs come from rich and resourceful people like filmmakers. He pledged
   that the committee would to go out to the public and provinces, to give
   people a chance to give inputs and participate in the legislative
   processes.

   Mr Chauke cited the move to challenge Adult World operating next to
   Parliament as eye opening. The Films and Publication Act does not allow
   anybody to posses child pornography.  The challenge is for the conference
   not only to address the South African problems but also of its neighbours
   (SADC and the African Union). The chairperson indicated that in his
   experience with Hustler magazine was that it had two versions. The simple
   one for the world and the hard porn for South Africa. He asked why South
   Africa had been given hard porn. South Africa is becoming a dumping
   ground for pornography. There is also the Voice newspaper in Cape Town,
   which is selling at R1,50 – thus becoming easily accessible to young
   ones.


   Mr Chauke proposed that there should be a strong inspectorate within the
   FPB that should begin to raise these issues. He was concerned about the
   fact that there are currently three inspectorates in the country. That is
   Johannesburg, Cape Town and Durban.   In Johannesburg porn is sold in the
   streets and police are doing nothing about this. He appealed to the
   Minister of Home Affairs, the Portfolio Committee, the FPB and the
   Department of Safety and Security to work together to deal with these
   issues.


   Ms Susan Shabangu, Deputy Minister: Safety & Security



  The Deputy Minister indicated that child pornography is a challenge to
  everyone. The South African Police Service (SAPS) signed various
  protocols which protect children. Locally, the police are involved in
  various awareness programs in communities to address child pornography
  and child abuse. Police move around to schools and communities to
  continuously protect the interest of the child. The problem needs
  community support and people must report abuse. The SAPS would continue
  to work with the community to bring perpetrators to book.


   The department has trained police to investigate child pornography. The
   challenge is to train more – with specialised computers, forensic
   training, etc. Courses are run by Interpol. South Africa also managed to
   train other African countries: Botswana, Ethopia and Ghana. The process
   is shown to be successful in making arrests and conviction related to
   child pornography and child abuse.


   A call for minimum sentence is a challenge. Key for police is to refer
   victims to victim’s centres for support and that people report
   perpetrators to police. The Deputy Minister reiterated that the police
   are going to work with various stakeholders to fight this crime.


Strategies to deal with child pornography




   Peter Mahlare: Vodacom


  Mr. Mahlare stated that technologically many things have changed in life.
  Children can access pornography from cell phones. He pledged that Vodacom
  takes it’s responsibility to protect children from pornographic materials
  seriously.


   He further alluded to the important role played by parents in the
   education of the young ones, which is key. There is a need to recognise
   the role of adults in society. There is a need to educate subscribers
   about what mobile units can do, ensuring that certain things are not
   accessed by children.


   Vodacom complies with the regulations and those who have access to mobile
   units need to abide by the rules. Vodacom operates in various areas. Wasp
   (Wireless Application Service Provider) ensures that they comply with
   ICASA regulations; Vodafone live enables them to label contents under
   specific classification around adults and others. Vodacom does not market
   products which are unlawful and there are age restrictions.


   Parental empowerment is crucial to protect children from having access to
   content
   which is deemed to be undesirable.

   Mr Sbu Mngadi: Cell C


  Mr Mgadi also mentioned that Cell C is pledging support in efforts to
  protect children from access to mobile adult services. The company needs
  WASP partners to come together as one body to set clear codes of conducts
  and regulate advertising of adult content to children. He further
  asserted that the Portfolio Committee on Communications is hearing a
  submission from the ICT industry in this regard.



   Mr A V Malambo: HIREZ Internet service provider


  The internet service provider has over the past two months conducted
  research over the Internet about child pornography. Mr Malabo argued that
  the results are shocking, including paedophiles. What can be done? The
  Watch Foundation in Britain is looking into combating child pornography.
  Similar operations are in the US. The United Nations is also playing a
  role in initiatives to protect the child called “innocent in danger”.


   The internet service provider appealed to government to increase
   organisations which are internet focussed. Parents, teachers and children
   themselves should be educated about the laws which are against child
   pornography.


   Ms Joan Van Niekerk: Civil Society, Child SA


   Ms Van Niekerk argued that according to reports between 800 000 and 900
   000 children are trafficked annually in the world. But there are no
   updates on the extent of the problem in South Africa.


  South Africa has legislation in place to protect the child; namely the
  Child Care Act, Sexual Offences Bill, Child Justice Bill, Films and
  Publication Amendment Act, new child trafficking legislations and others.
  Civil Society appealed to Members of Parliament to expedite the
  processing of legislation before them without worrying about the cost of
  doing this.


   There is a need to help and support parents and caregivers experiencing
   the abuse of their children. Children also need to feel safe to make a
   full disclosure of their abuse, 90 % of offenders had viewed pornographic
   materials. Awareness (including self awareness), training, support and
   regular debriefings are important.

   Ms Gloria Britain: SABC

  Ms Britain maintained that SABC is accountable for what it puts on air
  and it is in a position to play a role in fighting child pornography.
  Since 1996 the broadcaster established an education department producing
  and transmitting important messages to the public. This included Soul
  Buddies, Takalane Sesame and others.


   SABC licence policies and legislation are in place to encourage a
   programme for pro-social behaviour- showing what we would like children
   to do. Aligning editorial polices is crucial and there are very clear
   guidelines about what programmes are flighted.


   She argued that burning problematic materials won’t be an answer to the
   problem. There is a need for consultations and partnerships on this
   issue. Parents and adults need to be vigilant about what happens and
   educate the children. Involving political action at the highest level is
   crucial.


   Discussions


  After the presentations the conference was given an opportunity for
  discussions or comments, which resulted in the following points as
  presented below.  It should be noted that these comments never covered
  all presentations, especially those delivered later.

    • Need to engage civil society in advocacy work, especially in schools –
      porn is rife in Johannesburg (Hillbrow and Parkstation).
    • It is important to raise awareness about children rights and work as
      adults to address this.
    • Children are our present and we need to protect them for the future.
    • Presentations were eye opening as anyone can be dangerous to your
      child.
    • Need to unite organisations to create awareness under the auspices of
      FPB.
    • Need for a minimum sentence for offenders – currently there is only a
      maximum sentence.
    • Move from looking at young people as victims, but rather to a voice to
      be heard.
    • Need to change the mentality that child pornography is not happening
      here in South Africa.
    • Need to correlate research on this issue and form partnerships.
    • No consent of children from parents, rape is high, – in Sunnyside and
      Pretoria CBD - and people should speak up all the time.
    • Need to unpack issues of culture, religion and tradition, housing and
      education, skills development and safer school programme in education.
    • Concern about the illegal immigrants who are perpetrators and drug
      pushers – they get deported and come back in the country the same day,
      especially in Beit Bridge.
    • Difficulty to teach about pornography at school because parents and
      SGBs are against that – who is wrong? A man or everybody?
    • What is the best method to teach the young people?
    • FBP should educate people about the hotline.
    • Education department was supposed to be part of the conference.
    • Child trafficking for sexual purpose – how do we deal with demand for
      protection?
    • Baby Tshepang was an eye opener to sufferers beyond closed doors.
    • Need to introduce filter software to protect children from accessing
      pornography on the internet.
    • Regarding missing children, where are they?
    • The cultural problems in the family, men as father figures, socio-
      economic issues which force children to take part in porn movies,
      children bought and sold – what are we going to do about these?


1 Working groups


   Delegates were divided into four commissions for discussions. The
   commissions were: Mobile Technology and Child Pornography; Media and
   Child Pornography; Internet and Child Pornography and lastly Child
   Trafficking and Pornography.
  The Terms of References for the commissions are presented below:


    • Establishing brand consensus on child pornography
    • Current key challenges on protecting children against child
      pornography
    • The role of family and household
    • Strategies we need to mobilise business and others stakeholders to
      intervene
    • Policy interventions required to deal with child pornography
    • Strategic interventions to create the capacity to monitor and prevent
      child pornography

J. Presentation and adoption of the Plan of Action (POA) - by Mr Jacob
 Mamabolo:

   Secretariat


  Mr Mamabolo presented the Plan of Action and the conference declaration,
  which is a conference summary and recommendations, as follows:


   We, the delegates gathered at the National Conference against Child

   Pornography, convened by the Film and Publication Board in Partnership
   with

   the Department of Home Affairs, brought together by our profound

   commitment to fight the proliferation and spread of child pornography.

   Inspired by the noble ideals espoused by the progressive people and
   governments of the world united against gross neglect, abuse, degradation
   and dehumanisation of children as contained in the UN Convention on the
   Rights of the Child

   Further inspired by the unwavering commitment of our democratic
   government as enshrined in the Bill of Rights of the Constitution,
   notably that:

   Every child has the right-

   a. to a name and nationality from birth;
   b. to family or parental care, or to appropriate alternative care when
      removed from the family environment;
   c. to basic nutrition, shelter, basic health care services and social
      services;
   d. to be protected from maltreatment, neglect, abuse or degradation;
   e. to be protected from exploitative labour practices; and
   f. not to be required or permitted to perform work or provide services
      that are inappropriate for a person of that child’s age; or place at
      risk the child’s well being, education, physical or mental heath or
      spiritual, moral for social development.


    Noting the qualitative contributions by delegates, international and
    national experts representing diverse interest groups united in action
    against child pornography.

    Recognising and appreciating that whilst modern technology seeks to
    advance human development, it has adversely undermined the social
    cohesiveness of the family and household as a basic unit of society.


    Further recognising that the creation, production, processing, and
    distribution of any pornographic material severely imposes untold
    misery to normal childhood development.
    Acknowledging that the thematic areas as the thrust of Conference have
    laid a basis for robust engagement with all key stakeholders, to develop
    a sustainable programme of action against child pornography.
    Believing that the deliberations at this conference have laid a solid
    foundation to mobilise, educate and raise public awareness amongst South
    Africans about the evils of child pornography in the country.


    We are therefore convinced that our common pursuit of the ideal that
    South Africa that belongs to all who live in it, united in our
    diversity, will be incomplete unless children are protected against all
    forms of abuse.


    We further believe that the ideals that underpin our quest to live in
    South Africa that provides peace, comfort and security to her citizens
    will never be realised until the rights of children are respected and
    affirmed.


    We therefore adopt the National Plan of Action Against Child
    Pornography, pronounced as follows:



National awareness and public education campaign

    • The Ministry of Home Affairs to develop and implement comprehensive
      Campaign to intensify efforts aimed at protecting children from
      accessing harmful images within the media, including films,
      exhibitions, games, televisions, internet and other publications. The
      Sixteen Days of No Violence Against Women and Children will further
      seek to enhance the campaign.

    • The Portfolio Committee of Home Affairs will initiate a national
      debate in both Houses of Parliament, with a view to placing the fight
      against child pornography on the country’s national agenda.

    • The Portfolio Committee will further consult with the Select Committee
      on Social Services, to ensure roll out of the debate in Provincial and
      Local Government Legislatures.

    • As part of the national awareness campaign, the Ministry of Home
      Affairs will engage in particular the local government in the
      metropolitan councils, with a view to cracking down on the illegal
      porn shops operating in their jurisdiction. And to also ensure that
      all pornographic materials be restricted to designated areas.

    • The FPB will develop and implement a programme with schools (targeting
      learners and educators) as part of the campaign to raise awareness on
      the dangers of possessing, creating, producing, distributing,
      importing, accessing, and advertising or promoting child pornography.

    • The Moral Regeneration Movement (MRM) will adopt this national
      campaign in its programme, as well as coordinate organs of civil
      society.

    • The FPB will interact with the broadcasting sector to make a
      contribution to the national awareness campaign. We call upon the
      South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) to take a lead in this
      regard.

    • Ministry to engage NEDLAC to initiate a national dialogue within its
      member organisations about the effects and dangers of child
      pornography and suggest measures that are required to curb this
      scourge in the country.

   Capacity of the film and publication board


    • Conference notes that the current core mandate, scope and structures
      of FPB are extremely inadequate to deal decisively with the challenges
      posed by the increasing effects of modern technology on child
      pornography. We therefore on the Ministry to ensure a total review of
      structures of the FPB. Such measures will include the creation of
      create a specialised unit to focus on child pornography, Research and
      Information Management Unit, enhance the quality of the Monitoring and
      Evaluation system and processes.



    • Call upon the Portfolio Committee of Home Affairs to amend legislation
      with a view to strengthening the capacity of the FPB to exercise
      authority over the classification of material.

    • Ministry to engage ICASA to introduce measures that seeks to regulate
      the spread of child pornographic material on mobile technology.



   Building strategic partnerships

    • Ministry of Home Affairs to ensure synergy and coordination within the
      law enforcement agencies and the judiciary to deal decisively with the
      perpetrators of child abuse through pornography.

    • Call upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to engage FOSAD and the
      relevant Cabinet Clusters (JCPS Cluster, Social Sector Cluster) to
      make a concerted effort to combat and prevent the spread of child
      pornography.

    • Call upon the Home Affairs Portfolio Committee to engage the Portfolio
      Committee of Trade and Industry to amend legislation to empower the
      FPB to be the only authority responsible for issuing licences for
      pornography industry.



Monitoring and evaluation


    • Recommend that the Ministry  of  Home  Affairs  appoint  the  National
      Advisory Committee  to  advise,  and  make  recommendation  on  policy
      intervention that are required to intensify the  fight  against  child
      pornography.



L.    Closing – by chairperson, Deputy Minister, Mr M Gigaba


   In his closing remark the Deputy Minister hailed the conference as a
   success and added: “We are very thrilled that this conference has created
   a possibility for us to strengthen strategic partnerships with all organs
   to civil society, business, international institutions and government to
   curb the scourge of child pornography. This is a call for action.”  More
   than 300 delegates attended the conference and adopted a declaration
   (plan of action) and committed all organs of civil society, government
   and the private sector to take radical steps to combat the scourge of
   child pornography in all its manifestations.


   Amongst others, the declaration made pronouncements on the National
   Awareness and Public Education Campaign, Capacity of the Film and
   Publication Board (FPB), Building Strategic Partnerships and Monitoring
   and Evaluation.


   Concerning the National Awareness and Public Education, the Ministry of
   Home Affairs was mandated to develop and implement a comprehensive
   campaign to intensify efforts aimed at protecting children from accessing
   harmful images within the media, including films, exhibitions, games,
   televisions, internet and other publications.

   Critically, the Portfolio Committee of Home Affairs was also mandated to
   initiate a national debate in both Houses of Parliament, with a view to
   placing the fight against child pornography on the country’s national
   agenda. One of the resolutions taken at the conference is that Home
   Affairs should hold bilateral discussions with both the Internet Service
   Association of South Africa and the mobile technology providers with a
   view to developing a joint programme of action aimed at combating the
   spread of child pornography.


   Lastly, the Deputy Minister handed out certificates to 53 learners who
   completed their first module training on child trafficking. Seven
   teachers and principals also received training on management and
   reporting systems. The training is the initiative of Volkswagen South
   Africa. Mr Moosa Moss of Volkswagen SA indicated that the company helps
   with funding and formed partnerships with NGOs to do training.


Report to be considered.


5.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on Oversight Visit
     to Independent Electoral Commission and Government Printing Works in
     Tshwane, date 14 June 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having undertaken an oversight
    visit to Tshwane on 14 June 2005, reports as follows:


A. Introduction


    The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs undertook a visit to Tshwane on
    14 June 2005. The aim of the committee was to get the briefing by the
    Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) on state of preparedness for the
    forthcoming local government elections. The committee also visited
    Government Printing Works (GPW) to understand the factory’s operational
    matters, security of official documents and processing systems.


    Lastly, the report will also report briefly on the surprise visit by
    the committee to home affairs offices to check the manner in which
    people are issued with passports, identity documents (IDs), birth and
    death certificates and others.



B. Procedures


    The committee secretary coordinated the plans of the committee on its
    visit to Tshwane. He arranged appointments with the IEC and GPW to meet
    with the committee, first by sending correspondences to the two
    institutions clearly stipulating the purpose of the meeting and the
    dates and the number of delegates for the meeting.


    At IEC the meeting was scheduled to begin at 9h00 and 14h00 at GPW, on
    June 14 2005. Co-ordinators at IEC and GPW assisted with the
    arrangements of venue for the meeting at their respective premises.
    Delegation for the Tshwane visit was comprised of the following six
    persons: Mr P Chauke, Chairperson: ANC; Mr W Skhosana: ANC; Ms S
    Kalyan: DA; Ms I Mars: IFP; Mr R Mankge: Committee Secretary and Ms L
    Martins: Committee Assistant. However some committee members withdrew
    from the visit in response to a call by the President, Mr Thabo Mbeki,
    to attend a Parliamentary sitting he had called for on 14 June 2005.


C. Findings


    This section presents the findings of the study done by the committee
    on the Independent Electoral Commission, Government Printing Works and
    Department of Home Affairs.

Independent Electoral Commission

    During the committee’s visit to the IEC the chairperson of the
    commission, Dr Bam, voiced her appreciation particularly on the role
    played by Parliament with its provincial visits and encouraging people
    to apply for IDs. The committee was also highly commended on the
    support they give the Department of Home Affairs (DHA). Dr Bam argued
    that irrespective of the myriad of challenges they are faced with such
    as the new demarcations and systems of running elections, they have
    gained skills and experience to take the coming elections forward.


    A strong team of managers and commissioners had accompanied and
    supported Dr Bam during her meeting with the committee.   She
    introduced her team each with an assigned role or an activity to
    present before the committee. The IEC team was comprised of the
    following: Commissioner Mpumlwana – presenting International activities
    of the IEC; Commissioner Van der Merwe – handling general overview on
    the preparations for the forthcoming local government elections;
    Advocate Tlakula, CEO – dealing with administrative arrangements for
    the forthcoming local government elections and lastly presentation on
    Delimitation and Voter Registration by Mr Norman du Plessis.

International activities of the IEC

    The IEC is playing a leading role on elections not only in South Africa
    but also in other parts of Africa. Although the country is still young
    in the game of multi-party democracy, international worlds already are
    convinced that the country can offer more to them, argued the
    chairperson of the commission.


    Commissioner Mpumlwana outlined the role played by the IEC at
    international level,
    that they:


  ▪ offer technical support
  ▪ observe elections
  ▪ participate as partners in electoral projects


    The work of the commission on the international level is funded by
    organizations that invite it to assist. Despite that, Commissioner
    Mpumlwana argues that as partners IEC also augments.


    The commission has already been involved in countries like Namibia,
    Lesotho, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and Sudan on electoral
    projects. The commission is in a partnership with the African Union
    (AU), and they are trying to establish and electoral unit to build
    democracy in Africa. In Sudan the electoral commission is doing
    research on elections and electoral systems and conflict management.


    With the Southern African Development Community’s (SADC) electoral
    forum, IEC intends to enhance its support on the forum and help create
    a common vision on elections. The commission’s partnership with the
    Association of Electoral Forum in Africa has already shown the fruits
    for success whereby the commission is currently helping the DRC
    electoral Commission with capacity building.



Overview on the preparations for elections


   Commissioner van der Merwe said that IEC has established electoral units
   in municipalities. The units work as municipal support staff, which the
   IEC pays for their salaries and the projects run. Municipal support
   staffs are under the management of IEC.


   Municipal electoral units are established do deal with the brain drain,
   which was happening within the IEC. Commissioner, van der Merwe, asserted
   that in the past the commission used to hire part-time workers during
   elections but lost them after they gained experience.


   Running the elections is not a smooth sailing. The commission is faced
   with a number of challenges, which include:


 ▪ creating and maintaining a voter’s roll
 ▪ re-demarcation of new voting stations
 ▪ how to distribute ballot papers to the districts
 ▪ financial constraints and management of elections


Administrative arrangements


   Advocate Tlakula presented the committee with the election plans. Amongst
   other things, Tlakula reported that the planning was based on the premise
   that the elections were scheduled for 07 December 2005, while
   registration begins on 03 September.


   About two hundred million is budgeted for this financial year, for
   elections. The commission has negotiated with the landlords to put
   polling stations in their premises. For example, the commissioner
   mentioned that they spoke with school governing bodies (SGBs) about using
   the schools. However there are problems in areas where there is no proper
   infrastructure like in the informal settlements. As the results, the
   commission would resort to use of tents, sometimes blocking streets.



Delimitation and voter registration


   Mr du Plessis mentioned that there is improvement in access to voting
   facilities – queues and numbers and distances. But differences would
   still be seen in other places, between Easter Cape and Johannesburg, for
   example, due to walking distances. Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB) has
   redrawn the boundaries to accommodate peoples’ movement and the voting
   districts were also cut. The movement of people calls for creation of new
   voting districts.



Questions and answers


   Below is the list of questions asked by the committee with the responses
   provided by the by the commission:


   Is the budget allocation enough


   In response, the chairperson of the commission asserted that the
   commission would manage to run the forthcoming elections with the money
   the have. She indicated that they, however, have a valued added tax (VAT)
   challenge. They are currently discussing with the national treasury to
   give them 80 million rands in tax return.


   On the other hand, it appeared that the commission doesn’t have enough
   money for outreach programmes and publicity, especially for poor rural
   communities, which don’t have access to televisions.


   How much is used for voter education


   The commissioners indicated that 35 million rands are used for voter
   education. They are also managing with the financial assistance provided
   by provincial departments. Examples include Limpopo province, which has
   adopted a policy to support IEC.


   How would people be educated about the elections

   Responding to the question of voter education, the commission indicated
   that they have approved an organogram for coordinators in provinces to
   deal with ongoing voter education. The project aims to infuse democracy
   in schools. The project has been running for four years in conjunction
   with the department of education covering the sample of 600 schools in
   the country.


   Currently the commission is negotiating with the department of education
   to incorporate the project of voter education in the school syllabus. It
   has already been piloted in the Further Education and Training (FET)
   band. The aim is to bring democracy in education.


   In addition the commission reported that, there is a stakeholder
   management project, which runs to include community leaders, churches,
   unions, schools and universities. The objective of this initiative is to
   organize communities and educate them about balloting and how to vote.

   How were target areas for voter registration identified

   Targeted areas explain areas affected by boundary changes and low
   registrations. The commission goes back to the identified houses affected
   by the changes and asks people to re-register for elections. However
   sometimes people are not found at home, in this case the commission
   argued that pamphlets are left at the house to inform dwellers that they
   have to register again.

   The voter registration is often met with challenges, which include:

    ▪ lack of proper addresses in informal settlements
    ▪ ongoing migration of people
    ▪ lack of systems to trace how many people move from their
      municipalities.

   How is the maintenance of voters’ dealt with – problems of people passing
   on and names still on the voters’ roll.


   The commission is working with the department of home affairs to prevent
   the system of ghost voters. Only the living people should vote.  The
   commission reported that 1.8 million dead people were removed from the
   voter’s roll since 1998. The problem is that elements of resurrection
   occurs but the commission works closely with the home affairs department
   to make sure that they don’t get names of dead people on the voter’s
   roll, said Mr du Plessis.

 Do people get IDs for elections

 With regard to the question of ID, the commission indicated in response
 that there is an increasing awareness campaigns to encourage people to
 apply for IDs. The problem is that there is no system in place to track
 applications done. To show this, it appears that people apply for IDs in
 the Eastern Cape and move to Cape Town before they receive them, and when
 they get there they apply again.

 The Government Printing Works

 Mr Tom Moyane, as the Chief Executive Officer (CEO), heads the Government
 Printing Works. In brief, Mr Moyane reported that the factory does
 printing of Identity Documents, passports and government gazettes and
 others.


 During the meeting at the factory, Mr Moyane was supported by the
 following staff members: his Personal Assistant, Ms M Mopelong; Mr S Quit:
 Admin Manager; Mr M Ntimba: Finance Manager; Mr J Engelbrecht: Operations
 Manager; Mr J Rossouw: Human Resources Manager; Mr A Mosoma: Factory
 Manager; Mr T Nyida: Assistant Factory Manager; Mr T Khumalo: Assistant
 Factory Manager; MS A Pretorious: Assistant Director, Finance; Ms S
 Badenhorts: Assistant Director, Stationery; Mr Z Montjane: Assistant
 Director, Publications.
   Some staff members presented the work of the factory before the committee
   as outlined below, which was followed by a tour of the factory.


   Operations


   The Operations Manager, Mr Engelbrecht, stated that the factory is
   divided into different functions which include printing, publications,
   stationery and raw materials, administration and support.

   Printing

   With regard to printing, it was mentioned that the process includes
   putting printing plates to machines to get actual printing done. After
   the materials are printed the factory also do binding. Apart from the
   binding of the reports and government gazettes the factory does what they
   call security binding, which includes IDs and passports.


   Publications

   Mr Engelbrecht argued that their Pretoria and Cape Town offices do
   publications whereby provincial gazettes are produced.  The GPW offices
   in other provinces do publishing of statistical reports.


   Stationery and raw materials


   The GPW purchases ball pens, papers and other materials and store them in
   different stores. The factory has also what they call a face value store
   used for safe keeping of ID or passport face photos and other important
   documents.


   Admin and support

   The admin and support directorate is responsible for contract printing,
   finance and human resources divisions. Mr Engelbrech stated that security
   is important part of the GPW. There are twenty-four security guards at
   the factory seven days a week.


   Challenges


   Mr Moyane mentioned that they are faced with a number of challenges at
   the GPW. They include the following:



   Training and skill development


   The CEO indicated that their work is very sophisticated and hence they
   need resources to meet staff training needs and skills development. The
   factory has a staff compliment of more than six hundred workers.





   Inappropriate facility


   The facility the factory is operating from is a problem in itself. The Mr
   Moyane argued that the facility was the prison in the past, which is now
   turned into government printing. It is not adequate for the printing work
   and security of the material produced.

   Factory tour

   The committee was given a chance to embark on a tour of the factory to
   observe and have first hand experience of the work done.


   Different sections of the factory were visited. The visit started with
   the origination section, which captures every information and documents
   sent to the factory. Sixty-one people were found working in this section.
   There is also a proof reading section, which makes sure that the
   information captured to be printed is correct.

   Another section seen was the photo reproduction dealing with photo
   materials. The photo reproduction section has a staff compliment of
   three.  The factory has editors who do editing work and making sure that
   the notices go to the right places.


   From the photo reproduction, the committee proceeded to the manufacturing
   section. This section is highly secure. Everyone entering the ID and
   passport manufacturing section is searched when going in and out. It was
   realized that no bags are allowed inside the section.


   The committee was how the IDs are made and the security features on the
   ID paper, which could only be seen by use of magnifying class. The papers
   used for making IDs are carefully counted and recorded by machine to
   prevent fraudulent printing of the document. Where the machine fails
   counting can be done manually.

   Committee’s response and concerns

   The chairperson assured the GPW that the committee supports their desire
   to move out of the prison building to a proper facility designed for
   printing works. The committee was also satisfied about the way funds are
   run in the factory. The factory was however advised to put some tighter
   debt collection measures to get back the money owed to them by different
   state departments.
   The committee had however, on the other hand, raised some concerns, which
   are explained below.


   Safety of papers
   The committee uncovered loopholes with regard to the security of ID
   papers and other official documents. The CEO mentioned that the paper
   moves between the State Information Technology Agency (SITA) and the
   Department of Home Affairs before it reaches the GPW for printing of IDs.
   The committee’s view was that in the middle of this process some of the
   papers end up in the hands of criminal who produce fraudulent IDs. The
   question is who between the three is to blame; GPW said it is clean and
   suspected that SITA is the one which poses serious security risk on the
   paper.


   Old coat of arms


   While IDs and other official documents have new coat of arms, passports
   are still left behind in the past – reflecting the old apartheid coat of
   arms. Nevertheless, Mr Moyane maintained that the South African passport
   is the best in the world.

   Department of Home Affairs


   Before the committee reached the Government Printing works, they decided
   to pay a surprise visit to the regional department of home affairs at
   corner Bosman and Pretorius, Pretoria. The committee moved quietly inside
   the department and joined queues as if they were coming to apply for
   official documents like any other person.


   The committee discovered a number of problems at the department, and
   these are explained below.

   Issues discovered


   The committee witnessed two things happening at the department of home
   affairs:


   Nametags


   The committee realized that most of the home affairs officials, including
   their seniors, were working without their nametags on them. Some of the
   officials were arrogant when asked about why they did not wear their
   nametags, perhaps because they did not know the importance of wearing
   them.


   Agencies


   In the passport section it was found that there were agencies, which work
   to collect passports on behalf of other people. For example one man was
   found with a stack of passports and after been interrogated by the
   chairperson he claimed that he was collecting them on behalf of a
   particular family. The man further mentioned that he also work for the
   South African Football Association (SAFA) - collecting passports for
   players from the offices. However nothing wrong was found with the man as
   officials at the department also confirmed that he was known and
   confirmed that he is working for SAFA.

       D.   Committee recommendations


   This section presents the committee recommendations to attempt to address
   the problems affecting the three institutions visited in Tshwane.

   Concerning the IEC, the committee recommends that:

   1. There is a need to put more money for the commission to fully meet its
   plans
   2. There is a need to focus on voter education and inter-party
   relationships
   3. The number of voters needs to be increased
   4. Voting stations need to be put at walking distances to people

   With regard to the Department of Home Affairs, the committee recommends
that:

   1. Officials should wear their name takes during work hours

   Concerning the Government Printing works, the committee recommends that:

   1. A joint meeting be held between the department of home affairs, GPW
      and Sita to discuss security issues
   2. Transformation should happen and staff must reflect the countries
      population
   3. The GPW should do away with the old code of arms on passports
   4. The GPW needs to be moved to a suitable building
   5. The GPW needs to collect money owed by departments

       Report to be considered.


