---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 May 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-05-17
---

TUESDAY, 17 MAY 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

               COMMEMORATION OF THE 22nd CANDLELIGHT MEMORIAL




                               (Announcement)


The SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed with today’s business I wish to
draw your attention to the commemoration of the Candlelight Memorial that
is held from 13 to 18 May 2005. The theme this year is turning remembrance
into action. It focuses on remembering those who have been touched by HIV
and Aids and on keeping those memories alive through collective action. It
seeks to encourage communities and incorporate advocacy activities that
extend beyond the official candlelight event.

It is also an opportunity to discuss the impact of HIV and Aids within
communities as well as how communities will address issues, such as
education, prevention, care and treatment. I urge you, hon members, to
participate in this commemoration in your various communities.


                             DISCIPLINARY ACTION


                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed to other business, I wish to
make an announcement concerning developments in the processing of the abuse
of travel vouchers. The investigations and judicial processes are ongoing.
But, as you are aware, five current members of the Assembly have entered
plea bargains and were sentenced by the Cape Town regional court on 18
March for committing fraud against Parliament. Although it is not my
intention to make a statement on this matter at the moment, I simply want
to indicate that it is a very grave matter indeed – a very grave situation
for the House and the institution to be facing.

I called a special meeting of the Assembly Rules Committee this morning to
consult the committee on the appropriate steps to be taken by the House in
regard to these members. And, following on that meeting, I have requested
the Deputy Speaker to convene the Disciplinary Committee, as a matter of
urgency, to advise me in that regard.

A memorandum is on its way to parties requesting them to nominate their
representatives on the disciplinary committee. I appeal to hon members in
the parties to submit the names of their representatives to the Deputy
Speaker without delay so that this matter could be attended to as speedily
as possible.


                     CONGRATULATIONS TO SA CRICKET TEAM


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move
without notice:

    That the House -

    (1)     notes the success of the SA Cricket Team (the Proteas) in their
        tour to the West Indies;

    (2)     congratulates them on winning both the five-day test series and
        the one-day international series against the host country;


    (3)     further congratulates the two players who went straight into the
        history books of the game, viz Makhaya Ntini, for becoming the
        first South African in the history of the game to claim thirteen
        test wickets in a single test match, and Charl Langeveldt, for
        becoming the first South African cricket player to claim a hat-
        trick in a one-day international; and

    (4)     wishes the South African team every success in their
        preparations to take on the world champions, Australia, later this
        year.

 Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Agreed to.





                      TRIBUTE TO PROF WILLEM KLEYNHANS


                             (Draft Resolution)


 Mr L K JOUBERT: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the IFP I
 move without notice:


    That the House;


    (1)     wishes to pay tribute to political scientist Professor Willem
           Kleynhans, who on 17 May 1955 presented a petition to the then
           National Party government, signed by 13 Afrikaans academics,
           protesting against the racial policies of the then National
           Party; and

    (2)     notes that:

           (a)   at that stage a prominent National Party member, Kleynhans
                was the first Afrikaans academic to openly criticise the
                apartheid regime from within and was thereafter rejected and
                scorned;

           (b)   it is of historic importance to notice that today it is 50
                years since Kleynhans took his principled and brave stand
                against apartheid; and

           (c)   during this very year the National Party will die, without
                apologising to Professor Kleynhans, who showed them the way
                half a century ago.

We salute you, Professor Kleynhans, and also the many other Afrikaners who
never supported the National Party’s racial policies.
Thank you.

Agreed to.

                       APPOINTMENT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion printed on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, as follows:

   That the House, in terms of Rule 214, appoints an  ad  hoc  committee  to
   make a nomination to the House in order to enable it to recommend to  the
   President, in terms of section 2A(1) of the Public Protector Act (Act  No
   23 of 1994), a person for appointment as  Deputy  Public  Protector,  the
   committee to –

      (a)   consist of 17 members, as follows: African National Congress 10;
          Democratic Alliance 2; Inkatha Freedom Party 1; other parties 4;


      (b)   exercise those powers in Rule 138 that may assist it in carrying
          out its task; and


      (c)   report to the House by 17 June 2005.


Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE




                   (The late Mr Bavumile Herbert Vilakazi)

UMBHEXESHI DYINTLOKO WEQELA ELILAWULAYO: Somlomo, ndiphakamisa:

   Ukuba le Ndlu -


     1) ivakalisa usizi nobuhlungu ludaba lokusweleka ngomhla we 21 April
        2005 eKampala kuka Bavumile Herbert Vilakazi obengummeli weli
        lizwe, eUganda nowayesakuba lilungu lale Ndlu;
     2) iqwalasela ngokumandla igalelo alenzileyo nendima enkulu
        ayidlalileyo kumzabalazo wokudalwa koMzantsi Afrika okhululekileyo,
        iindima ezahlukeneyo azidlalileyo kule Ndlu ngokunjalo najikelele
        kweli lizwe phantsi kokuba ebengummeli weli eUganda;

     3) inqwenela ukuvakalisa ukuba iphantsi kwenzilo ngenxa yolimka kweli
        qhawe;

     4) ivakalisa uvelwano olunzulu kwizihlobo nezalamani zakwaVilakazi;
        yaye

     5) ilunqwenelela amandla avela kumdali nokomelela usapho lwakhe ngeli
        xesha lokuva kwabo ubunzima.
   (Translation of isiXhosa motion of condolence follows.)



[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -


     1) expresses its sorrow at the news of the untimely death on 21 April
        2005 in Kampala of Ambassador Bavumile Herbert Vilakazi, the South
        African High Commissioner to Uganda and a former member of this
        House;

     2) recognises the valuable contribution that Ambassador Vilakazi made
        to the struggle for a democratic South Africa, to this House where
        he served in various roles and to the country at large as its
        representative in Uganda;

     3) mourns the passing of our former colleague Mr Vilakazi;

     4) conveys its sincere condolences to the Vilakazi family and their
        friends; and

     5) wishes that they be filled with strength and fortitude in their
        time of sadness.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Speaker, the DA associates itself with the motion of
condolence in respect of our late colleague Ambassador Bavumile Vilakazi
who passed away recently. Ambassador Vilakazi had a distinguished career in
public life as a member of Parliament, as executive mayor of Ekurhuleni and
as our country’s Ambassador to Uganda. He was larger than life with a ready
smile and a friendly word for all.

During the time that he was in Parliament Mr Vilakazi was deeply involved
in parliamentary visits and delegations, and contributed to the success of
a number of these visits because of his wide experience and his sensible
advice to newer members. We extend our very sincere condolences to all
those who loved him, to his friends, his party and relatives. He will be
greatly missed.

Robala ka kagiso, morwa Vilakazi. [Rest in peace son of Vilakazi.]

Mr L K JOUBERT: Madam Speaker, hon members, I never had the privilege of
meeting our late brother Bavumile Herbert Vilakazi, but from enquiries I
made it is clear that he was a remarkable man who served his country in one
of its highest offices with distinction. Africa is not a popular posting
for diplomats but Ambassador Vilakazi loved Africa and it is therefore
fitting that he spent his last days in the heart of Africa.

Death always saddens those who stay behind but it is especially sad if
death visits a man in the prime of his life. It makes us stop and realise
that we are all mortal. A philosopher once said that death is not the
greatest loss in life, the greatest loss is what dies inside us while we
live. An important lesson from Ambassador Vilakazi’s life is that one need
not live to a ripe old age to have lived a successful life.

I would like to express our sincere condolences to the Vilakazi family with
their great loss.

Hamba kahle ndoda yamadoda. [Go in peace man amongst men.]

Mnu J BICI: Somlomo, iUDM iluve udaba lokusweleka kukabawo uVilakazi
ngomothuko nangentliziyo ebuhlungu. Kubuhlungu ukushiywa ngamagokra,
amakroti, namakhalipha anjengale ndoda. Kodwa ke sithi masingalili
ngokwabantu abangenathemba. UVilakazi uhambile kwaye uphumle yena ngoku.
Sithi usapho lwakhe nezihlobo zakhe, mazilale ngenxeba, nathi sinabo
kwintlungu abakuyo. Iintetha ezinjengezi sinethemba lokuba ziyacaphula
kancinci kwintlungu abayivayo nenzima abayivayo. Enkosi. (Translation of
isiXhosa motion of condolence follows.)

[Mr J BICI: Speaker, the UDM received the news of the demise of Mr Vilakazi
with shock and pain. The passing on of heroes like him leaves us in sorrow.
We must not cry as though we do not have hope. Vilakazi is no more, and he
is resting now.  We extend our condolences to the family and relatives. We
hope that motions like these do console them. Thank you.]

Mr C H F GREYLING: Madam Speaker, I would like to pay tribute to our High
Commissioner to Uganda, Ambassador Vilakazi, who passed away on the 21st of
April. He was involved in the United Democratic Front, was the ANC
Gauteng’s deputy provincial secretary, an ANC Member of Parliament and the
first mayor of the Ekurhuleni metro on the East Rand before been sent to
Uganda as South Africa’s High Commissioner.

Sy heengaan op ’n relatief jong ouderdom is ’n groot verlies en vandag sê
ons totsiens aan ’n man wat sy lewe gewy het aan sy mense en die
vryheidstryd. Sy bydrae sal nie vergeet word nie. [His passing at a
relatively young age is a great loss and today we bid farewell to a man who
devoted his life to his people and the liberation struggle. His
contribution will not be forgotten.]

I, therefore, wish to express our deepest condolences to his family and
loved ones.

Rev M S KHUMALO: Madam Speaker, the ACDP joins this House in expressing our
condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of Bavumile Vilakazi. We
salute Mr Vilakazi for the contribution he has made to the progress we see
in our country today as well as to the development of the continent of
Africa.

The ACDP acknowledges the high esteem in which Bavumile Vilakazi is held
for the role he played in our struggle for liberation. We commend him for
the dedication and perseverance with which he advanced the rights of our
country’s workers and we express our appreciation for his commitment to
democracy and social justice. It is our prayer that Mr Vilakazi’s loved
ones will experience the peace and comfort of Jesus Christ during this
time.

Dr C P MULDER: Mevrou die Speaker, dit is my voorreg om namens die VF Plus
ons meelewing en simpatie te betuig met die familie van Mnr Vilakazi, asook
die lede van sy party en die mense wat ten nouste met hom saam gewerk het,
veral die Departement van Buitelandse Sake, wat ’n kollega verloor het.

Ek het hom leer ken toe hy in 1994 lid geword het van dié Parlement en sy
bydraes gesien en ervaar. Ek het met hom te doen gehad in verskeie
hoedanighede. Daarna het hy hom gewend tot die plaaslike regeringsvlak,
waar hy gedien het as burgemeester en toe ook as Hoë Kommissaris in Uganda.
Ek wil graag namens die VF Plus ons opregte meelewing betuig en sy
naasbestaandes baie sterkte en simpatie toewens in hierdie moeilike tyd.
Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans motion of condolence follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, it is my privilege, on behalf of the FF
Plus, to express our condolences and sympathy to the relatives of Mr
Vilakazi, as well as the members of his party and the people who
collaborated closely with him, especially those in the Department of
Foreign Affairs, who have lost a colleague.

I got to know him when he became a member of this Parliament in 1994, and I
saw and experienced his contributions. I had dealings with him in a variety
of capacities. He then turned his attention to local government, where he
served as a mayor before being appointed as the High Commissioner to
Uganda. On behalf of the FF Plus, I would like to express our sincere
condolences and to wish his next of kin much strength and sympathy at this
difficult time. Thank you very much.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker and hon House, the late Mr Bavumile Vilakazi
was a man full of wonders. When we arrived in this Parliament in 1999 and
our presence as members of the UCDP was viewed with disdain by some people,
he came out to meet us at least, apparently because he knew me from before,
and briefed us on how Parliament operates.

Steeped in activism from the days of the struggle and being in positions he
held in his political party and in Parliament did not blind him to the
plight of the disadvantaged and those who needed assistance. He thus
endeared himself to people through his concern for people regardless of the
different views they may have held against him.

His gigantic frame belied the sympathetic and considerate inner person in
him. This he also displayed as Whip in the Portfolio Committee on
Environmental Affairs and Tourism. While he did not compromise discipline
and attendance, he displayed the fullness of the milk of human kindness in
him.

We in the UCDP say farewell to a friend and a brother and accept that he
has been called to a better place for higher service. Our condolences go
out to his queenly wife, children and family, his political party and the
leadership.

Sithi, lala ngoxolo! Gokra lamagokra! [We say, rest in peace! Hero of
heroes!]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Speaker and hon members, it is indeed sad that we have
to ascend this podium once again to express our condolences and solidarity
with a comrade who has passed away. Indeed, we are paying tribute to a
comrade who has contributed his fair share to the development of his
country.

The late Ambassador Vilakazi was an integral part of the liberation
struggle, especially in the turbulent 80s in the Vaal and also as a Delmas
trialist. As a member of the first democratic Parliament, he contributed in
laying the foundation for the transformation of our country and this
institution and, as a diplomat in Uganda, which is a strategic country in
relation to the Great Lakes region, he contributed to the efforts of our
country to bring about peace and stability in that region.

Those of our comrades who have worked with him either during the Delmas
trial or in the Ekurhuleni metro council, can indeed attest to the fact
that the late ambassador was an approachable person who was ready to listen
and take ideas and implement them if they were in the best interest of our
people, irrespective of which political party they came from.

I wish, on behalf of the PAC and, indeed, on my own behalf, to convey our
heartfelt condolences to his family, the Department of Foreign Affairs and
his party.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the MF associates itself in conveying its
condolences to the Vilakazi family. It is sad when one struggles and is a
part of the freedom that has come to South Africa and one does not live to
enjoy it. But, we all have come to go and when the call comes, we must go!

But God said: I am sending you for a purpose and once that purpose is
fulfilled and your service is finished on earth, you shall come back home.
This is where Vilakazi was called and it is said: When one misses a family
from home it is like part of you that is gone.

The MF, the councillors and the MP, Mr Roy Bhoola, all join in conveying
our condolence to the family of Vilakazi and hope and wish that they be
filled with strength and fortitude at this time of sorrow.
Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of Azapo, we wish to convey
our condolences to Comrade Ambassador Bavumile Vilakazi’s family and
relatives. To the ANC and its alliance partners we say that to Azapo
Comrade Bavumile was one of our country’s dedicated soldiers and patriots
who will be missed not only by his comrades in the ANC but by all freedom-
loving people in our country.

Azapo salutes his dedicated service to the nation and the people of Africa.
South Africa has indeed lost a man whose talent and capabilities will be
difficult to replace.

Ms E THABETHE: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers, hon members and
comrades, death has once more robbed us of one of our dedicated fighters
for freedom. Comrade Bavumile Vilakazi was born on 12 January 1955 at
Evaton. The year of his birth coincided with a historic moment in our
freedom struggle – the birth of the Freedom Charter.

As it were by fate, Comrade Bavumile Vilakazi passed on, on the 50th
anniversary of the People’s Charter. The obnoxious system of apartheid
propelled him into the active ranks of the resistance movement. The decade
of the 80s marked the 25th year of the Freedom Charter and the then
president of the ANC declared:


    The Freedom Charter contains the fundamental perspective of the vast
    majority of the people of South Africa, of the kind of liberation that
    all of us are fighting for.

Hence, it is not merely the Freedom Charter of the ANC and its allies,
rather, it is the Charter of the people of South Africa because it came
from the people. It remains still a People’s Charter, the basic political
statement of our goals to which all genuinely democratic and patriotic
forces of South Africa adhere.

It was during this period that the ANC made a clarion call to our people to
render the institution of apartheid unworkable and ungovernable.
Simultaneously, the ANC called upon all patriots to forge a united front
against the apartheid regime.

Responding to the call again, Comrade Bavumile Vilakazi served the
liberation movement with distinction in various capacities. In the 80s, he
was the deputy secretary of the Vaal Civic Association, an affiliate of the
United Democratic Front, which led important struggles against the puppet
black local authorities.

Together with Comrade Mosiuoa Lekota and Popo Molefe, he was unjustly
charged by the apartheid regime in the famous Delmas trial. He served as an
educator of the Urban Training Project in the Vaal regime. He dedicated his
life to the struggles of the working class.

After the unbanning of liberation organisations, Comrade Vilakazi was
elected as our deputy provincial secretary in the then PWV region. He also
served as the education secretary of Cosatu, Wits region. In 1994 he was
elected to Parliament for the Gauteng province until 2000. As an MP, he was
elected to the executive committee of the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association, Africa region.

This opportunity of forging bonds of friendship with other countries
catapulted Comrade Vilakazi into international relations. He became the
first executive mayor of Ekurhuleni metro after the 2000 local government
democratic elections. In 2002, he was appointed High Commissioner to Uganda
and he was passionate about his work and championed the African
Renaissance. The facilitation of the implementation of Nepad was uppermost
in his mind.

Comrade Vilakazi is a soldier falling in battle in the line of duty. The
ANC dips its revolutionary banner in memory of this great son of the soil.
We send our condolences to his family, colleagues and comrades. We pledge
to continue the implementation of the People’s Contract to create work and
fight poverty.

Hamba ngoxolo! Mphephethwa! Gwala! [Go in Peace! Mphephethwa! Gwala!]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, from the debate it is clear that there is
obviously no objection to the motion by the House. I would just like to
take this opportunity on behalf of the Deputy Speaker and myself to also
add to the words of the members of the House.

When I had the opportunity to send a message to the family of the late
Bavumile, one of the things I highlighted was the fact that to this day we
have not been able to replace him in his activities as a great champion of
robust participation and involvement in the activities of the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association.

We are yet to find a person to replace his energy, passion and dedication
and the way he really was disciplined when it came to organising the
members of Parliament and making sure that we made informed inputs and
participated in a manner befitting of the honour that South Africa
deserves.

So, it is my pleasure that we have already passed that kind of message to
the family and, indeed, the condolences of the House will be conveyed to
the Vilakazi family.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.


                     TRANSFORMATION IN TOURISM INDUSTRY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms E THABETHE (ANC): The ANC congratulates the Department of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism on taking transformation in the country a step further
by breaking down the wall separating our communities from the benefits of
tourism in the country. There was the launch of the new tourism BEE charter
at the tourism indaba held in Durban on 7-10 May, and this charter is in
line with the policy and mandate given to the ANC of ensuring that this
country is fully transformed to ensure that the gap between the first and
second economies is bridged.

At the launch of the charter, the Minister of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism, hon Marthinus van Schalkwyk, stated that it will be gazetted as a
transformation charter by 1 August 2005, and will apply to every single
enterprise in the tourism value chain, from the largest corporate to the
smallest entrepreneurs. The ANC salutes the launch of the charter as
another milestone in the implementation of a people’s contract to create
work and fight poverty. Furthermore this endeavour will change the face of
tourism in the country as we celebrate 50 years of the Freedom Charter.


                    GOVERNMENT NEEDS TO PROTECT CITIZENS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R JANKIELSOHN (DA): Madam Speaker, government itself is now experiencing
first-hand what many individuals and businesses experience every day. The
ransacking and robbery of the Gauteng department of agriculture over the
weekend by eight armed men indicates how arrogant criminals have become.
Our supermarkets are also increasingly becoming targets of such armed
heists, with an average of 15 occurring nationally every month.
Supermarkets in the Western Cape alone experienced a 277% increase in armed
heists between 2003 and 2004. These important suppliers of goods to
millions of homes and employment to thousands of individuals deserve better
protection from government. In most instances, the perpetrators are not
apprehended or punished for their crimes.

Clearly, government does not have crime under control. Criminals commit
these crimes because they correctly believe that they will not be caught or
punished. The situation will only improve when government commits the
necessary resources to improve the SAPS’s capacity to fight crime,
especially in the detective services, the forensic crime laboratories and
the criminal records centre. The certainty of detection and punishment is
the only real deterrent to criminals who plunder, rape and murder with
impunity.

It is time for government to dispense with its triumphant attitude to crime
and get back to the basics of crime prevention and control. Our citizens
have a right to a safe environment in which to sell and purchase goods
required to lead normal lives. Government has a duty to protect this right.


                      DEATH PENALTY FOR POLICE KILLERS


                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Speaker, the IFP recognises that many members of
the SAPS are killed while they are on duty. We observe that the criminals
appear to have taken a decision not to spare the lives of the police when
they are caught during criminal acts. The IFP therefore agrees with Judge
Combrink when he sentenced one of the police killers to life imprisonment
plus an additional 15 years for the attempted murder of the other
policeman, during his trial in the Port Shepstone High Court.

When Judge Combrink said that the police killers deserved the death
penalty, he was voicing the feeling of the majority of South Africans. We
feel that there are people who are so criminal that they do not deserve to
be supported by the government, by way of keeping them in prison at a cost
of R109 per day per prisoner for life, when they should receive the death
penalty for the crime they committed. Criminals who are police killers,
child molesters and rapists of women should receive the death penalty at
once. We urge the executive to look at these categories of crime against
the sentence handed down. Thank you.


                 ENVIRONMENTAL AWARD TO PRESIDENT AND PEOPLE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J J COMBRINCK (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC welcomes the honour bestowed
on the President of South Africa and the people of South Africa for
outstanding leadership in the field of the environment by the UN
Environmental Programme. This award bestowed on the people of our country
and its president, which was accepted by the Minister of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism in New York, is an indication to all that South Africa
is certainly on the right path, when it comes to sustainable development.
It also ensures continued international collaboration and friendship for
our country.

The ANC congratulates the people of our country for their support for and
commitment to environmental issues, for having protected, preserved and
promoted our national environmental endeavours and for striving to make a
positive difference in their homes, businesses, factories, schools,
churches and community centres. [Applause.]


                     PROBLEMS EXPERIENCED BY PENSIONERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J BICI (UDM): Madam Speaker, during the recent constituency period
numerous disturbing cases of the suspension of old-age pensions in the
Eastern Cape came to my attention. It seems that in the process of sorting
out social grant corruption, a number of people have had their pensions
suspended without any warning or notification. The UDM condemns this harsh
and unfair administrative action.

People from very poor households often arrive at the pension pay points,
only to discover that their pensions have been suspended and that they must
now reapply. Where they are to get the resources to survive until the new
applications have been processed seems of little concern to the officials
involved. It becomes more painful when the applicant is forced to bring
along a ward councillor who, in most cases, is not available.

Surely, it is not too difficult to inform people that they need to reapply
without summarily suspending their pensions. These pensions are often the
only income of large households and could mean the difference between
eating and starving. The approach to beneficiaries of pensions shows a
complete lack of compassion and humanity. The UDM calls upon the Minister
of Social Development to immediately address this and do so quickly.


                      ACCESS OF THE DISABLED TO BEACHES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V C GORE (ID): Madam Speaker, on 3 December 2004, the International Day
for the Disabled, the hon Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
announced that his department would no longer be unfairly discriminating
against people with disabilities and their families by granting them access
to beaches and that within two weeks people with disabilities would be able
to apply for such beach access. However, five months later, people with
disabilities and their families are still being unfairly discriminated
against and are not being given an opportunity to access beaches within
South Africa in an equal and equitable manner.

It appears that there are certain elements within Marine and Coastal
Management who understand and support the constitutionally enshrined rights
of freedom of movement and unfair discrimination, while there are other
elements within MCM who are determined to ensure that people with
disabilities and their families are denied the right and the opportunity to
enjoy and experience the wonders of our coastal areas, by unfairly
restricting them to particular areas, times and unreasonable obligations.
The ID calls on the hon Minister to immediately step in and take control
within MCM and deliver on the promises he made to the disabled community
over five months ago. I thank you.


                             SPORT AND POLITICS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF PLUS): Mevrou die Speaker, tans vind daar ’n hewige
debate plaas en heers daar groot ongelukkigheid by die SA rugbypubliek oor
die Springbokrugbygroep wat die afgelope naweek aangekondig is. Die
ongelukkigheid gaan oor spelers wat die groep gehaal het, maar nie in goeie
vorm was tydens die Super 12-kompetisie nie. Ernstige vrae word gevra oor
spelers soos Ashwin Willemse, Enrico January, Gurthrö Steenkamp en Quinton
Davids, wat geen vorm gehad het waarop gekies kon word nie, aangesien hulle
beseer was tydens die kompetisie en nie eens kon speel nie. Of geld ’n
ander maatstaf wanneer dit by spankeuses kom?

Die vraag is of dit bloot spankeuses deur die afrigter en sy medekeurders
was of watter rol die ANC en die regering met hulle blatante inmenging in
sport en obsessie met transformasie in hierdie keuses gespeel het? Die ANC
se inmenging in sport oorskry alle grense. Die feit dat die Minister van
Sport en Ontspanning ’n sportliggaam wat veronderstel is om outonoom te
wees, ontbied het en aangespreek het oor sy super 14-besluit, is al erg
genoeg. Die feit dat Mnr Fikile Mbalula van die ANC-jeugliga egter
teenwoordig was by hierdie vergadering is verregaande. Is hy ’n rugbykenner
of ’n rugby-administrateur? Die VF Plus se Jeugliga stel baie belang in
rugby: Waarom is hulle nie genooi nie?

’n Maand gelede het Bafana Bafana in ’n sokkerwedstryd teen die Seychelles
gespeel. Daar was nie ’n enkele wit speler in die SA sokkerspan nie. Hoekom
nie? Die VF Plus Jeugliga wil nou insit as die Wêreldsokkerbekertoernooi
beplan word, want daar is tans baie probleme en binnegevegte in die
sokkerwêreld. Solank die ANC nie lesse uit die verlede gaan leer nie en bly
inmeng en hulle politieke wil wil afdwing op onafhanklike sportliggame, so
lank gaan die sportpubliek in Suid-Afrika die geloofwaardigheid en meriete
van spankeuses bly bevraagteken. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF PLUS): Madam Speaker, at present a fierce debate is
taking place and there is immense unhappiness among the SA rugby public
regarding the Springbok rugby group that was announced this past weekend.
The unhappiness is about players who were selected to the group but who
were not in good form during the Super 12 competition. Serious questions
are being posed about players like Ashwin Willemse, Enrico Januarie,
Gurthrö Steenkamp, and Quinton Davids, who had no form on which they could
have been selected because they were injured during the competition and
could not even play. Or does a different criterion apply when it comes to
team selections?

The question is whether the team selections were merely those of the coach
and his co-selectors, or what role the ANC and the government played in
these selections with their blatant meddling in sport and their obsession
with transformation. The ANC’s meddling in sport goes beyond all bounds.
The fact that the Minister of Sport and Recreation summoned and addressed a
sports body, that is supposed to be autonomous, about its Super 14 decision
is already bad enough. The fact that Mr Fikile Mbalula of the ANC Youth
League was present at this meeting, however, was extraordinary. Is he an
authority on rugby or a rugby administrator? The FF Plus Youth League is
very interested in rugby: Why were they not invited?

A month ago Bafana Bafana played a soccer match against the Seychelles. The
SA soccer team did not have a single white player. Why not? The FF Plus
Youth League wants to be present at the planning of the Soccer World Cup
Tournament because of the many problems and infighting in the soccer world
at the moment. As long as the ANC is not going to learn any lessons from
the past and continues to meddle and to seek to impose its political will
on independent sports bodies, the sporting public in South Africa will
continue to question the credibility and merit of team selections.
[Interjections.]]

                              PEACE IN THE DRC


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G P MNGOMEZULU (ANC): Madam Speaker, the adoption yesterday of the new
constitution by the parliament of the Democratic Republic of Congo, which
was attended by President Mbeki, is a significant step towards achieving
the objectives of the African Union to promote peace, security and
stability on the African continent. President Mbeki and the ANC-led
government are to be lauded on the instrumental role they played in
brokering a peace deal between the warring groups by ending Congo’s war
that lasted from 1989 to 2002, with the adoption of the transitional
constitution in South Africa towards the end of 2002. The new constitution
replaces the transitional constitution and paves the way for a referendum
within the next six months and presidential elections by the end of 2006.
The new constitution with its 226 articles sets up a system of checks and
balances between the president, prime minister and parliament and
recognises the rights of all the ethnic groups living in the Congo at the
time of independence in 1960.

The ANC calls on President Mbeki and the government as one of the
guarantors of peace in the DRC to remain steadfast in their commitment to
assist the people of the DRC in their endeavours to entrench peace,
democracy and stability as part of our overall objective of working for the
renewal of Africa and the creation of a better world. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                             THE RATH FOUNDATION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): Madam Speaker, the DA welcomes the decision of
the Advertising Standards Authority to ban the latest advertisements by
Californian snake-oil salesman, Matthias Rath. We can only hope that the
investigation into the Rath Foundation by the Medicines Control Council is
concluded as swiftly and results in some sanity returning to the debate on
the treatment of HIV-Aids. This man’s misinformation for purposes of
personal enrichment is daily costing the lives of South Africans duped into
believing that his vitamins can cure Aids. They never have and they never
will and any newspaper that publishes his advertisements is complicit in
the evils that he peddles.

The hon Minister of Health owes it to HIV-positive South Africans to
publicly and vocally distance herself from this parasite. In the light of
the hon Minister’s obvious fondness for the Rath Foundation, his
advertisements in international newspapers this week have contributed to
making our health system and the Minister a laughing stock around the world
Of course, a Minister ought to know better. [Applause.]


                    HOME AFFAIRS SERVES THE RURAL PEOPLE


                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr H P CHAUKE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC welcomes and applauds the
initiative taken by the Minister of Home Affairs to address the challenges
of providing people living in rural areas with access to services offered
by the Department of Home Affairs.

The launch of the project on 13 May 2005 in the Eastern Cape will see the
mobilisation of 67 mobile units by the Department of Home Affairs to reach
out to the rural people of the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and Limpopo
provinces. By doing so, the department takes service to the people living
in the three most rural areas of our country in an attempt to improve and
enhance rural service delivery. No longer will it be necessary for our
people in rural areas to travel hundreds of kilometres to go and apply for
ID documents, register births or death.

The initiative actualises the clause of the Freedom Charter that South
Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white. It illustrates the
commitment of the department in ensuring that the status of all citizens of
our country is recorded accurately and reflected in the national population
register.

The ANC recognises the role played by the premier and the provincial
government of the Eastern Cape in making the project a success and
recognises the role that was played by the Buffalo City Municipality and
the traditional leaders in that particular area, who have mobilised
thousands of people who participated in the launch. Some of them came with
problems relating to the Department of Home Affairs and they were assisted
by the officials of the department.

Lento esiyichazayo ukuthi labo mahambanendlwana bazoya le phansi koNkandla
ezindaweni zasemakhaya. Bazofika futhi naseNtabankulu ezindaweni
zasemakhaya lapho abantu bethu bengakwazi ukuthola lolu sizo lukahulumeni.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[What we are saying is that these mobile units will even go as far as
Nkandla in the remote rural areas. They will even reach Ntabankulu in the
rural areas where our people do not have access to these government
services.]

Swi vula leswaku na vanhu va le makaya va ta pfuniwa hi tona ti—mobile unit
leti. [Nkarhi wu herile.] [This implies that rural communities would also
benefit from these mobile units. [Time expired.]]


                        LABOUR LEGISLATION AND POLICY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Madam Speaker, over the years the hon members of this
House have debated at length the importance of six policies, namely the
creation of a two-tier labour market, the reform of labour legislation for
small business, the establishment of export processing zones, the final
scrapping of exchange controls, the aggressive accumulation of foreign
exchange reserves, and radical reform of the black economic empowerment
programme.

It has long seemed obvious to some of us that the introduction of these six
policies will, inter alia, break the back of our unemployment crisis,
increase rates of investment, ensure that the benefits of economic growth
are extended to a broader base of South Africans, minimise the negative
effects of exchange rate fluctuations and drastically speed up economic
growth.

Now that they are on the agenda of the ANC national general council meeting
next month, we all hope that these policies have a real chance of being
implemented to the benefit of all South Africans. I thank you.


                       CRIME INCREASING IN RURAL AREAS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE(IFP): Madam Speaker, rural areas are experiencing an
increase in the rate of crime, including crime in educational institutions.
There are great delays in response to crime, which indicates that there is
a need for more satellite police stations in order to have the Police
Service close to the scenes of crimes and an increase in the need for
reliable police vehicles. Communities which are most affected by the lack
of adequate police responses and police patrols are often in rural areas.
We urge the Minister to increase the efforts of policing in this regard. We
thank you.


                     MEDICAL HELP FOR KELEBOGILE MASEKO


                            (Member’s Statement)

Rre M S MOATSHE (ANC): Puso ya rona, e e eteletsweng pele ke mokgatlho wa
ANC, e dirile tshepiso mo bathong gore e tla natlafatsa maiteko a yona a go
neelana ka tlhokomelo ya boitekanelo, e e kgonegang e bile e fitlhelelwa
bonolo. Ke ka lebaka leo go nnileng le matsapa a a dirilweng ke Tona ya
Boitekanelo le lekgotla la gagwe, ka go tlhaga borraMaseko thuso ya boleng
jo bo kana ka 95% ya madi a bongaka jwa ga Kelebogile Maseko, yo o neng a
na le bolwetse jwa diphilo jo bo sa foleng [chronic kidney failure].

Morago ga dibeke di ka nna tharo, Kelebogile a fitlhilwe ke batswadi ba
gagwe, ba ne ba amogela lekwalo le le tswang kwa go magiseterata wa
lekgotla la Rustenburg gore ba kolota madi a bongaka jwa ga Kelebogile.
Mokgatlho wa ANC o amilwe maikutlo ke matsapa a a tserweng ke kuranta ya
Sowetan, go tlhagisa ntlha e e diragaletseng borraMaseko. Se Sowetan e se
dirileng, ga se fela go dira pegelo, ke go tlhaga lelapa la ga Maseko
thuso. Re rotloetsa borradikuranta botlhe go latela motlhala o o tserweng
ke Sowetan. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation of Tswana member’s
statement follows.)

[Mr M S MOATSHE (ANC): Our government, which is led by the ANC, has made a
promise that it will strengthen its efforts to give health services that
are affordable and easily accessible. That is why the Minister of Health
and the council made an effort to help the Maseko family with 95% of the
medical expenses of Kelebogile Maseko, who had chronic kidney failure.

Three weeks after Kelebogile’s burial her parents received a letter from
the magistrate’s court of Rustenburg informing them that they owed the
medical expenses of Kelebogile. The ANC party is touched by the efforts of
the newspaper, the Sowetan, which wrote about what had happened to the
Masekos. What the Sowetan did was not only to print the report but also to
help the Maseko family. We encourage all newspapers to take their example
from the Sowetan. Thank you. [Applause.]]


                ANC WINS 90% OF VOTES IN RECENT BY-ELECTIONS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Mhlalingaphambili, umbutho wesizwe i-ANC
uyachulumanca kwaye ukwavuyiswa yintembeko ebonakaliswa ngabavoti kunye
nabemi beli lizwe kurhulumente oxhuzula imikhala okhokelwa nguwo.

Kunyulo lovalo-zikhewu obelusandul’ukuqhubeka kutsha nje abavoti nabemi
beli lizwe bawanyevulele amaqela aphikisayo, nathe akha phantsi isitya
sigcwele. Kwiindawo ezintandathu ebezinonyulo lovalo-zikhewu, kula maphondo
alandelayo, eFreyistata, eGauteng, KwaZulu-Natala, eMpumalanga naseNtshona
Koloni umbutho wesizwe i-ANC uphumelele izikhundla ezihlanu. Ngentetho
evakalayo, iphumelele izihlalo ezingama-90 ekhulwini.

Le mpumelelo yeveki ephelileyo ibonakalisa ngokumhlophe ukuba impumelelo
yethu kunyulo lukazwelonke kunyaka ophelileyo yayingengo mgunyathi okanye
ithamsanqa, koko ziziqhamo zemisebenzi yethu phakathi kwabantu.

Thina singamalungu ombutho wesizwe i-ANC siyazibophelela, ngakumbi
kwizibhambathiso esazenza nabantu sokulwa indlala nentswelo-misebenzi.
Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC, which is the majority party
in this country, is happy about the attitude and trust that are being
demonstrated by the electorate and citizens of the country in general
towards democracy and the incumbent ruling party in particular.

In the by-elections that were recently held in the country, the electorate
showed their disinterest in the opposition parties and they lost the
elections. Of the six by-elections that were held, which the ANC contested
with other parties in the Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga
and the Western Cape provinces, five were won by the ANC. In simple terms,
this means that the ANC won 90% of the elections it contested.

The previous week’s success provides a crucial indicator that the national
elections, which we won last year, were not rigged, and neither was it a
matter of luck that we won them, but it was an indication of the good work
that we are doing, which is also appreciated by people.

We commit ourselves, as members of the ANC, to the promises we made to
people to fight poverty and unemployment. Thank you. [Applause.]]

                    GOVERNMENT NEEDS TO PROTECT CITIZENS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much, Speaker.
Obviously, there is a lot of work we need to do as South Africans, so that
we help those critics who stand on the sidelines all the time and complain
and whinge.

The hon Jankielsohn was not speaking on behalf of business when he raised
the matters that he was trying to raise here. Businesspeople are working in
partnership with the police. They are soiling their hands and, together
with the police, are ensuring that even businesspeople are protected from
the criminals out there. They work together with the police in partnership.
They do not complain. They work practically with the police.

Those who pretend to be speaking on their behalf are not speaking on their
behalf, because we sit down with them and discuss strategies. It is those
strategies that have led, among other things, to the dramatic decreases in
bank robberies and cash-in-transit heists. This is because we work together
as a collective against crime and criminality. They speak for themselves.
[Applause.]


                              PEACE IN THE DRC


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, in supporting the statement by the
member on the DRC, I just want to draw the attention of the House to the
fact that the postponement of the elections must not be seen as a rest
period. There is urgent and very intense work that needs to be done.

It is crucial that we move, because the masses of the people in the DRC,
like masses of people in various parts of Southern Africa and,
increasingly, other parts of the continent, are demanding that there be
quick movement towards elections and the resolution of problems by peaceful
means.

So, in the interim period, we will be working intensely to speed up the
process of the integration of the armed forces of the various fighting
forces in that country. This process is running very well. We had hoped
that by next month, in fact, we would have completed the training of seven
brigades. But, we expect now, that by November we should have between 15
and 17 Congolese brigades ready to secure the elections and to secure their
country.

I also must add, Madam Speaker, and for the sake of the members of the
House, that other departments are doing intensive work in the DRC in
support of this process. There is the registration of voters, the issuance
of IDs, the building of the civilian police. So our country is intensely
involved there, and, in fact, our involvement will increase. It has to,
because we require that country to have stabilised in order to enable large
numbers of Congolese, who are in this country, to find their way back to
the elections and then, of course, to participate in the life of their own
nation’s economy and so on. Thank you. [Applause.]


                    HOME AFFAIRS SERVES THE RURAL PEOPLE


                            (Minister’s Response)

UMPHATHISWA WEMICIMBI YEZEKHAYA: Somlomo, ewe, sithe xa siphehlelela eli
phulo lithi, “Lokisa Ditokomane/Lungisa Izincwadi”, senza ukuba oko
kungqamane nokuphehlelela kwethu oomahamba-nendlwana abangama-67. Amalungu
mawaqaphele ukuba bangama-67 oomahamba-nendlwana esibakhuphayo kule nyanga,
hayi ama-69.

Sasitshilo ngethuba lengxoxo ngohlahlo lwabiwo-mali lweSebe loLawulo
kunyaka ophelileyo ukuba kulo nyaka siza kube sisasaza oomahamba-nendlwana
kumaphondo olithoba. Ndifuna ukulungisa nomba wokuba aba mahamba-nendlwana
abazi kuya kumaphondo amathathu, koko baya kumaphondo olithoba.

Kodwa sithe njengokuba siza kukhupha oomahamba-nendlwana abathandathu
kwiphondo ngalinye, sangeza abalishumi ngaphezulu kula maphondo alandelayo,
KwaZulu-Natala, iLimpopo, iMpumalanga neMpuma Koloni, ngenxa yokuba la
maphondo mane ngamaphondo aneelali ezininzi, ngamaphondo esaziyo ukuba
abantu bawo ngabantu abahluphekileyo kakhulu. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Speaker, yes, we said when we were approving
the campaign called “Rectify the Documents” that we were doing this because
it ran concurrently with our approval of 67 mobile units. The members
should take note that there are 67 mobile units that we are going to deploy
this month, and not 69.

We said during the discussion on the Budget Vote of the Control Unit the
previous year that this year we would be deploying mobile units in nine
provinces. I also want to state the fact that the mobile units will not be
going to three provinces, but to nine.

We were going to deploy six mobile units in every province, but we are
adding ten in the following provinces, namely KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga and the Eastern Cape, because these four provinces have many
rural villages and we know that people from these provinces are destitute.]

We will have 10 mobile units in those three provinces, and we will have six
mobile units per province in other provinces. So all nine provinces will
have mobile units. Therefore we have a total of 67 mobile units.

Enye into ebalulekileyo kukuba amalungu azi, kwaye acacisele abantu, ukuba
ukuba sibe noomahamba-nendlwana ayithethi ukuba yonke into iza kwenziwa
kubo. Iziqinisekiso zokuzalwa kwanezo zingqina ukubhubha komntu ziphuma
kwangoko, ukwenzela ukuba ukuba abantu banabantwana babe nokubabhalisa
kwiSebe loPhuhliso lweNtlalo yoLuntu. Ukuba ke baselungelweni lokufumana
uncedo lukarhulumente, baya kuthi ke bafumane ezo mali.

Kanti ke ukuba sithi aba mahamba-nendlwana bakwinqanaba eliphezulu
akuthethi ukuba abantu abenza izicelo zeencwadi-zazisi, amaxwebhu
okundwendwela kwanamanye amaxwebhu besebenzisa aba mahamba-nendlwana baya
kuwafumani kwangoko.

Xa ndiza kuhlala phantsi, njengoko bendikhe ndatsho, siye saphehlelela
iphulo elithi, “Lungisa Izincwadi”. Ibalulekile ke into yokuba njengokuba
siphehlelela aba mahamba-nendlwana nje, amalungu ahambe epapasha eluntwini
ukuba kwezi nyanga zintathuzizayo iSebe leMicimbi yezeKhaya liye
laphehlelela iphulo elikhuthaza ukuba abantu baze kulungisa amaxwebhu abo
ngaphandle kwentlawulo.

Ngeli phulo sizama ukulungisa zonke iziphene ezibonakalayo ngokubhekisele
kumagama, iintsuku zokuzalwa kunye nayo nantoni na esisiphene kumaxwebhu
ethu, kwanabantu ekuthiwa bafile bengafanga. Yonke loo nto siyenza kwezi
nyanga zintathu zizayo ngaphandle kwentlawulo.

Sizama ukulungisa ezi ngxaki abantu abazikhalazelayo ezifana nokungakwazi
ukufumana inkamnkam kwaneemfanelo zabo kurhulumente ngenxa yokuba amaxwebhu
abo engabhalwanga ngendlela efanelekileyo kwiSebe leMicimbi yezeKhaya.
Siyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Another thing that is important for the members to know and explain to the
people is that the fact that we have these mobile units does not mean that
everything is going to be done through them. Birth certificates as well as
death certificates are issued immediately, so that people with children
will be able to register them with the Department of Social Development. If
they qualify to get assistance from the government, they will get those
moneys.

Although we say that these mobile units are of a high standard, this does
not mean that people who use these mobile units to apply for identity
documents, as well as travel and other documents, will get these
immediately.

In conclusion, as I have said before, we have approved the campaign called
“Rectify the Documents”. It is important that as we are approving these
mobile units, members should inform the people that during the next three
months the Department of Home Affairs will be embarking on a campaign that
will encourage people to come and correct their documents without payment.

With this campaign we are trying to correct the mistakes that are visible
with regard to the names, dates of birth and everything else that is not
correct in our documents, including the particulars of people who are said
to be dead whereas they are not. We will be doing all of this during the
next three months without payment.

We are trying to rectify the problems that people are complaining about,
such as not being able to get their grants and other benefits from the
government because their documents have not been completed in a proper way
by the Department of Home Affairs. We thank you. [Applause.]]


 TRANSFORMATION IN TOURISM INDUSTRY; ACCESS OF THE DISABLED TO BEACHES; AND
                 ENVIRONMENTAL AWARD TO PRESIDENT AND PEOPLE


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Speaker, first of all I
would like to thank the hon chairperson of the portfolio committee for her
congratulations and kind words directed at the Ministry and South African
tourism. Yes, it was indeed the largest and most successful indaba in our
history to date in terms of the number of exhibitors and the number of
visitors, etc.

As she pointed out, the BEE Charter was launched there. Here I must also
point out, like the hon member did, the positive reaction from the industry
as a whole. The reason is that we involved all the stakeholders, all the
role-players right from the outset.

There were two changes to the recommendations from the task team. The one
was that we did not accept the recommendation with regard to indirect
ownership when it comes to the issue of ownership, but only direct
ownership. I must also say that the ownership target is 30%. It is 5%
higher than the proposed 25%.

We also exempted small business, that is business with an annual turnover
of up to R5 million, from the ownership requirement, but not the other
requirements – preferential procurement, skills development, etc.
Nevertheless, I thank her for her congratulations.

Then, on the issue of the disabled community and access to the beaches, hon
member Gore, we agreed with the disabled community that we would open
certain of our beaches to make sure that there was now proper access for
the disabled community. We did agree that the disabled community – the
organisations representing that community – would assist us in verifying
that the people applying were really disabled. We are working with the
World Health Organisation’s definition in that regard. It takes a little
bit of time to verify, because there are a number of people who really do
not fall within that definition.

However, if the hon member has information in that after the process there
is an unacceptable delay within the department and in the MCM, he can
definitely provide me with that information and we will certainly deal with
it. It would be unacceptable if there were a delay other than what I have
referred to.

Derdens, met betrekking tot wat die agb lid mnr Combrink gesê het, ons is
baie trots op die toekenning wat die President en die mense van die land
gekry het vir die beskerming van die omgewing. Dit is die eerste jaar wat
die Verenigde Nasies daardie toekenning maak. Ons is een van die eerste
twee lande wat daardie toekenning kry vir die manier waarop ons die
omgewing beskerm en bestuur. Spesifiek is uitgelig die oorgrensparke en die
marinebewaringsgebiede. As ’n land en ’n regering is ons uiteraard trots op
daardie toekenning, en ek bedank ook die agb lid vir sy gelukwense.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Thirdly, with regard to what the hon member Mr Combrink has said, we are
very proud of the award that the President and the people of the country
have received for the conservation of the environment. This is the first
year that the United Nations has made this award. We are one of the first
two countries to have received this award for the way in which we protect
and manage the environment. The transfrontier parks and marine conservation
areas were specifically mentioned. As a country and a government we are
naturally proud of that award, and I would also like to thank the hon
member for his congratulations. [Applause.]]

The House adjourned at 15:02.


