---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 23 August 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-08-23
---

TUESDAY, 23 AUGUST 2005
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you very much and welcome back to this
sitting after the long time that you have been in your constituencies. I
hope you had a wonderful time there, particularly the past week in two
provinces, North West and KwaZulu-Natal. I think the work went very well in
those two provinces.

We shall now proceed to questions as printed on the Question Paper. I have
been informed that the Whippery have agreed that there will be no notices
of motion or motions without notice today. Therefore we will move directly
to questions.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY


      Prevention and Monitoring of Terrorist Activities in South Africa


1.    Mr M A Mzizi asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      (1)   Whether there are any measures in place to prevent terrorist
             organisations from using South Africa as a place to recruit
             new members; if not, why not; if so, what measures;


      (2)   whether, in light of the recent spate of terror attacks around
             the world, there are any systems in place to monitor the
             levels of terrorist activities in South Africa and to prevent
             their increase; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
             details?                   C213E

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, firstly, let me just say
that there are indeed measures in place that are designed to deal with
issues relating to terrorism. The first one, of course, is our Protection
of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities Act,
which was signed into law on 20 May this year. It deals therefore with all
issues that relate to terrorism.

The second measure is the fact that the SA Police Service and our National
Intelligence Agency and other members of the intelligence community in our
country have in place systems that deal with matters relating to terrorism.
Of course, we also co-operate with international agencies that deal
specifically with these matters. I therefore would want to say that we have
the necessary wherewithal to deal with terrorism. Thank you.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, angibonge kuNgqongqoshe ohloniphekileyo ngempendulo
yakhe eqonde ngqo embuzweni. Kodwa-ke okuqhamukayo kuvuka empendulweni
yakhe kuthi: Ngabe empeleni sizimisele ngawo wonke amandla ethu ukubuvimba
ubushokobezi? Ngingakusho nje kuNgqongqoshe ukuthi kuyethusa empeleni
ukucabanga ukuthi ngabe simi ngomumo yini.

Maduzane nje, ngemuva kwalesi sigameko esenzeke laphaya eNgilandi,
kwelamaNgisi, kukhona umuntu bude buduze nje kwesifundazwe engihlala kuso
okutholakale ukuthi indlu yakhe iyasetshenziswa kwamanye amazwe le, kodwa
yena elapha. Yilokho-ke esithanda ukuzwa kukho ukuthi izinto ezinjalo
zivimbeka kanjani ukuze labo bantu abanjalo bangcothulwe nezimpande – labo
abashokobeza bengaphakathi, beshokobeza amanye amazwe. Wena wakomkhulu!
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, let me thank the hon Minister for his direct
answer to the question.  However, what arises from his answer is the
following: Are we really prepared to prevent terrorism by all means? I can
say to the Minister that it is frightening to think about whether we are
ready for action or not.

Recently we saw what happened in England. In the province where I stay it
was also discovered recently that there is a person whose house in another
country is being utilised, while he is here. What we would like to hear is
how are we going to prevent such things from happening so that we can get
rid of these terrorists – those who are terrorising people in our country
as well as in other countries.

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, there are certain things
that have happened globally as a consequence of globalisation, because
globalisation does not just relate to economic activities only.
Globalisation relates to a number of things, including mobility of people.

Therefore some of the people who have been moving around, not just in our
country but in other countries as well, are people who have been
participating in terrorist activities. They are able to move around. For
instance, you will find them in England, America and you will find them in
a number of countries. The key question is: Are we then able to detect
them? Are we then able to keep them under surveillance? Are we then able to
expose them? I do want to say that, in South Africa, we have been able to
do this.

It should be borne in mind, relevant to the initial answer to this
question, that I said we are also working with international intelligence
agencies. Through that interaction, we have been able to find a number of
people. We have been providing useful information to many countries. We
have been participating therefore in programmes that are indeed designed to
put paid to this nefarious intent on the part of terrorists to cause mayhem
in our country and in other countries. Thank you.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mr Chairperson, in October last year, during the debate
of the hon Minister’s department in this Chamber, I asked the Minister
whether he was aware of the open recruitment at places of worship for
recruits for the Al Qaeda and Hamas intifada movements. That was about 10
months ago. The Minister also indicated that they keep strict surveillance
and expose people who indulge in any kind of terrorism.

My question to the hon Minister is: Did they also, in this particular case
– and that was October last year – investigate the issues that were brought
to their attention; and if so, what were the results? Thank you,
Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am not sure whether this is a follow-up
question to your previous question or whether it is a follow-up to this
question that we are now discussing.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: No, Mr Chairperson, it is actually a follow-up to the
reply given by the hon Minister regarding surveillance and exposure. That’s
actually a follow-up question.
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I am sure you will agree with me, hon
members, that I will obviously be circumspect in responding to some of the
questions because they also relate to some investigations that are ongoing.
I won’t therefore be able to give details relevant to this matter, except
to reassure you that, indeed, we do investigations.

Indeed, we have been able to conduct ourselves in the best ways possible.
In terms of that, we have exposed certain people. I can’t go beyond that,
unfortunately, because it would jeopardise ongoing investigations. Thank
you.


                       Access to Fingerprint Database


2.    Mr M A Mzizi asked the Minister for Safety and Security:

       Whether his department has access to the Department of Home Affairs
       database of fingerprints in order to increase his department’s
       database of fingerprints; if not; why not; if so, what are the
       relevant details?                                 C214E

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: Hon Mzizi, you see, there are two
systems here. One system is looking at civilian questions relating to the
general population of our country. Therefore the fingerprints you have,
with respect to that, relate to services, including population registration
relevant to your citizens.
The second system is about fingerprints that relate to criminal activity.
So we can’t merge the two. It wouldn’t work. I am sure you also wouldn’t
want us to place your data and details into our databank regarding criminal
activity. You wouldn’t want us to do that. [Laughter.] So we can’t extend
into the databank of the Department of Home Affairs. We can’t do that. We
can’t mix the two. Thank you.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, ngiyabonga ukuzwa uNgqongqoshe ephendula. Khona
kuyiqiniso ukuthi akekho umuntu ofuna ukuphenywa izinqe. Kodwa umbuzo wami
ovuka lapha empendulweni yakhe uthi: Ngenxa yesimo, umthetho wamaphoyisa
uthi bathumela lawo ma-fingerprints abawathatha lapho kusuke kube khona
umonakalo, bawathumele eziteshini zamaphoyisa lapho becabangela ukuthi lowo
muntu mhlawumbe wake waboshwa khona.

Uzongivumela-ke uNgqongqoshe uma ngithi ezinkantolo, selokhu ngaba khona
lapha, umuntu uvela ngamagama amaningi. Umuntu uba nguMzizi eboshwe kuphi
kuphi, aphinde abe uMaduna kwenye indawo, angalivezi ipasi. Kodwa lokho
kuboshwa kwakhe kusuke kuyinto ekhomba umuntu oyedwa. Kusho ukuthi ukuba
besisebenzisana naboMnyango wezaseKhaya ngabe izinto ezinjalo zisheshe
zitholakale masinyane.

Okokugcina kuvuka kuwo umbuzo wakho Ngqongqoshe. Zolo lokhu, umuntu
ubevakashele umuntu wakubo ejele, laphaya lapho kulungiswa izimilo khona.
Ngenxa yesiboshwa esaseqile ejele, lowo muntu bamfanisa naleso siboshwa
base bemfaka phakathi ejele. Lowo muntu uqede iminyaka emibili esejele.
Emuva kweminyaka emibili bamkhulula.

Ukuba ama-fingerprints ayethathiwe, ngabe babona ngalo usuku lokuqala
ukuthi lo muntu akasona lesi siboshwa eseqile esisifunayo. Nakulabo
abaqalayo, uzomthola kanjani lowo muntu osanda kwemukela ipasi ngoba usuke
engakagangi? Yilapho engithanda ukuthi sizwe kahle khona. Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I thank the Minister for responding. It is true
that nobody would like to be investigated. My follow up question is: You
are saying the police are forwarding fingerprints taken from the scene of a
crime to other police stations where they believe such a person once
committed a crime.

You will agree with me, Minister, that for as long as I can remember some
people tend to use different names when they appear in court. A person
would be Mzizi when arrested in one place, and Maduna in another without
showing an identity document. But this still points to one and the same
person. If we were working together with Home Affairs, things of this
nature would have been noticed quickly.

Lastly, comes the follow-up question, Minister. A few days ago a person
visited a relative in prison. A prisoner escaped from prison and this
person was mistaken for that escapee and as a result he was imprisoned.
This person spent two years in jail. He was only released after two years.

If fingerprints were taken they would have noticed that he was not the
prisoner who escaped. But how are you going to identify a person who has
recently acquired an identity document but who has not yet committed any
offence? This is where I would like some clarity. Thank you.]

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: The hon member is correct. There have
been instances like that and this arises as a result of human weaknesses at
one level, but negligence on the other level. Because we have the necessary
technology for us to be able to pick up anybody whose fingerprints are
available to us, it ought not to be a problem.

There is a case that is similar to the one that the member is talking about
where we were sued. In that case, as well, a person was picked up,
fingerprints were taken and it became obvious that the person who had been
detained was not responsible for the crime that had happened. But that
person was kept in detention for a long time. So you will find those sorts
of things. But it ought not to happen. Where it happens, we need to find a
way to deal with those who are responsible.

Indeed, we are doing this because we took a decision in May that, as from
the beginning of June, senior management in the police will go to all
police stations in order to help people with respect to the systems in
place and in regard to the utilisation of resources, both material and
human. They have gone back after the initial deployment to assist further
in regard to these things. Hopefully through that system this will be
corrected.

Ordinarily, therefore – which is what we do in some instances when we mount
roadblocks - we are able to take fingerprints on the spot using what we
refer to as the MorphoTouch, which is a particular machine. When you check
fingerprints there, it immediately reflects whether there is any
outstanding issue that we have with the particular person. We have, in
these circumstances, detained quite a number of people through that
process.

We have also gone to the correctional detention centres in the country and
done the same thing there. We discovered that some of the people whom we
were looking for were actually serving sentences. But where there are
weaknesses; it’s either because of ordinary human problems or it has to do
with negligence. But such matters are receiving continual attention. Thank
you.


                        Tea Industry in South Africa


3.    Mr D J Botha asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:
      1.    Whether his department has done any comprehensive analysis of
          the tea industry in South Africa, if not, why not, if so, what
          are the relevant details;


      2.    Whether the Competition Commission will investigate the
          competition issues within the tea industry, if not, why not, if
          so, what are the relevant details;


      3.    Whether there are any new stakeholders within the industry, if
          not, what is the position in this regard, if so, what are the
          relevant details?                                   C215E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, hon members, yes, the
department does regularly monitor the tea industry as part of the services
delivered by the agriprocessing business unit of the department.

In response to stakeholders’ requests, a black tea forum was established in
December 2004 to consider developments within the industry. After wide-
ranging consultations the forum agreed that the key challenge was the lack
of competitiveness of the industry as a result of increasing international
competition.

The forum also suggested that the impact of this competition would be
reduced significantly if the local packers would agree to reduce their own
margins in favour of a higher price to growers.
Discussions with the packers are continuing, and once an outcome has been
determined the report of the Black Tea Forum will be submitted to Cabinet
for consideration.

Regarding part two of the question, yes, the Competition Commission has
confirmed that a complaint was received against Rooibos Ltd. Complaints
relate to allegations of a dominant position and exclusive, anticompetitive
practice abuses. The matter was lodged in early August, and we’ll follow
the normal screening process and an announcement will be made immediately
thereafter.

Regarding the third part of the question, as the DTI we are not aware of
any new stakeholders in the black tea industry. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mnu D G MKONO: Ndiyabulela, Mhlalingaphambili. Bendiza kuthi apha
kuMphathiswa, phaya emaMpondweni ndandifudula ndisazi ukuba kukho amasimi
eti phaya, aziwa njengeMagwa. Kwavela iingxaki, de waphinda wasuka
uMongameli waya kuwavuselela, batsho abantu baphila phaya.

Bendirhalela ukuva ukuba ngaba umsebenzi usaqhuba na owawenziwe
nguMongameli wokuba amaxhegokazi akwazi ukuphunga phaya? Yayimnandi kakhulu
iti yaphaya eMagwa, kangangokuba aye sakuthi amaxhegokazi kusasa,
ukwahlukana komfana nentombi, abe sele ephunga iti wona. Ndicela ukuqonda,
Mhlekazi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)
[Mr D G MKONO: Thank you, Chairperson. I was going to say to the hon
Minister that I know that there used to be tea farms in eMaMpondweni in an
area called Magwa, and they used to be called the Magwa farms. Problems
cropped up, but the hon President however initiated a programme to revive
them and thereafter people started making a living from them.

I would like to know whether what the hon President initiated in the area,
where old women could also go and have tea, is still functioning? The Magwa
farms used to produce very nice tea so that early in the morning when a
young lady and a gentleman parted ways after spending the night together,
the old women would be there already having their tea. Could you tell us,
please, sir?]

UMPHATHISWA WEZORHWEBO NOSHISHINO: Mhlalingaphambili, ewe kunjalo.
Siyawenza amalinge nakwamanye amasimi eti akwamanye amaphondo. Umzekelo,
amasimi eti kwaZulu-Natala, aseMpumalanga naseLimpopo
asengxakini. Siyazenza iinzame, endingakwaziyo ukuthetha gca ngazo
nezimalunga nokuba senza ntoni nantoni.

Ndizamile ukubonisa ukuba enye yeengxaki ezikhoyo kulo mcimbi kukuba aba
bantu balima iti abafumani mvuzo waneleyo kwaba bantu bayipakishayo. Ngoko
ke siyaxoxa. Kambe bakhona nabanye abatyali-zimali esithetha nabo
abazimisele ukutyala iimali zabo ukuvuselela la masimi eti, njengoko
kwakwenzekile eMagwa ukuze ibe imi ngeenyawo namhlanje. Ngamalinge
esiwenzayo lawo. Ndiyathemba ukuba ndiza kukwazi ukubuya, kungekudala emva
kokuba siziqukumbele ezi ngxoxo sizibambileyo. Ndiyabulela. (Translation of
Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, that is correct. Initiatives are being made to revive tea
farms in other provinces too. In KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, and Limpopo
provinces also experience problems with their tea farms. Plans are
underway, however, I cannot deliberate on them.

I tried to highlight the fact that one of the problems on this issue is
that the producers are paid insufficient wages by merchants. However, the
matter is under discussion. We are engaged in discussions with some
prospective investors who have indicated an interest to revive these tea
farms, as was the case in Magwa which today is in full operation. Such are
some of the initiatives we have made. I hope that I would be able to bring
back positive news soon after we have concluded our discussions. I thank
you.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Minister. Are there any further
follow-up questions? No. Who keeps on saying no? How do you know that other
people don’t have questions? [Laughter.] If you don’t have a question, just
keep quiet. I’d like to find out if other people have follow-up questions.

4.    Ms N D Ntwanambi – Provincial and Local Government. [Question
       standing over.]

                       Regional Electricity Regulator


5.    Ms N D Ntwanambi asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:

      (1)   Whether, in the light of the fact that the first regional
            electricity distributor (RED) is in place, any progress has
            been made in respect of the REDs; if not, why not, if so, what
            are the relevant details?


      (2)   Whether the new director is meeting the challenges of co-
            ordinating three provinces; if not what is the position in this
            regard;                                                 C21


The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (for the Minister of Minerals and
Energy): Chair, overall positive progress has been made in respect of
regional electricity distributors. The deadline was to have the first RED
established by June 2005, according to government’s programme of action.
This deadline was met by the first RED 1 Pty Ltd coming into operation on 1
July 2005. It is our intention to launch the rest of the REDs by January
2007.

The RED will initially operate within the area of jurisdiction of the City
of Cape Town. It is, however, important to note that the envisaged future
state of the RED is to operate within the defined RED boundaries. It is
expected that the incorporation of the approximately 40 municipalities,
including the portion of the Eskom distribution business, will take
approximately 18 to 24 months.

All regulatory and legislative processes, for instance licensing,
incorporation agreements, registration and municipal legislative processes,
such as the Municipal Systems Act, section 78 and the Municipal Finance
Management Act, section 84, were fulfilled in achieving this first regional
electricity distributor.

The members of the initial independent board, consisting of six members,
including the chief executive officer and the chief operations officer,
were also appointed. From a readiness perspective it is envisaged that the
next RED will be rolled out during February 2006. Preparations are being
made to officially announce the second RED to be launched. At this stage
the readiness of RED 5, which is anchored by Ethekwini, is the highest,
followed by RED 2, which is anchored by Ekurhuleni.

It is expected that a rapid roll-out process will be followed during 2006.
It is important to note that this is a dynamic process and that the roll-
out of the REDs will be influenced by their state of readiness.

To achieve the envisaged roll-out, electricity distribution industry
restructuring legislation will be introduced. This will provide the
legislative framework for the formation of REDs and will remove the risk of
the currently open-ended process. Such legislation will finalise questions
related to governance, valuation, shareholding, compensation, asset and
staff transfers in a way that addresses current or potential risks related
to restructuring to the end-state boundaries.

Substantial preparations are being made at different municipalities for
incorporation in the REDs. Different municipalities are at different stages
of preparation, including signing the co-operative agreements, obtaining
relevant council resolutions, ring-fencing and completing relevant
municipal legislative processes.

Regarding the second part of the question, the chief executive officer is
indeed managing to co-ordinate all provinces affected as part of RED 1. The
CEO has an engagement plan involving all 39 municipalities in the RED 1
area to ensure the incorporation of the municipalities into the RED.

This plan will be executed in conjunction with Salga Western Cape and
Northern Cape, to ensure consistency and standardisation. Initial
engagement meetings have taken place with different stakeholders in the RED
1 area.

With regard to the third part of the question, while over 800 jobs will be
lost as a result of the closure of the underground operations at the
Kimberley mine, the impact on the economy of the Northern Cape will be
minimised as the company will provide training and reskilling support to
workers in order to move them to other parts of their operations, move them
to other areas of the local economy and, where possible, assist workers to
establish their own small businesses.

The details of these proposals are currently under negotiation between the
company and the Department of Minerals and Energy, in line with the social
and labour plan requirements. A study has been commissioned by the company
to determine the projected growth of the domestic economy so that workers
are equipped with relevant skills.

The company has informed the department that they have committed
substantial resources to developing the tourism sector, which will assist
in diversifying the domestic economy away from reliance on mining activity.
Tourism companies, in partnership with the provincial government, have
identified several projects to grow the tourism industry.

The section of the mine being closed, that of the underground operations of
the company, represents 10% of the company’s current operations in
Kimberley. Thank you, hon Chair.

Mr D A WORTH: Chair, I’d like to ask the hon Minister a question. The first
RED, as far as I know, encompasses the Cape Town metropole. There are other
municipalities that are supposed to be joining that RED. Has the Minister
got the assurance from the other municipalities that they will be
participating in that, and what do they say about the interruption in their
cash flow, vis-à-vis that they will only be getting money on the shares at
the end of that financial year? What do the municipalities feel with regard
to that matter? Thank you, Chair.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chair, even though this is not my line
function, it is my understanding that this is going to be a phased process
that will begin operating within the jurisdiction of the City of Cape Town
and which will, over time, expand to include all the other municipalities.
Therefore, in working towards that objective there are lots of interactions
that are taking place in order to realise that outcome.

The matter around cash flows and revenues is one of the central issues that
are of concern in terms of ensuring that, whatever restructuring is done in
the distribution of electricity, it does not impact negatively on the
revenue flows of the various municipalities. These are matters that in my
understanding are part of the ongoing discussions and work. Thank you very
much, Chair.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy Minister, my high blood pressure rose
by two, because I didn’t see you. I was surprised, until the Chief Whip
wrote me a note that you are just next to me, on my right-hand side. Next
time, I think, if you sit here I will be able to see you and my high blood
pressure will not rise.

Questions transferred from written to oral reply upon request of the
relevant member (Rule 239)


        Nursing Conditions, Equipment and Training in State Hospitals


4.    Ms H Lamoela asked the Minister of Health: [Written Question No 74]

       Whether any strategy has been introduced to (a) prevent poor working
       conditions, particularly in state hospitals, from forcing competent
       nursing staff to leave the country, (b) expedite the acquisition of
       essential and effective equipment, particularly in state hospitals,
       in order to improve service delivery standards and (c) review the
       duties of nursing staff and ensure that their training corresponds
       with changing medical trends; if not, why not; if so, what are the
       relevant details?
                       C161E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I apologise for that. As the
Deputy Minister of Health, I shouldn’t be causing you to have your high
blood pressure rise! Concerning this question, the Minister of Health
humbly requests that it be held over for the next round. She is out of the
country at the moment. Thank you.

[Question standing over.]


     Vacancies of nurses and doctors in Free State hospitals and clinics


6.    Mr D A Worth asked the Minister of Health: [Written Question No 85]


      (1)   Whether there are any vacant posts in the Free State in  respect
            of (a) nursing personnel and  (b)  doctors;  if  so,  how  many
            vacancies are there in each specified hospital or clinic;


      (2)   whether any steps are being taken to fill these posts;  if  not,
            why not; if so, what steps?                       C195E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, hon members, the reply to this
question is that the following information was received from the Free State
province:

|POST              |FILLED        |VACANT         |TOTAL         |
|Medical           |794           |662            |1 456         |
|Practitioners     |              |               |              |
|Medical           |266           |193            |459           |
|Specialists       |              |               |              |
|Professional      |5 234         |3 326          |8 560         |
|Nurses            |              |               |              |
|Nursing Assistants|5 304         |2 438          |7 742         |
|Staff Nurses      |619           |432            |1 051         |
|TOTAL             |12 217        |7 051          |19 268        |

The Free State provincial department of health is faced with a shortage of
health professionals, in particular medical and nursing personnel, as well
as those health professionals with scarce skills. Vacant posts are
advertised on a regular basis, but it is difficult to attract professionals
with the required skills to the Public Service and particularly to the
rural areas. Rural and scarce skills allowances are being paid to certain
health professionals and the head of department has granted approval to
head-hunt as a means to filling critical posts.

The Free State has also developed a draft human resources plan, which will
be made available for comment. The draft document will have to ensure
alignment and compliance with the national human resources plan. It is
envisaged that the document will be ready for implementation before the end
of 2005.

The provincial department’s organisational structure is also under review
since more posts were created than are needed. The province is in the
process of abolishing all posts that have been vacant for the past three
years. The structure will reflect the true picture once the process has
been completed. I thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Mr Chair, I just ask if I could possibly get that in writing
as well. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: That will be done.

Ms D ROBINSON: Chair, it is of great concern that there are so many
vacancies and while I accept that there are going to be investigations and
structural changes to determine exactly where the needs are, I think we
must accept that health and that people are adequately cared for, is
absolutely vital.

My question is: Apart from extra money – you know, a scarce-skill bonus or
whatever can be offered - what is being done to make the working conditions
better? We do know that doctors and nurses very often leave because they
don’t have adequate, proper working conditions.

There is a shortage of supplies; there is shortage of equipment. Very often
young doctors aren’t adequately supervised and safety is also something
that is very important in some of the rural areas and metropolitan ones
too. Could we perhaps have some information about those conditions to
improve and encourage people to work?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: That sounds like a new question to me, but I
will attempt to answer it and say that, as we have heard from this reply,
the Department of Health in the Free State is concerned about the situation
and they are doing something about it.

What I have said in my reply is that we have already supplied rural and
scarce-skill allowances to provide an incentive for people to go to work in
this area; but the department is also preparing a human resources plan.

Of course, as you know, if you prepare a human resources plan you also
include working conditions; you include a whole number of other issues.
When this comes out, I am sure the hon member will have an opportunity to
interrogate the plan and make a contribution to make it, maybe, more
positive. Indeed, this is an issue that the Department of Health as a whole
is concerned with and is looking at very seriously.


                  Decline and Job Losses in Mining Industry


7.    Mr D A Worth to ask the Minister of Minerals and Energy:

      Whether any measures are contemplated to prevent the

       (a)  further decline of the mining industry; and


       (b)  loss of jobs in the Goldfields mining area in the Free State, if
           not, why not; if so, what measures?          C197E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (on behalf of the Minister of Minerals
and Energy): Chairperson, presently there is a task team of stakeholders.
These stakeholders are the Department of Minerals and Energy, mining
companies and the labour movement. That task team has been formed to find
ways and means of easing the effect of the declining mining industry,
mainly in the gold mining sector where there is a high percentage of
retrenchments. It is important to note that mineral resources are
nonrenewable.

According to the Labour Relations Act of 1995, organisations have the
prerogative to dismiss workers on the basis of operational requirements.
Large-scale retrenchments fall under this category of dismissals. In this
regard the department cannot take part in preventing any company from
taking such decision. However, measures to ameliorate the impact of such
retrenchments on the workers have been put in place.

The social and labour plan legislated in the Mineral and Petroleum
Resources Development Act of 2002 calls for companies to proactively train
workers in skills utilisable outside and beyond mining. In the Free State
goldfields, the department has ensured that Harmony has a social plan that
addresses the above issues. The department has engaged Harmony to extend
the social and labour plan and to include those workers retrenched in the
past 18 months. Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Chair, yes, I would like to ask the Minister, in view of the
fact of the declining gold reserves in the goldfields in the Free State,
there is reputedly large-scale deposits of coal; probably very low grade
coal. Bearing in mind the close proximity or relatively close proximity of
Sasol, does the Minister know anything about this coal deposits and is
there any chance that the department will look into and investigate whether
there are any other further minerals that could be exploited in the area?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Well, Chair, I don’t know of coal
deposits that may be in the vicinity, but clearly the issue that really
confronts us is that we need to think of a long-term basis when we are
dealing with mineral deposits.

This is happening, I think, across the world. If we were to look at the
Middle East, I think there is a rising consciousness that those resources
that they currently have in abundance may not be there forever and
therefore you have to begin to look at how to diversify and broaden the
base of the economy.

My own sense would be that the way to go is to both look for opportunities
where we can diversify and broaden the base of the economy and, at the same
time, try to find other deposits that we could be able to exploit much more
quickly in order to ameliorate the impact of the loss of jobs because of
closure of certain operations. Thank you.

The Council adjourned at 14:36.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                            FRIDAY, 5 AUGUST 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson:

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      (1)   Nursing Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of Health on 26
           July 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health and the
           Select Committee on Social Services.

      (2)   Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain
         Laws Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister for Justice and
         Constitutitonal Development on 29 July 2005. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and
         the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.

2.    Fast-tracking of Bills

      (1)   The Joint Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee on 4
           August 2005 took a decision, in accordance with Joint Rule
           216(2), that the Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill [B 22 -
           2005] (National Assembly - sec 75) be fast-tracked by, where
           necessary, dispensing with any relevant House Rule or Joint Rule
           and shortening any period within which any step in the
           legislative process relating to the Bill has to be completed,
           including the submission of the translated version of the Bill
           as introduced before the debate in the National Assembly takes
           place. This process must be completed in order for the Bill to
           be enacted and for the Act to be published in the Government
           Gazette by 31 August 2005.

            In terms of Joint Rule 216(4) this decision must be tabled in
            both Houses for ratification.


                            MONDAY, 8 AUGUST 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson:
1.    Introduction of Bills

      (1)   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


            i) Forestry Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2005] (National Assembly
               – sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction
               published in Government Gazette No 27877 of 5 August 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Water
         Affairs and Forestry of the National Assembly, as well as referral
         to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
         of Joint Rule 160, on 10 August 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


                           FRIDAY, 12 AUGUST 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills
        1) South African Sports Commission Act Repeal Bill [B 13B – 2005] –
           Act No 8 of 2005 (assented to and signed by President on 20 July
           2005);
        2) Minerals and Energy Laws Amendment Bill [B 1 – 2005] – Act No 11
           of 2005 (assented to and signed by President on 10 August 2005).
        3) National Ports Bill [B 5F - 2003] – Act No 12 of 2005 (assented
           to and signed by President on 31 July 2005); and
        4) Intergovernmental Relations Framework Bill [B 3B - 2005] – Act
           No 13 of 2005 (assented to and signed by President on 10 August
           2005).

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


           ii) Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain
               Laws Bill [B 25 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76) [Bill
               and prior notice of its introduction published in Government
               Gazette No 27845 of 28 July 2005]
               Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
               Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
               Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
               (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 12
               August 2005.
               In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
               classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
               Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
               days.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

      a) International Plant Protection Convention, tabled in terms of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

      b) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Plant Protection
         Convention.

2.    The Minister of Labour

      a) Recommendation of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) –
         Recommendation No 195 concerning Human Resource Development:
         Education, Training and Lifelong Learning, adopted by the
         Conference at its 92nd Session – Geneva, 17 June 2004.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)    Proclamation No R.26 published in Government Gazette No 27719
         dated 27 June 2005: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996).


    (b)    Proclamation No R.27 published in Government Gazette No 27719
         dated 27 June 2005: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996),

    (c)    Government Notice No R.614 published in Government Gazette No
         27719 dated 27 June 2005: Amendment of Regulations in terms of the
         Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).

4.    The Minister of Education
    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Umalusi – Council for Quality
         Assurance in General and Further Education and Training for 2004-
         2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2004-2005.
5.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Johannesburg World Summit
         Company for 2002-2003, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003.


    (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Johannesburg World Summit
         Company for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1. Report of the Joint Budget Committee, dated 22 June 2005:

(INCORPORATING REPORT ENVISAGED IN ITEM 9 OF THE COMMITTEE’S TERMS OF
REFERENCE)

Strategic Plan for Joint Budget Committee

Table of Contents

Strategic Plan for the Joint Budget Committee      35

1. Vision, mission and core goals for the strategic plan period     36

2. Background    37
  2.1 Terms of Reference     37
  2.2 Underlying principles  39
  2.3 Strategic Plan process 41

3. Activities    41
  3.1 Conceptualising the JBC’s role in budget preparation    42
  3.2 Conceptualising the JBCs role in the Legislative phase  45
  Diagramme 1: JBC Role and Activities in Budget Preparation and Approval
  Phases    49
  3.3 Principles for JBC activities during Budget Execution   50

4.    Committee structure and work method    53

5 Operationalising the Strategic Plan   56
  5.1 Planning and budgeting 56
  5.2 Monitoring and Evaluation   57

Annex 1. Draft Operational Plan   57


                Strategic Plan for the Joint Budget Committee


The Joint Budget Committee (JBC) was constituted by a resolution of
Parliament in 2003 to give effect to several aspects of Parliament’s
oversight responsibilities regarding the public finances. The current JBC
was convened in 2004 and its co-chairpersons elected later on that year.
This document is the result of a 4 month long process in the first half of
2005 to map out a way forward for the duration of the current parliament in
the form of a rolling strategic plan. The document, which will be updated
in 2006, sets out the JBC’s strategy for developing its role in the budget
process in practice, and for engagement in the current MTEF and budget
cycle.

In compiling the document the JBC set itself the task of being brief,
activity-focused and transparent. While a conceptual framework and the
necessary background information is provided therefore, the JBC endeavoured
to be concise and clear in setting out a work plan for 2005 and 2006. The
document is set out in four main sections. Section one provides the
conceptual framework for the JBC’s strategic decisions by formulating its
vision, mission and core goals for the strategic plan period (2005 to
2007), the second frames the strategy by providing information on
background factors such as the JBCs Terms of Reference (TORs) and parallel
processes elsewhere in Parliament affecting the JBCs work, the third sets
out the activities the Committee will undertake to achieve its objectives
and the fourth discusses how it will organize itself to undertake the
activities.



    1 Vision, mission and core goals for the strategic plan period



The JBC’s vision is to have an effective role in budget management,
facilitating improved spending outcomes in terms of (i) aligning spending
with government priorities, and (ii) ensuring value for money.

JBC’s mission is to practise effective oversight over state spending on the
consolidated budget (ie national and provincial spending).

The JBCs goals to reach this mission are
    • To review and provide meaningful recommendations aimed at improving
      spending effectiveness and efficiency to parliament on budget
      allocations in Appropriation Bill and the MTBPS
    • To review actual expenditure reports on a monthly and quarterly basis
      for spending effectiveness and efficiency
    • To engage the executive effectively in a dialogue on spending
      effectiveness through the above two tasks
    • To engage with, coordinate and guide portfolio and select committees
      work on the budget in order to streamline parliament’s role in budget
      management
    • To put in place a structure and work method that will effectively make
      use of committee capacity
    • To build its own resources in order to fulfill its mandate.


2 Background




2.1 Terms of Reference

The TORs of the JBC for 2005 – as passed by the NA in concurrence with the
NCOP – specify the structure of the Committee (in terms of political party
shares and number of members from the two Houses respectively) and mandates
it to undertake specific tasks. These tasks are
   1. Consider the proposed allocations in the Medium-term Expenditure
      Framework and Appropriation Bill (and whether these are in keeping
      with Government policy directions)
   2. Consider the Medium-term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS), with the
      exception of those sections dealing with the macro-economic situation
      and revenue
   3.  Conduct hearings on the MTEF and the Budget Policy Review document,
      with the exception of those sections dealing with the macro-economic
      situation and revenue
   4. Monitor published actual revenue and expenditure per department (to
      ascertain whether they are in line with budget projections)
   5. Report on the MTBPS (regarding the matters referred to under 2 above)
      and quarterly on actual revenue and expenditure per department (as in
      4 above)
   6. Make proposals regarding
        a. The processes Parliament should follow with regards to its role
           in the development of budgets in accordance with the
           Constitution
        b. The nature of its functions relative to those of other
           committees in respect of the budget process and conducting
           oversight
   7. Report on its functions from time to time as necessary, but submit a
      final report not later than the end of the next budget cycle in
      Parliament.
The TORs, as they currently stand, therefore mandate the JBC
    • to engage with the distribution of expenditure (in relation to
      spending effectiveness and efficiency) rather than with the aggregate
      level of expenditure or how the expenditure is to be financed (revenue
      and borrowing);
    • to interact with three important sets of executive budgetary
      documentation, the MTBPS, the budget documentation and the monthly and
      quarterly National Treasury (NT) reports on actual expenditure;
    • to make recommendations as to the nature of its functions relative to
      those of other committees

This strategic plan addresses when and how the JBC will engage with the
budget process in order to fulfill these mandates.

The TORs also mandate the JBC to make recommendations regarding its role in
the development of budgets in accordance with the Constitution. This
strategic plan does not address this mandate directly, on account of a
separate process in Parliament that is developing proposals in this regard
under the auspices of the Task Force on Accountability and Oversight. The
JBC will however stay abreast of developments in this process, and will
share how it intends shaping its role in practice with the Task Force.

2.2 Underlying principles

The JBC has formulated and accepted a set of principles that guide this
Strategic Plan. These are
   i. Parliament’s intervention should strengthen accountability and the
      incentives for public managers and office holders to be fiscally
      responsible, to allocate resources to priorities and to minimise
      wastage.
  ii. The role Parliament defines for itself in the budget should balance
      influencing policy, with the right to make amendments with the
      obligation to hold the executive to account.
 iii. Parliament should engage with the outer years of the MTEF.
  iv. Parliament deliberations on the budget should focus on the financing
      of existing legislation and policy objectives (the link between policy
      and spending), and on the quality of spending and service delivery (on
      what is achieved with spending).
   v. Parliament should intervene if there is a mismatch between policy and
      budget, and between budget and spending (when budgets do not result in
      service delivery), when spending and financial management is poor and
      when there is wastage.
  vi. The JBCs role should be formulated in line with the Constitutional
      framework regarding the respective roles of the executive and the
      legislature on the one hand, and to the rights and obligations of
      Parliament on the other. This means that Parliament will not duplicate
      or take over the executive’s role of drafting and implementing the
      budget. Parliament’s role in the budget is primarily one of oversight
      over executive action, not of action itself.
 vii. Parliament’s role in the budget should not disrupt the integrity of
      the budget, or the integrity of the expenditure management system. The
      executive has superior information to draft the budget – amendments by
      parliament should not result in poorer budget decisions.
viii. If spending departments’ new policy proposals have already been
      rejected by the executive, the parliamentary budget process should not
      allow an easy backdoor to fund new proposals.
  ix. Parliament should speak with a unified voice. Notwithstanding the
      right of each of the Houses to differ, the process in Parliament
      should allow the Houses to reach some consensus on reactions to the
      budget.
   x. The JBC’s role should not overtake that of portfolio and select
      committees. These committees are the engine of engagement with vote
      level budgets. The JBC’s role is that of coordination. It also has a
      substantive role in considering the distribution of available funds
      between votes.
  xi. The JBC’s process should make full use of other parallel processes,
      within Parliament and in relevant institutions outside of Parliament,
      such as the Financial and Fiscal Commission (FFC) and the Office of
      the Auditor-General (OAG). The JBC should endeavour to liaise with
      these institutions, and ensure that it receives the full benefit of on-
      going work in these institutions.
 xii. The JBC process should respect the NCOP’s unique role in terms of
      presenting provincial interests. The NCOP’s role does not need to
      mirror or duplicate that of the NA, but should be complementary.


2.3 Strategic Plan process

This document is the result of a two-day workshop held on 20 and 21 May
2005 in Gordonsbay. At the workshop the JBC received briefings from the
National Treasury, the FFC and the Office of the Auditor General. The
workshop was the culmination of a process started in February 2005 with a
first working session regarding the TORs of the JBC.


3. Activities


The JBC is facing the challenge of developing its role and work methods
from the current state of affairs to its vision: playing a substantive and
meaningful role in a fully developed parliamentary budget process. The
activities set out below are therefore undertaken with the strategic intent
of expanding its role while paying due attention to capacity constraints.
For convenience its activities are arranged against the budget cycle –
budget preparation, budget approval, budget execution, and audit. In
deliberating its activities for each phase, the JBC developed a set of
guiding decisions that demarcated its scope of work. For each phase these
decisions are recorded first, followed by the resulting activities, which
are set out in numbered format in a table.


3.1 Conceptualising the JBC’s role in budget preparation


Guiding JBC decisions for activities
Budget preparation refers to the prioritization and allocation phases of
the budget process (as set out in the diagram below) that lasts from April
in previous year until the budget is tabled in Parliament.
    • The JBC will not actively participate (ie have a decision-making role)
      in the budget preparation process: that is the prerogative of the
      executive.
    • In order to prepare thoroughly for its role in reviewing the MTBPS,
      the MTEF and the Appropriation Bill, the JBC will request briefings
      from the Executive at key points in the process.
    • Also, the JBC will attempt to influence in the preparation process.
      For this the JBC will submit a pre-budget report to Parliament, which
      will set out issues of concern on account of Parliament’s oversight
      over spending and spending departments, e.g. under spending in votes,
      poor implementation of policies, poor service delivery, unauthorized
      spending etc. JBCs work on quarterly reports and its engagement with
      Portfolio and Select Committees’ oversight work, will determine
      content of pre-budget report
    • It is important for JBC to slot into earliest feasible slot on 2006/7
      process which is already underway.

Activities in the Budget Preparation Phase
|Objective                                                           |
|Input into and early view on policy priorities, new spending        |
|policies and outstanding issues                                     |
|Activities                                                          |
|2006/7 – 2008/9 drafting cycle                                      |
|1. The JBC will be briefed by National Treasury at earliest possible|
|point on                                                            |
|Budget process and Treasury Guidelines                              |
|Cabinet’s guidelines regarding budget priorities                    |
|Outstanding issues on spending departments’ budgets                 |
|The JBC will receive further briefings on outcomes of executive     |
|processes as cycle unfolds                                          |
|2. The JBC will receive briefings by Finance and Fiscal Commission  |
|on its recommendations on the Division of Revenue Bill; and the     |
|outcome of FFC research in other areas                              |
|3. The JBC will continue to work with the NT to maintain and develop|
|observation status in key executive events                          |
|4. The Portfolio and Select Committees will be briefed by spending  |
|departments on new spending policies submitted to Treasury in terms |
|of the budget process guidelines.                                   |
|5. The Portfolio and Select Committees will channel comments /      |
|concerns to JBC for inclusion in pre-budget report to executive     |
|6. The JBC will provide a pre-budget report to executive in time for|
|meeting of Ministers’ Committee on Budget in October. The JBC will  |
|design a process for this report, including whether it will be      |
|tabled in the main House, and whether a response will be requested  |
|from the executive and when.                                        |
|7. The JBC will meet on the MTBPS, consider whether its concerns    |
|have been addressed and report to Parliament. The JBC will decide   |
|closer to the time whether to conduct hearings.                     |
|2007/8 – 2009/10 preparation cycle                                  |
|8. The JBC will review the effectiveness of its activities in the   |
|2006/7—2008/9 cycle early in 2006 and develop a programme for 2007/8|
|to 2009/10 along similar lines.                                     |
|9. In addition the JBC will identify key issues for in depth        |
|research (Public Expenditure Review style) in the 2007/8 to 2009/10 |
|cycle in October 2005 in order to inform its engagement in this     |
|cycle                                                               |
|10. The JBC will highlight areas of concern for drafting 2007/8 to  |
|2009/10 in its report after the first reading of 2006/7 Budget      |


3.2 Conceptualising the JBC’s role in the Legislative phase


Guiding decisions
1. The legislative phase starts when the Budget is tabled and ends when the
   relevant Acts are passed.
    • Parliament has the strongest constitutional mandate in the legislative
      phase of the budget process.
    • The JBC will review allocations in line with government’s spending
      priorities and existing legislation.
    • The JBC will however not attempt in depth engagement with all
      spending. Given current capacity constraints, the JBC will rather
      focus on specific, substantive spending areas or departments. These
      areas will be identified in advance of the budget being tabled, on
      account of its oversight over actual expenditure and its interaction
      with Portfolio and Select Committees. The JBC will also use its
      interaction with the executive in the budget preparation phase to
      identify priority focus areas. These might be in line with the
      executive’s spending priorities.
    • In the legislative phase the JBC will utilize the budget documentation
      to
         o Relate past performance to spending plans
         o Ascertain whether concerns in drafting phase have received
           attention
    • The JBC will coordinate its investigation into specific spending areas
      with relevant portfolio and select committees
    • In engaging with the budget as tabled in the immediate future, the JBC
      would pay particular attention to
         o Funding of new spending policies
         o Changes over baseline
         o Capital projects funding and implementation
         o Intergovernmental issues (FFC report)
         o Financial management issues

Activities in the Legislative Phase
|Objective                                                             |
|Meaningful engagement with budget in approval phase, facilitation of  |
|public debate and budget transparency on budgeting issues             |
|Activities                                                            |
|For Budget 2006/7                                                     |
|1. The JBC will develop a process and discuss it with stakeholders in |
|Parliament at the end of 2005 to include Portfolio Committee and      |
|Select Committee input into its activities for Budget 2006/7.         |
|2. The JBC will hold hearings on selected issues after budget day.    |
|3. The JBC will compile a report for Parliament                       |
|The Report will present findings and make recommendations on the      |
|effectiveness and efficiency of spending in specific areas as         |
|investigated over the course of the budget cycle.                     |
|If relevant, the report will also make recommendations on new issues  |
|arising from the Committee’s deliberations                            |
|If relevant, the report will make recommendations on budget           |
|allocations more broadly (in other words on the distribution of       |
|expenditure between spending areas) relating to the executive’s       |
|overall policy priorities and relating to existing legislation.       |
|The report will include recommendations not only on budget policy     |
|issues, but also on issues of financial management where relevant     |
|These recommendations will be aimed at                                |
|Addressing progress on concerns highlighted in pre-budget report      |
|Highlighting areas of concern for upcoming budget (for which          |
|preparation in executive is just starting), in other words, engage    |
|with forward treatment in budget preparation of allocations in outer  |
|years                                                                 |
|Highlighting areas of concern for engagement with actual expenditure  |
|reports                                                               |
|Highlighting areas of concern for Portfolio and Select Committee      |
|follow-up                                                             |
|For Budget 2007/8                                                     |
|4. The JBC will review its set of post-budget activities in the course|
|of 2006 for Budget 2007/8, taking into account the outcome of the     |
|Taskforce on Oversight and Accountability.                            |

The diagram below sets out role and activities up to point of budget
approval.


Diagram 1: JBC Role and Activities in Budget Preparation and Approval
Phases







      [pic]




3.3 Principles for JBC activities during Budget Execution


Guiding Decisions
1. The JBC has a mandate to monitor the actual revenue and expenditure
   reports published by the National Treasury. In fulfilling this task the
   JBC will
    • Link up its monitoring with its pre-budget work. In other words, it
      will track spending areas and issues it highlighted in the pre-budget
      and budget report.
    • Coordinate with Portfolio and Select Committees by
         o Alerting these committees to issues that should be tracked or
           that arise from the actual revenue and expenditure reports
         o Coordinating oversight on actual revenue and expenditure with
           oversight of Annual Reports and Strategic Plans
    • Target specific spending areas and departments on account of
         o Experience with quarterly reports (year-on-year)
         o Scopa and OAG
         o From government policy priorities (eg DTI re job creation)

2. In order to practise effective oversight the monthly and quarterly
   reports on their own are not enough. They need to be complemented by
   additional information from departments (through sector committees)
    • the JBC would need monthly cash flow projections and the operational
      plans of spending departments.
    • It would also need additional information on the strategic plan
      linkages to budget and the quarterly reports.
   Given current capacity, it is clear that the JBC will not be able to
   engage in depth with all spending areas. It will therefore focus on
   specific spending areas to investigate beyond the numbers.

3. The JBC will utilise monthly and quarterly cash flow reports to
    • Watch for implementation of new spending policies (request additional
      information from identified departments)
    • Underspending / savings
    • Pull through issues identified into implementation
    • Identify areas for closer focus
    • Personnel spending (vacancies and filled posts; particularly where
      personnel sizable portion of budget)

Activities in the Execution Phase
|Objective                                                           |
|Effective parliamentary oversight over the implementation of the    |
|budget, service delivery in line with plans                         |
|Activities (2005/6)                                                 |
|1. The JBC will request aggregate monthly cash flow projections for |
|all spending departments as soon as possible, plus updates during   |
|the year where relevant                                             |
|2. JBC will request more detailed cash flow projections and         |
|operational plans from specific spending departments, in            |
|coordination with the relevant Portfolio and Select Committees      |
|3. The JBC will request briefings from specific departments, in     |
|coordination with the relevant Portfolio and Select Committees, on  |
|Strategic Plan linkages to budget and operational plans and to the  |
|cashflow projections.                                               |
|4. The JBC will request follow-up briefings, in coordination with   |
|the relevant Portfolio and Select Committees, on implementation in  |
|line with Strategic Plan and Budgets, and on the achievement of     |
|spending undertaken for specific spending departments.              |
|5. The JBC will commission research on budget implementation in     |
|specific spending areas and departments (in coordination with the   |
|relevant Portfolio and Select Committees), piloting in 2005 – if    |
|funds can be raised – and extending the programme in 2006.          |
|6. The JBC will compile quarterly reports for Parliament that       |
|relates the actual revenue and spending reports to budget           |
|implementation and service delivery. The reports will comment on    |
|progress with budget implementation overall. The reports will draw  |
|on investigations into specific spending areas by commenting on     |
|The timeliness of activities of the spending department             |
|The efficiency of spending and the speediness and quality of service|
|delivery (JBC not only to investigate whether spending is taking    |
|place, but to which effect)                                         |
|7. At end of fiscal year the JBC will compile a briefing report to  |
|SCOPA highlighting areas of high concern on account of its          |
|engagement with budget implementation.                              |

The JBC expects to make slow progress in moving from commenting on spending
to coordinate work on and commenting on the timeliness, quality and
efficiency of service delivery on back of the actual revenue and
expenditure reports. However, it will endeavour to shift its practice in
this direction from the 2005/6 spending year.


   Committee structure and work method

The following principles were formulated for how the committee will work to
fulfill the tasks set out above.
1. There will be specialization within the committee. Specific members will
   be assigned to specific sub-committees charged with engaging with
   specific spending areas, Portfolio and Select Committees and spending
   departments.
2. The Committee will deliberate further as to whether this specialization
   in the current cycle will be in line with the identified areas of
   investigation, or whether it will organize itself immediately in broad
   functional sub-committees, to which specific spending area issues will be
   assigned. The latter carries the benefit of being permanent for this
   Parliament, and of more in-depth engagement over time.
3. The sub-committees will be the engines of the JBCs work. In other words,
   the committee will meet mainly as a full committee
     a. In September/October to agree and compile the pre-budget report
     b. At the time of the MTBPS
     c. After the Budget has been tabled
     d. On a quarterly basis (see point 6 below)
   However, the JBC Chair may call a full committee meeting at any point.
4. Portfolio and Select committees will be invited to delegate a ‘budget
   specialist’ who will
     a. act as ‘floating’ members of the JBC, that is join the JBC and
        relevant JBC sub-committees
     b. be the liaison with the JBC
     c. facilitate joint sittings of the Portfolio and Select Committees
        and the JBC sub-committee to undertake the activities as set out
        above.
   The JBC will work through the Chairs of the relevant committees to agree
   and operationalise the system. Part of this process would be to agree
   what level of representation the “budget specialist” will enjoy on the
   JBC: whether as observers or full members.
5. The JBC will undertake in full committee and as sub-committees joint
   sittings -- albeit in the budget preparation and approval or
   implementation phases -- with Portfolio and Select Committees to
     a. Deliberate on areas highlighted and formulate report findings and
        recommendations
     b. Receive briefings from spending departments and National Treasury
        on specific spending areas and issues
   The JBC may at times formulate findings and recommendations not in a
   joint sitting, but with the participation of the ‘budget specialist’
   only.
6. On a quarterly basis the JBC will have extended meetings to
     a. Agree on forward work of sub-committees
     b. Report back on on-going work in sub-committees
     c. Agree on Quarterly report to Parliament.
7. The JBC may create ad-hoc sub-committees to look at cross-cutting areas.
   Members of Portfolio and Select Committees may be invited onto these
   committees.
8. When the cluster system is in place, the JBC will align its operations
   to make use of the system.
9. The JBC will commission research into specific spending areas that it
   targets for engagement.
10. The JBC may undertake oversight visits to spending departments or to
   service delivery sites as part of its oversight work.
11. The JBC will draft a proposal before end 2005 to establish a
   Parliamentary Budget Office. To this end it will delegate a sub-
   committee.
12. The JBC will formulate a strategy to increase financial resources of
   the committee in the meantime, to undertake research and further
   development work.




5. Operationalising the Strategic Plan


This strategic plan is at a fairly high level. The JBC needs to undertake
further development, as well as monitoring activities in support of
strategic plan implementation. This section briefly discusses the further
planning and budgeting; and monitoring and evaluation activities that are
required.


5.1 Planning and budgeting


The JBC needs to programme steps in specific activity areas – for example
getting agreement from parliamentary structures on coordination between the
committee and other committees and developing a methodology for undertaking
public expenditure reviews. It also needs to develop a guideline financial
requirement for undertaking the identified activities, and prioritise its
activities against its existing and potential financial resources. These
activities will be undertaken in the 3rd quarter of 2005, resulting in an
operational plan for 2005/6. A draft implementation plan is provided in
Annex 1. This plan will be finalized in the 3rd quarter of 2005/6.


5.2 Monitoring and Evaluation


The JBC will monitor the effectiveness of its Strategy by holding a
quarterly review meeting -- in September 2005, November 2005, February 2006
and May 2006 -- to monitor progress with strategy implementation, do a scan
for changes in the national budget environment, identify obstacles to
strategy implementation and formulate mitigation strategies. The JBC will
adjust the strategy in year if required. The meeting in May 2006 will be
more extensive, and will be utilized to roll over the Strategy Document for
2007/8 – 2009/10 budget cycle.


             Annex 1. Draft Operational Plan Outline and Budget



                              Operational Plan


|   |               |2005              |2006                    |2007                    |
|   |                                                                                    |
|2  |Discuss interface of activities with NT; briefing by National Treasury              |
|3  |Present programme of activities to NT and agree interaction for budget cycle for    |
|   |2006 Budget                                                                         |
|7  |First Briefing completed                                                            |
|10 |JBC clarify process for compiling and submitting pre-budget discussion paper to MCoB|
|16 |JBC agrees focus areas, identifies required preparation work and agrees programme   |
|   |for MTBPS                                                                           |
|20|JBC|                  |                        |                        |
|  |rev|                  |                        |                        |
|  |iew|                  |                        |                        |
|  |s  |                  |                        |                        |
|  |act|                  |                        |                        |
|  |ivi|                  |                        |                        |
|  |tie|                  |                        |                        |
|  |s  |                  |                        |                        |
|  |and|                  |                        |                        |
|  |fin|                  |                        |                        |
|  |ali|                  |                        |                        |
|  |se |                  |                        |                        |
|  |pro|                  |                        |                        |
|  |gra|                  |                        |                        |
|  |mme|                  |                        |                        |
|  |for|                  |                        |                        |
|  |pre|                  |                        |                        |
|  |par|                  |                        |                        |
|  |ati|                  |                        |                        |
|  |on |                  |                        |                        |
|  |pha|                  |                        |                        |
|  |se |                  |                        |                        |
|  |of |                  |                        |                        |
|  |Bud|                  |                        |                        |
|  |get|                  |                        |                        |
|  |200|                  |                        |                        |
|  |7  |                  |                        |                        |
|   |                                                                       |
|23 |Develop and agree process in Parliament for Budget 2006 legislative    |
|   |phase                                                                  |
|24 |JBC finalises process                                                  |
|28 |JBC holds hearings                                                     |
|31 |JBC reviews successes and failures of process for Budget 2006 and make |
|   |recommendations for Budget 2007                                        |
|33 |JBC request spending department cash flow projections for remainder of |
|   |2005, and 2006                                                         |
|   |JBC reviews engagement with Budget 2005, adjust activities forward     |
|41 |Finalise programme and budget                                          |
|42|JBC|                  |                        |                        |
|  |sub|                  |                        |                        |
|  |mit|                  |                        |                        |
|  |s  |                  |                        |                        |
|  |str|                  |                        |                        |
|  |ate|                  |                        |                        |
|  |gic|                  |                        |                        |
|  |pla|                  |                        |                        |
|  |n  |                  |                        |                        |
|  |to |                  |                        |                        |
|  |Par|                  |                        |                        |
|  |lia|                  |                        |                        |
|  |men|                  |                        |                        |
|  |t  |                  |                        |                        |
|   |                                                                       |
|46 |JBC finalises committee structure, interface with Portfolio and Select |
|   |Committees (Streamline with rows 11, 24)                               |
|54    |Quarterly meetings  |                          |          |            |
|      |to review strategic |                          |          |            |
|      |effectiveness of    |                          |          |            |
|      |programme,          |                          |          |            |
|      |structures and      |                          |          |            |
|      |activities          |                          |          |            |
|      |(streamline with    |                          |          |            |
|      |rows 20,21, 30 and  |                          |          |            |
|      |43)                 |                          |          |            |
|B10B-2|Companies Amendment |To amend the Companies    |No        |Yes         |
|004   |Bill                |Amendment, to omit “in the|          |            |
|      |Briefing by DTI and |arrangement of sections”  |          |            |
|      |finalisation of Bill|                          |          |            |
|      |- 31 August 2004    |                          |          |            |
|B16-20|Petroleum Products  |To amend the Petroleum    |No        |Yes         |
|04    |Amendment Bill      |Products Act so as to     |          |            |
|      |(Section 75)        |delete a condition        |          |            |
|      |Briefing by DTI and |regarding the purchase and|          |            |
|      |finalization of Bill|sale of certain petroleum |          |            |
|      |–                   |products; to adjust the   |          |            |
|      |27 October 2004     |provision dealing with the|          |            |
|      |                    |system for the allocation |          |            |
|      |                    |of certain licences; to   |          |            |
|      |                    |extend the power of the   |          |            |
|      |                    |Minister of Minerals and  |          |            |
|      |                    |Energy to make            |          |            |
|      |                    |regulations.              |          |            |
|B9B-20|National Energy     |To establish a single     |No        |Yes         |
|04    |Regulator Bill      |regulator to regulate the |          |            |
|      |(Section 75)        |electricity, piped-gas and|          |            |
|      |Briefing by DME  -  |petroleum pipelines       |          |            |
|      |16 September 2004   |industries.               |          |            |
|      |Finalisation of Bill|                          |          |            |
|      |– 13 October 2004   |                          |          |            |
|B23B-2|National Small      |To amend the National     |No        |None        |
|004   |Business Amendment  |Small Business Act, 1996, |          |            |
|      |Bill (Section 75)   |so as to repeal all       |          |            |
|      |                    |provisions pertaining to  |          |            |
|      |Briefing by DTI on  |Ntsika Enterprise         |          |            |
|      |the Bill            |Promotion Agency; to      |          |            |
|      |Finalisation of Bill|provide for the           |          |            |
|      |– 16 November 2004  |establishment of the Small|          |            |
|      |                    |Enterprise Development    |          |            |
|      |                    |Agency; to make provision |          |            |
|      |                    |for the incorporation of  |          |            |
|      |                    |the Ntsika Enterprise     |          |            |
|      |                    |Promotion Agency, the     |          |            |
|      |                    |National Manufacturing    |          |            |
|      |                    |Advisory Centre and any   |          |            |
|      |                    |other designated          |          |            |
|      |                    |institution into the      |          |            |
|      |                    |Agency to be established; |          |            |
|      |                    |to provide for the        |          |            |
|      |                    |necessary transitional    |          |            |
|      |                    |arrangements to this      |          |            |
|      |                    |effect.                   |          |            |



7.    INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS



         • The Committee considered and approved the Southern African
           Customs Union Agreement on 4 February 2004.
         • The Committee considered and approved the Protocol on the
           Amendments to the Constitutive Act of the African Union and the
           Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol on 4 February 2004.
         • The Committee considered and approved the Protocol Relating to
           the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration
           of Trade Marks, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
           Constitution, 1996 and the Explanatory Memorandum on the
           Ratification of the Madrid and Hague Systems on the Registration
           of Trade Marks and Designs on 13 October 2004.
         • The Committee considered and approved the Geneva Act of the
           Hague Agreement Concerning the International Registration of
           Industrial Designs on 13 October 2004.



8.    SCHEDULE OF MEETINGS (BRIEFINGS, HEARINGS, ETC)



|Document/Subject                       |Date discussed    |No of hrs|
|                                       |                  |spent    |
|PRE-ELECTION MEETINGS                                               |
|Briefing by Department of Trade and    |27 January 2004   |1 ½ hrs  |
|Industry on the New Southern African   |                  |         |
|Customs (SACU) Agreement.              |                  |         |
|Briefing by Department of Foreign      |                  |         |
|Affairs on Protocol on the Amendments  |                  |         |
|to the Constitutive Act of the African |                  |         |
|Union.                                 |                  |         |
|                                       |                  |         |
|Finalisation of Southern African       |4 February 2004   |2 hrs    |
|Customs Union (SACU) Agreement.        |                  |         |
|Finalisation of Protocol on the        |                  |         |
|Amendments to the Constitutive Act of  |                  |         |
|the African Union, tabled in terms of  |                  |         |
|section 231(2) of the Constitution,    |                  |         |
|1996. Explanatory Memorandum to the    |                  |         |
|Protocol on the Amendments to the      |                  |         |
|Constitutive Act of the African Union. |                  |         |
|Adoption of annual report for 2003.    |                  |         |
|Discussion and consideration of        |17 February 2004  |2hrs     |
|National Gambling Bill [B48D - 2003]   |                  |         |
|Briefing by Department of Trade and    |                  |         |
|Industry on legislation since 1999 and |                  |         |
|how it has impacted on the people of   |                  |         |
|South Africa.                          |                  |         |
|Consideration and adoption of Limpopo  |                  |         |
|visit report.                          |                  |         |
|POST-ELECTION MEETINGS                                              |
|Election of the Chairperson and        |18 May 2004       |1hr      |
|consideration of Committee Programme.  |                  |         |
|Briefing by DTI on budget Vote (32) and|26 May 2004       |4hrs     |
|its Strategic Plan.                    |                  |         |
|Briefing by Dept of Foreign Affairs on |31 May 2004       |2hrs     |
|Budget Vote 3.                         |                  |         |
|Briefing by Dept of Foreign Affairs on |31 May 2004       |2hrs     |
|Strategic Plan.                        |                  |         |
|Briefing by Khula, Ntsika and          |                  |4hrs     |
|Industrial Development Cooperation on  |09 June 2004      |         |
|Budget.                                |                  |         |
|Consideration of Committee programme   |14 June 2004      |1hr      |
|for the second and third session.      |                  |         |
|                                       |                  |         |
|Consideration of Committee Programme.  |18 August 2004    |1 hr     |
|Briefing on Companies Amendment Bill   |24 August 2004    |2 hrs    |
|[B10B – 2004]                          |                  |         |
|Briefing on Madrid Protocol, the Hague |                  |         |
|Agreement and Geneva Act.              |                  |         |
|Briefing on Cooperative Policy and     |25 August 2004    |2hr      |
|Bill.                                  |                  |         |
|Finalization of the Companies Amendment|31 August 2004    |2hr      |
|Bill[B10B – 2004].                     |                  |         |
|Briefing on the National Regulator Bill|16 September 2004 |2hr      |
|[B9D – 2004].                          |                  |         |
|Overview of Policy on Corporate Law    |07 October 2004   |1hr      |
|Reform.                                |                  |(Dti     |
|                                       |                  |Campus)  |
|Consideration and Finalisation of      |13 October 2004   |1 hr     |
|National Energy Regulator Bill [B9B -  |                  |         |
|2004].                                 |                  |         |
|                                       |                  |         |
|Briefing, consideration and report on: |                  |         |
|                                       |                  |         |
|(a) Geneva Act of the Hague Agreement  |                  |         |
|Concerning the International           |                  |         |
|Registration of Industrial Designs,    |                  |         |
|tabled in terms of                     |                  |         |
|section 231(2) of the Constitution,    |                  |         |
|1996.                                  |                  |         |
|                                       |                  |         |
|(b) Protocol Relating to the Madrid    |                  |         |
|Agreement Concerning the               |                  |         |
|International Registration of Trade    |                  |         |
|Marks, tabled in terms of              |                  |         |
|section 231(2) of the Constitution,    |                  |         |
|1996.                                  |                  |         |
|                                       |                  |         |
|(c) Explanatory Memorandum on the      |                  |         |
|Ratification of the Madrid and         |                  |         |
|Hague Systems on the Registration of   |                  |         |
|Trade Marks and Designs.               |                  |         |
|                                       |                  |         |
|Briefing by the Department of Minerals |20 October 2004   |2hrs     |
|and Energy on Health and Safety in the |                  |         |
|mining industry.                       |                  |         |
|                                       |                  |         |
|Briefing by the Department of Minerals |27 October 2004   |1 hr     |
|and Energy on the Petroleum Products   |                  |         |
|A/B and finalisation of the Bill.      |                  |         |
|                                       |                  |         |
|Briefing by the Department of Trade and|9 November 2004   |2 hrs    |
|Industry on the Southern African       |                  |         |
|Customs Union (SACU) and World Trade   |                  |         |
|Organisation (WTO)                     |                  |         |
|Briefing by the Department of Trade and|15 November 2004  |1 hr     |
|Industry on National Small             |                  |         |
|Business Amendment Bill [B23B – 2004]  |                  |         |
|                                       |                  |         |
| Finalisation of National Small        |16 November 2004  |1 hr     |
|Business Amendment Bill [B23B –  2004] |                  |         |
|                                       |                  |         |


9.  OVERSIGHT


      |Subject Matter |Date(s)     |Names of        |Venue          |No of  |
|               |            |attendants      |               |hrs    |
|               |            |                |               |spent  |
|International  |01-04 June  |Ms N Ndalane    |International  |4 days |
|Conference for |2004        |(ANC)           |Congress Centre|       |
|Renewable      |            |                |in Bonn Germany|       |
|Energies       |            |                |               |       |
|Induction      |03 / 05     |Ms N Ntwanambi  |New DTI Campus | 3 days|
|Programme on   |October 2004|(ANC)           |(Pretoria)     |       |
|DTI’s New      |            |Ms S Mabe (ANC) |               |       |
|Campus         |            |Mr J Sibiya     |               |       |
|               |            |(ANC)           |               |       |
|               |            |Ms P Themba     |               |       |
|               |            |(ANC)           |               |       |
|               |            |Mr D G Mkono    |               |       |
|               |            |(ANC)           |               |       |
|               |            |Ms JF Terblanche|               |       |
|               |            |(DA)            |               |       |
|               |            |Ms S Chen (DA)  |               |       |
|               |            |Mr K Sinclair   |               |       |
|               |            |(NNP)           |               |       |
|               |            |Ms P Mpoyiya    |               |       |
|               |            |(staff)         |               |       |
|               |            |Mr M Erasmus    |               |       |
|               |            |(staff)         |               |       |
|               |            |                |               |       |
|               |            |                |               |       |



11.   FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
      Budget allocated to Committee     R 345, 861
      Catering                     R 6, 207
      Oversight visits       R 68, 022

12.   FORMAL ADOPTION OF ANNUAL REPORT BY THE COMMITTEE


      The Committee adopted its Annual Report for 2004 on 31 May 2005.
…………………………………………….     ………………………………………

COMMITTEE SECRETARY    DATE

…………………………………………….     ………………………………………

CONTROL COMMITTEE SECRETARY  DATE

…………………………………………….     ………………………………………

COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSON  DATE





13.   APPENDICES


      Composition of Committee


           Membership


|MEMBER                                     |DATE APPOINTED  |DATE DISCHARGED   |
|Ms ND Ntwanambi                            |1 January 2002  |                  |
|Ms ES Mabe                                 |8 August 2004   |                  |
|Mr DD Gamede                               |13 May 2004     |                  |
|Mr T Setona (alt)                          |13 May 2004     |                  |
|Mr DG Mkono                                |13 May 2004     |                  |
|Ms MP Themba                               |20 August 1999  |                  |
|Ms JF Terblanche                           |13 May 2004     |                  |
|Ms S Chen                                  |13 May 2004     |                  |
|Mr MJ Sibiya                               |17 August 2004  |                  |
|Mr Z S Kolweni (alt)                       |20 August 1999  |                  |
|Mr K Sinclair                              |13 May 2004     |                  |
|Mr A Watson (alt)                          |13 May 2004     |                  |
|Ms M Madlala Magubane (alt)                |13 May 2004     |                  |
|Ms N Ndalane                               |13 May 2004     |30 June 2004      |
|                                           |                |(resigned)        |

(alt) = alternate member

      b.    Committee Support Staff

      Control Committee Secretary:      Mr Khaya Lala
           Period:                           2004 to date


                  Committee Secretary:        Ms Gadija Abdullatief
           Period:                           May 2003 to date


                                       Stand-in: Ms Koliswa Pasiya
                                        April to June 2004


                                        Stand-in: Mr Martiens Erasmus
                                        July to September 2004


           Committee Assistant (Acting):     Ms Nobesuthu Sihawu
           Period:                           May 2003 to date


            Secretary to Chairperson:   Ms Rosalind Molloy-Titus
           Period:                           August 2004 to date


                  Researcher (Research Unit): None


           Legal Support:                    No dedicated legal support


                           FRIDAY, 19 AUGUST 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)    Co-operatives Bill [B 4B – 2005] – Act No 14 of 2005 (assented
         to and signed by President on 14 August 2005).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 17 August 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill [B 22 – 2005]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 17 August 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as a section 76
         Bill:


         (i)     Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 23 – 2005] (National
         Assembly – sec 76).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    a) General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcomes of Local
       Government for the financial year ended 30 June 2004 [RP 73-2005].


    b) Report of the South African Delegation to the Third Ordinary Session
       of the Pan-African Parliament, 29 March – 11  April  2005,  held  at
       Gallagher Estates, Midrand:

                              Executive Summary


Section A


1.    Background

The report outlines the proceedings of the third  ordinary  session  of  the
Pan-African Parliament, which took place between 29 March 2005 and 11  April
2005.

The third ordinary session of the Pan-African Parliament  (PAP)  was  marked
by the opening  address  by  President  Gertrude  Mongella,  and  solidarity
speeches by Speakers of various National Parliaments including the Hon Ms  B
Mbete, Speaker of the Parliament of South Africa.

The Hon. Speaker of the National Assembly of Uganda spoke for  all  Speakers
on the continent, while the Speaker of the Parliament of South Africa  spoke
in her capacity as the leader of the delegation of the host  country.   Both
Speakers noted the successes  of  both  the  Pan-African  Parliament  as  an
institution, and the importance  of  the  institution  in  uniting  Africa’s
people.  While the Speaker  of  Uganda  highlighted  the  strengths  of  the
President of the Pan-African Parliament, whom  he  commended  for  honouring
all women of Africa and the world.  The Speaker of South Africa  highlighted
the importance of the Pan-African Parliament in  reclaiming  Africa’s  land,
and leading the continent in creating its own destiny.

The President of the Pan-African Parliament,  Hon.  Gertrude  Mongella  paid
tribute to the late 4th Vice President, Hon Jerome  Sacca  Kina  Guezere  of
the Pan-African Parliament.  The President also  noted  the  important  role
that South Africa had played  in  housing  the  Pan-African  Parliament  and
providing structures for this purpose.  The President  further  referred  to
the important  role  of  the  commission  of  the  African  Union,  National
Governments and the need for a budget for the Pan-African  Parliament.   The
President further highlighted  important  achievements  of  the  Pan-African
Parliament, including the peacekeeping mission to Darfur.


2.    Plenary Debates and Committee Meetings


The agenda of the third ordinary session of the Pan-African  Parliament  was
conducted both in meetings of committees, as well as in  the  Plenary.   The
purpose of the  committee  meetings  was  to  work  through  committee  work
programmes  and  for  each  committee  to  come  up  with  at  least   three
priorities.  Committees that are covered in the report include:

    • The Committee on Rules, Privileges  and  Discipline  –  the  Committee
      prioritised the  Code  of  Conduct  for  members  of  the  Pan-African
      Parliament and the Draft Proposal  on  guidelines  for  oversight  and
      accountability for the Pan-African Parliament.
    • The Committee on Co-operation, International  Relations  and  Conflict
      Resolution – the Committee has  identified  a  number  of  events  and
      resource  mobilisation  in  order  to   coordinate   cooperation   and
      peacekeeping efforts within and outside the continent.
    • Committee on Trade, Customs and Immigration Matters  –  the  Committee
      prioritised a fact finding mission to the Commissioners of  trade  and
      industry, and Social Affairs of the African Union  Commission  to  get
      status reports on their activities with particular reference to  trade
      regulations, tariff laws, immigration rules, regulations and laws.
    • Committee on Transport, Industry, Communications, Energy, Science  and
      Technology  –  in  addition  to  intensive  committee  discussions  of
      transport problems in Africa, the Committee presented a report to  the
      House on the  important  aspects  of  the  industries  that  had  been
      identified.  The report was debated and adopted in the House.
    • Committee on Justice and Human  Rights  –  the  Committee  prioritised
      capacity building for all members of the Committee on their roles  and
      functions in relation to the overall mandate of the Committee.

3.    Recommendations


The House adopted the following recommendations:

   1. Pan-African Parliament Peace Mission to Darfur  (PAP-Rec. 001/05)
   2. World Summit on Information Society (PAP – Rec. 002/05)
   3. The African Land Title System (PAP-Rec. 003/05)
   4. The Creation of an African Phytogenetic Resource Bank (PAP-Rec.004/05)
   5. Communications and  Information  Infrastructure  in  Africa  (PAP-Rec.
      005/05)
   6. The  request  directed  to  States  who  have  not  yet  ratified  the
      Constitutive Act of the Union and its Protocol (PAP-Rec.006/05)
   7. Encouraging Pan-African Investment and Financing Institutions to Focus
      on Africa’s Rural Economy (PAP-Rec.007/05)


4.    RESOLUTIONS



   1. Signing of Adherence to the African Peer  Review  Mechanism  (PAP-Res.
      001/05)
   2. Resolution on the Development of a Continental Code of  Conduct  (PAP-
      Res.002/05)
   3. Appreciation of the Intervention of the President of the African Union
      in the Togo Crisis (003/05)
   4. Appreciation of the Work of Mr. Kofi Annan, The Secretary  General  to
      the United Nations (PAP-Res.004/05)
   5. Resolution Relating to the Presidential Elections in Togo on 24  April
      2005 (PAP-Res. 005/05)
   6. Establishment of Pan African Investment and Financing Institutions for
      African’s Rural Economy (PAP-Res. 002/05)
   7. Designing Continental Policy Programmes for  Environmental  Protection
      and Efficient Utilisation of Natural Resource  (PAP-Res. 004/05)
   8. Appreciation to H.E. Olusegun Obasanjo,  Chairperson  of  the  African
      Union, for his Actions on the Togo Crisis (PAP-Res.005/05)
   9. Dispatch of a PAP Mission to Cote D’Ivoire at  the  Beginning  of  May
      2005 (PAP-Res.009/05)
  10. Dispatch of a PAP Peace Mission to the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
      During the First Fortnight of May 2005  (PAP-Res.10/05)
   11. Congratulating H.E. Thabo Mbeki, President of the Republic  of  South
       Africa, on his Success in Achieving a  Peace  Agreement  Between  the
       Warring Parties in Cote D’Ivoire  (PAP-Res.008/05)


Section B



 1. INTRODUCTION


 The Third Ordinary Session of the Pan-African Parliament took place from
 29 March to 11 April 2005 at Gallagher Estate, Midrand, Johannesburg.




 The South African Pan-African Parliamentarians were: Ms. B. Mbete (Leader
 of the delegation), Mr. M.J. Mahlangu (Chairperson of the National Council
 of Provinces), Mrs. F. Hajaig, Advocate Z.L. Madasa and Ms. S.C. Vos. The
 delegation was assisted by Mr. B. Nonyana (support to Mr. Mahlangu), Ms.
 A. Barnard (Support to Ms. Mbete), Ms. B. Diutlwileng (Researcher), Ms. B.
 Letompa (Researcher) and Mrs. J. P. Merckel (Administrator).



The Third Ordinary Session of the Pan-African Parliament was marked by the
opening ceremony that took place on Tuesday, 29 March 2005 and included
solidarity speeches by various Speakers of National Parliaments including
South Africa’s Speaker, Hon Ms Baleka Mbete.  From Wednesday, 30 March to
Monday, 11 April 2005, committee work and plenaries took place in earnest.
The volume of work covered by the 10 committees and the quality of the
debates in plenary showed the level of dedication and will to succeed from
all the Pan-African Parliamentarians, particularly the South African
members who made salient contributions to both the committee work programme
and the debates in the House.  At least two South African members
participated in each debate over the 14 days, with firm commitments from
all South African members to provide ongoing support to the Pan-African
Parliament during its infant stage.  An example of this commitment was
displayed by Hon Mr Mahlangu who made himself available to assist with the
drafting of a Code of Conduct for the Pan-African Parliamentarians and
defining the Oversight and Accountability role of the Pan-African
Parliament as an effective organ of the African Union.


The third ordinary session of the Pan-African Parliament was graced by
excellent presentations by in particular Ambassador Djinnit, New Economic
Partnership for Africa Development (NEPAD) and United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) on HIV and Aids in Africa.  On Friday, 08 April 2005, the
third ordinary session was privileged to be in the presence of 8 previous
Heads of State including the Prime Minister of Cote D’Ivoire, following the
successful signing of the Pretoria Agreement on Cote D’Ivoire, a peace
agreement brokered mainly by the H.E. President T M Mbeki.


2.  ISSUES DEBATED IN THE HOUSE

The third ordinary session of the  Pan-African  Parliament  focused  on  the
following issues:

2.1   Solidarity Speeches.


2.2   Administrative issues, including:
     • The 2005 Budget.
     • Annual Report.
     • Work plan of the Pan-African Parliament.
     • Establishment of a trust fund.
     • Launching of the Pan-African Parliament website.


3. Procedural and process issues, including
     • Strengthening Committees
     • Consideration of Committee priorities
     • Consideration of Committee work plans.


4. Debates on issues of continental significance.  Topics that were  debated
   include:
    • The Millennium Development Goals.
    • United Nations Reform.
    • Combating HIV/AIDS in Africa.
    • Transportation and Communication problems in Africa.
    • Report on Peace Mission to Darfur
    • Agricultural problems in Africa.


The third ordinary session of the Pan-African  Parliament  was  attended  by
194 members from 39 member states.

3.  Official Opening

Hon. Gertrude Mongella, M.P, President of the  Pan-African  Parliament,  led
the delegation in meditation and silent prayer and thereafter  proceeded  to
invite various speakers to present messages of solidarity.
            Solidarity Speeches
            i) Speaker of Parliament:  Uganda

The Hon.Speaker of the National Assembly of Uganda noted that  the  occasion
of the Third ordinary session  of  the  Pan-African  Parliament  marked  the
first anniversary of the Pan-African Parliament, which  was  inaugurated  on
the 1 of March 2004.  The Speaker congratulated the first President  of  the
Pan-African Parliament and indicated that Hon. Mongella honoured  all  women
of the world, but particularly the women of Africa.   He  also  saluted  the
founders of the Pan-African Parliament and highlighted the successes of  the
Pan-African  Parliament   and   African   Union   (AU),   particularly   the
peacekeeping successes, which are to promote peace, and  security  in  areas
like Darfur in Sudan.  The Speaker  also  highlighted  challenges  that  the
Parliament faces, including funding.  In conclusion,  the  Speaker  extended
gratitude  to  the  South  African  Government  for  the  support  provided,
including the building structure that houses the Pan-African Parliament.

            ii) Speaker of Parliament:  South Africa

Hon. Mbete noted that although the past year was a challenging one, the Pan-
African Parliament has recorded many successes, which included  achievements
with regard to the Rules of  Procedure.   The  Speaker  indicated  that  the
Constitutive Act of the African Union guided the rules  and  that  the  Pan-
African Parliament did not have full  legislative  powers,  but  assumed  an
advisory role over Parliaments.

The Speaker indicated  that  it  had  been  a  challenge  to  set  up  clear
oversight  functions.  One  of  the  major  challenges  of  the  Pan-African
Parliament is that it is not yet a fully legislative body, but only  assumes
an advisory role over Parliaments.  It  is  important  for  the  Pan-African
Parliament to  critically  examine  delivery  by  national  Governments.  In
addition, although committees have been formed, there is still  a  need  for
clear programmes so as to provide positive feedback to member countries.

The Speaker noted that Africa was once regarded as part of Europe, and  that
Africa is now determined to reclaim its soil and create its own destiny.  In
conclusion, the Speaker stressed the need and importance of taking pride  in
the Pan-African Parliament, ensuring that it is not  just  a  talk-shop  and
that it has substance. It was also important to ensure that at  the  end  of
the Third Ordinary Session, clear programmes for Committee work would be  in
place and positive feedback should be provided to member countries.

iii)  Keynote Address:  President of the Pan African Parliament     (Hon.
Ambassador Gertrude Ibengwe Mongella)

H.E. Ambassador Mongella made a formal announcement of the passing  away  of
the 4th Vice-President of the  Pan-African  Parliament,  Hon.  Jerome  Sacca
Kina Guezere, who died on 11 January 2005 in his home  country  Benin  after
taking ill in Accra, Ghana.    The  President,  as  well  as  several  other
speakers, paid tribute to the late Vice President and requested a moment  of
silence in remembrance.

President Mongella highlighted the important  role  that  South  Africa  has
played in the establishment of  the  Pan-African  Parliament  and  expressed
appreciation to the host country and other national parliaments from  across
the continent for their support and contribution towards the development  of
the Parliament[1].

      Key players in the development of the Pan-African Parliament had been:

 • The Commission of African Union: The  Commission  of  African  Union,  in
   particular the Commission for Political Affairs, spearheaded the  process
   of launching the Pan-African Parliament.   The  Commission  continues  to
   provide financial and human resources that facilitate the functioning  of
   the Pan-African Parliament.
 • The Host Country:  The South African  Government,  and  particularly  H.E
   President Thabo Mbeki, has demonstrated total commitment and  support  to
   the Pan-African Parliament.  The host government  has  provided  services
   and support according to the  Host  Country  Agreement  by  ensuring  the
   availability  of  the  required  buildings,  staff,  infrastructure   and
   services for the smooth operation of the Pan-African Parliament.
 • National Parliaments: National Parliaments have taken the  responsibility
   of covering travel and subsistence costs for their delegates to the  Pan-
   African Parliament  during  the  committees  and  plenary  meetings.   In
   addition, the Speakers of National Parliaments have  contributed  to  and
   supported the Pan-African Parliament at its initial stage of development.

   The Parliament has carried out its activities under the leadership of the
   Bureau composed of the President and the 4th Vice-Presidents.   According
   to Article 12 (5) the President and the  Vice  Presidents  shall  be  the
   Officers’ of the Pan African  Parliament.   In  the  discharge  of  their
   duties, the officers are assisted by the Clerk and the two Deputy Clerks.
    The Bureau appointed an Interim Clerk and two Deputy  Clerks  while  the
   Parliament was waiting for the approval of its budget for the recruitment
   of permanent staff.  The Pan-African Parliament had adopted its own rules
   and procedures  and  formed  10  Parliamentary  Committees  according  to
   Article 12 (1) and  12  (13),  during  its  Second  Ordinary  Session  in
   September 2004.

Swahili was introduced as a working  language  during  the  second  session,
bringing to the number of working languages of the Parliament to 5. Some  of
the successes of the Parliament include:

        • The mission to Darfur – investigating issues of conflict in
          Darfur.  Africa is showing leadership in the resolution to address
          the numerous challenges.  The President congratulated the
          committee that visited Sudan under difficult circumstances and at
          a time of conflict.
        •  The  Pan-African  Parliament  has  established  an  agreement  of
          understanding with several continental  and  regional  structures.
          Cooperation is expected to strengthen technical capabilities.
        • The Bureau Committee meetings have developed 2005 work  plans  and
          the Pan-African Parliament’s strategic plan to be discussed during
          this third session.
        • The Bureau has carried out a number  of  advocacy  initiatives  to
          popularise the Parliament within and outside Africa with the  hope
          of establishing institutional relationships and partnerships  with
          institutions of a similar nature e.g. The  Parliamentary  Assembly
          of the Council of Europe;  the  European  Union  (EU)  Parliament,
          European  Parliamentarians  for  Africa  (AWEPA);  United  Nations
          Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs  (UNDESA).     Such
          cooperation is expected to build strong technical capacity  within
          the Parliament.
        • The Pan-African Parliament  is  in  the  process  of  looking  for
          additional funding.  In this regard,  agreements  have  been  made
          with the United States of America, Europe and other countries.
        • The Bureau has examined the need to provide  the  Parliament  with
          the necessary resources.  At this third session there  will  be  a
          discussion on the establishment of the Trust Fund as an additional
          source of funding for Pan-African Parliament’s activities.

The  ultimate  goal  is   to   make   the   Pan-African   Parliament   truly
representative of the people of Africa in  social,  economic  and  political
issues around the continent, as well as in international  bodies  so  as  to
ensure  that  the  agendas  of  Africa  are   considered   by   multilateral
institutions.  In addition, the  Pan-African  Parliament  seeks  to  embrace
programmes such as the NEPAD in addressing social and  economic  development
of the continent, to protect the human rights  of  the  African  people,  to
manage the globalisation process by influencing  the  international  agenda,
as well as to  enhance  partnerships  for  effective  resource  sharing  and
advocacy.




4. Administration Process and Procedural Issues


The agenda for the Third Ordinary Session  of  the  Pan-African  Parliament,
made allowance for various subjects to be debated in  Plenary.  The  plenary
sessions were robust and included inputs  from  all  members  of  the  South
African Delegation.

Election of 4th Vice President

A new Vice-President was elected to replace the late 4th  Vice-President  of
the Pan-African Parliament.  Two candidates were nominated and  Hon.  Member
Natra Keofile from Benin was elected.


Annual Report


The Annual Report was tabled in the House and was debated and adopted.


Work plan[2]


The  House  considered  a  comprehensive  work  plan  for  the   Pan-African
Parliament for 2005.  The 2005  work  plan  focused  on  the  following  key
issues:

              •  Formulation  of  a  strategic  plan  to  support   resource
                mobilisation efforts.  This includes  resource  mobilisation
                for  Pan-African  Parliament  activities  and  institutional
                capacity-building.
  • The need for an image building campaign for the Pan-African Parliament.
  • Preparation and consideration  of  the  Pan-African  Parliament’s  2006
    budget.
  • Consideration of the 2006 African Union budget, as well as  reports  of
    other AU structures.
  • Consideration of Committee reports and special missions reports.
  • Consideration of the Pan-African Parliament’s Annual Report as well  as
    the annual reports of other structures of the African Union.
  •  Consideration  and  establishment  of  the  Pan-African   Parliament’s
    website.


The work plan was widely accepted and adopted with the view that it could
have been more specific and detailed in terms of activities, relationships
with similar bodies and other organs of the African Union, the specific
continental role of the Pan-African Parliament and expatiation on the Pan-
African Parliament’s mandate.


Annual Budget[3]

The Annual Budget of the Pan-African Parliament was  tabled  in  the  House.
After some robust and intense debating, the Annual budget was adopted.

The PAP submitted a budget proposal of  $6.9  Million,  out  of  which  $5.6
Million was approved by the  AU  executive  council.  The  council  effected
several amendments to the budget, including:
     • A reduction of $737 288 in common staff costs; the reduction was due
       to the elimination of the recruitment costs, installation allowances
       and group insurance; as well  as  the  reduction  of  the  education
       allowance.
     • A reduction of $534 000 in the supplies and  services  budget.   The
       reduction  in  this  budget  was  due  to  the  elimination  of  the
       responsibility allowance for Members of Parliament.
     • A reduction of $36 611 in the meetings  and  seminars  budget.   The
       budget for translators  was  reduced  to  cover  10  instead  of  15
       translators per session.

In total, the original budget was reduced by $1 307 899.
Members expressed concern over the reduction of the budget, as well  as  the
delay in the transfer  of  funds  and  indicated  that  this  could  have  a
negative impact on the activities of the Pan-African Parliament.

Hon. Dr Faika El-Refaie, seconded by Hon. Saida Agrebi, presented a  written
motion in  terms  of  rule  61  that  the  House  urges  the  African  Union
Commission to transfer  the  funds  of  the  Pan-African  Parliament  budget
without further delay, in order to enable the Parliament to  carry  out  its
mandate in accordance with the Constitutive Act, the Protocol and the  Rules
of Procedure.


Trust Fund


The Committee on Monetary and Financial Affairs presented a motion  for  the
Parliament to grant permission for the establishment of a trust fund  as  an
additional means to mobilise resources to  support  the  work  of  the  Pan-
African Parliament.   The  trust  fund  will  be  beneficial,  not  only  in
accelerating the implementation of the programmes  of  the  Parliament,  but
also in multiplying the direct benefits of regional cooperation as  well  as
contributing to peace building, democratic governance, gender  equality  and
the harmonisation of regional laws.

The trust fund would further enable the continental Parliament to function
effectively and mobilise funds worldwide in order to supplement the African
Union financial support.  Funders prefer trust funds because a trust fund
would enable them to have input in the management of such a fund.  The
Committee thus recommended that a trust fund would go a long way in
building capacity for the Pan-African Parliament, as well as enable the Pan-
African Parliament to be financially independent and thereby reducing its
dependence on national governments and enhancing its oversight role.


The House adopted the motion and the President indicated  that  as  soon  as
the trust fund is established, the Bureau  should  immediately  set  up  the
rules and regulations in relation to it.


5. Topics for Discussion


Debate  on  Transport,  Industry,   Communication,   Energy,   Science   and
Technology

The  Chairperson  of  the  Permanent  Committee  on   Transport,   Industry,
Communication,  Energy,  Science  and  Technology  presented  a  report   on
resolving communication  and  transport  problems  in  Africa.   The  report
highlighted the fact  that  the  absence  of  transport  infrastructure  and
sectoral plans to ensure links within  and  between  sectors  has  seriously
impeded  social  and  economic  development  in  Africa.   It  is  therefore
important to equip the continent with appropriate infrastructure,  and  more
particularly  with  transport  and   communications   networks   that   will
facilitate trade and circulation.

African rail networks have not yet put in place  regional  connections  able
to  foster  true  economic  cooperation  and   ensure   complementarity   in
development efforts in Africa, and also to facilitate trade between  African
countries.  The renovation and modernisation of railway networks  in  Africa
is  a  priority:  doubling  of  existing  tracks,  renewal  of   facilities,
maintenance of railway tracks  and  electrification  of  lines.   This  will
ensure more efficient facilitation of the transport of goods.

African countries are adversely affected by  poor  road,  maritime  and  air
travel infrastructure, which need to be  reorganised  and  modernised.   The
evaluation of the transport sector: land, sea and air, and the  prospect  of
their development, has been recorded as a priority  activity  in  the  NEPAD
framework.   The  Committee  called  upon   all   political   and   economic
roleplayers tasked with the implementation of NEPAD to commit all  necessary
resources and means at their disposal to activating the development  of  the
road  and  rail  infrastructure  through  the  construction  of  a  regional
connection likely to attain regional integration in the field  of  land  and
rail transport.

The  Committee  recommended  the   launch   of   extension,   modernisation,
harmonisation and electrification of railway lines.  The  Committee  further
recommended the rehabilitation of African ports and the extension  of  their
capacity to be able to cope with container transport through  links  between
all maritime regions in Africa.

The Committee identified a need  to  introduce  a  prevention  and  security
policy as well as for rigorous control against maritime pollution. There  is
also a need for cooperation  between  African  maritime  companies  so  that
their personnel can benefit from  training  in  the  fields  of  navigation,
naval and repair work, upkeep and maintenance.

The Pan-African Parliament should commit all  its  Members  to  work  within
their own Parliaments and countries in order to get closer  to  the  experts
responsible for NEPAD follow-up.  This should be  done  in  order  to  allow
Members to acquaint themselves with the realities of  the  road,  rail,  sea
and  air  networks  and  to   ensure   the   wide   dissemination   of   the
recommendations of the Pan-African Parliament.

The report was debated and widely accepted by Members as highly  informative
and crucial.  The house therefore adopted the report.

The Speaker of the Republic of South Africa raised an oral motion in terms
of Rule 62 that the Committee on Communication and Transport must conduct a
comprehensive research study of all Transport and Communication problems in
Africa and come up with solutions in this regard. This report should then
be debated and adopted in the House.



Debate on Rural Economy, Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment


The  Committee  on  Rural  Economy,  Agriculture,  Natural   Resources   and
Environment made a presentation on the actions that must  be  taken  by  the
Pan-African  Parliament  to   harmonise   state   and   regional   policies,
legislation and actions which would enable the continent to emerge from  its
current poverty.  The Committee looked  into  ways  in  which  the  PAP  can
assist member states to adopt the  Pan-African  doctrine  to  integrate  the
rural economy components into a productive zeal for the continent.

The Committee recommended that Parliament carry out a continental  study  of
the current position of each member state with a view to identifying  common
problems and programmes.  Such a  study  needed  to  identify  the  existing
policies aimed at solving rural economy, agriculture, natural resources  and
environment problems as well as enhancing existing programmes, with  a  view
to adopting common policies which will ensure collective development on  the
continent.

Such policies should be popularised through  seminars,  public  meetings  in
each state and communication through the media, to make the public aware  of
their existence.   Meanwhile,  the  Pan-African  Parliament  and  all  other
organs of  the  African  Union  should  promote  peace,  security  and  good
governance as necessary conditions for development.

The  predominance  of  agriculture  in  Africa's  rural  economy  should  be
recognised by governments and societies  at  large  so  as  to  accord  this
sector its due importance, in terms  of  financing,  budgetary  allocations,
research and marketing of its products. The  vital  role  of  women  in  the
development of Africa's rural economy  should  be  recognised  and  men  and
women should be treated more equally.

Africa's environmental and natural resources are being  carelessly  depleted
by  the  increase  in  human  and  animal  populations.    The   Pan-African
Parliament should, therefore, develop a continental policy to  maintain  the
balance between the increasing  populations  and  finite  natural  resources
with a view to improving land fertility and agricultural production.

There is an urgent need for  the  African  Union  to  establish  a  code  of
conduct for member states to abide by so  as  to  ensure  their  fulfillment
with the requirements of the code. Monitoring could be a big problem,  hence
the need for an enforcement  mechanism  such  as  the  African  Peer  Review
Mechanism. The  Committee  also  presented  a  brief  action  programme  for
implementation.

Most Members expressed  appreciation  for  the  report  and  recommendations
during the debate and the report was adopted.


Debate on the Pan-African Parliament Peace Mission to Darfur, Sudan


The Leader of the  Fact-Finding  Mission  to  Darfur,  Hon.  Abdul  Katuntu,
introduced the report of  the  Permanent  Committee  on  Justice  and  Human
Rights to the House, and the Rapporteur Hon.  Halifa  Sallah  presented  the
report. The Committee recorded the following findings:

 • The military aspect of  the  conflict  in  Darfur  is  that  80%  of  the
   tribesmen of Darfur carry weapons.  This  was  a  direct  result  of  the
   conflict in the 70s and 80s between Libya and Chad, which did  not  leave
   Sudan unaffected by the proliferation of  weapons.   The  acquisition  of
   sophisticated weapons by tribesmen has  led  to  their  use  in  settling
   tribal conflicts.   In addition, what started out as  a  tribal  conflict
   between Nomads and farmers has taken on a political face  and  government
   and public property have been destroyed and 400 policemen killed.
 • A state of insecurity prevails among citizens and  many  people  reported
   serious  atrocities.  Native  administration  has  been  torn  apart  and
   customary justice is in shambles. People  were  afraid  to  talk  to  the
   Committee for fear of reprisal.  They  complained  about  the  continuous
   sound of gunfire, arrests without  trial  and  pressure  to  go  back  to
   villages where there was no security. There was also a lot of distrust of
   the security forces,  and  the  police,  hence  distrust  and  insecurity
   prevails.
 • One third of the population of Darfur had been displaced, between 1.5  to
   2 million deaths reported and massive destruction of  property  has  also
   been reported.  There  has  also  been  recorded  evidence  of  rape  and
   violence against women.  The Committee thus stated that the  conflict  in
   Darfur has resulted in a humanitarian disaster.  The attempt  to  discuss
   HIV and AIDS in camps was unsuccessful.

Among others, the Mission strongly recommended the following:

 • That the negotiation in governance on Darfur be speeded up  and  be  time
   bound in  order  to  provide  the  blueprint  that  would  guarantee  the
   political, economic and social rights of the population.
 • That the African Union facilitates the convening of a National Conference
   on peace, democratic governance and development in  Sudan  involving  the
   government, the parties to all regional agreements and  all  stakeholders
   in general, to enable them  to  prepare  a  strategic  document  for  the
   sharing of power and wealth among the regions.
 • That the mandate of  the  protectors  in  the  cease-fire  commission  be
   enhanced  to  go  beyond  protecting  military  observers,   to   include
   protection of the  population  of  Darfur.   All  necessary  instruments,
   institutions and resources should be mobilised to ensure that the  cease-
   fire agreement is respected.
 • That the Pan-African Parliament establishes a trust fund for humanitarian
   assistance to populations in conflict areas in Africa.

The report was debated and the recommendations were adopted. The  report  is
attached as Annexure 5.
Debates on Peace on Security Issues in Africa



 • In accordance with Rule 38 (1) and 73 (2) of the Rules of Procedure,  the
   Commissioner on Peace and Security of the African Union, Ambassador  Said
   Djinnit made a statement on Peace and Security Issues in Africa.
 • Debate ensued on Peace and Security Issues in Africa in  accordance  with
   Rule 73(2) of the Rules of Procedure.

Debate on the Millennium Development Goals in Africa


The Chairperson of the Permanent Committee on Co-operation, International
Relations and Conflict Resolution, Hon Elhadji Diao Kante, presented a
report on achieving the Millennium Development Goals in Africa.  The goals
aim to:


   1. Eliminate extreme poverty and hunger; as well as ensure education  for
      all.
   2. Promote sexual equality and the empowerment of women.
   3. Reduce infantile mortality and improve maternal health.
   4. Combat HIV and AIDS, malaria and other diseases.
   5. Ensure a sustainable environment.
   6. Set up a world partnership for development.

In order  to  reach  these  goals,  each  developing  country  is  primarily
responsible for its own development, which it must assume by:
 • Reinforcing governance and fighting corruption.
 • Adopting policies and making investments that will promote growth  driven
   by the private sector.
 • Mobilising fully the available resources to finance national  development
   strategies.

Developed countries committed themselves to ensuring that developing
countries that adopt transparent, credible and accurately costed
development strategies receive all the support they need in the form of
increased development aid, a commercial system more firmly aligned with
development and broader intensified debt relief.


A debate ensued wherein members called for a review of the Millenium
Development Goals (MDGs) and the restructuring of the African socio-
ecomonic policies in order to meet the MDGs.  Furthermore it was stated
that, there is a need for reform of multilateral institutions such as the
United Nations and the World Trade Organisation (WTO) to ensure trade
fairness.  The report was subsequently adopted.



Debate on HIV and Aids


The debate on HIV and Aids was preceded by an audiovisual presentation by
members of European Parliamentarians for Africa (AWEPA). The presentation
highlighted the Cape Town Declaration, which was established in 2004.
However, AWEPA indicated that making declarations is not enough and that
these should be implemented.


Child-headed households  and  children  orphaned  by  AIDS  are  increasing,
particularly in  sub-Saharan  Africa.   The  Pan-African  Parliament  should
assume a leading role in  the  combating  of  HIVand  AIDS.   Sensitisation,
education and the introduction of HIV and AIDS in the educational system  is
important. Further, since war increases the incidence of HIV and AIDS  peace
in Africa would reduce the incidence of the disease.

It is important to consider the different dimensions of HIV and AIDS  -  the
health,  social,  human  resources,  developmental,   human   security   and
political aspects. HIV/AIDS should therefore be  approached  from  a  multi-
sectoral point of view. It is also important  to  avoid  fragmentation  when
dealing with AIDS orphans.

It is important to focus on behavioral change and to develop  a  continental
plan to fight HIV and AIDS.

The   President   of   the   Pan-African   Parliament   informed    European
Parliamentarians for Africa (AWEPA) that the Pan-African Parliament has  set
up a trust fund specifically to mobilise funds to deal with  such  important
continental issues. The House moved that the recommendations be adopted.

Debate on Reform of the United Nations

The debate on the Reform of the United Nations focused mostly on the  reform
of the United Nations Security Council as  this  is  the  most  far-reaching
reform  owing  to  the  important  role  that  it   has   on   international
peacekeeping and security.

The Committee recommended that:

          • Africa demands two permanent seats with veto rights and four non-
            permanent seats on the Security Council.
         •  The  Pan-African  Parliament   to   lobby   the   international
           parliamentary institutions with a view to securing  support  for
           Africa's demands.
          •  The  Pan-African  Parliament,  in  consultation  with   similar
            institutions, take the necessary action to ensure  that  balance
            is restored in  the  voting  procedures  of  the  Bretton  Woods
            institutions where eighty percent  of  the  members  carry  only
            thirty percent of the votes.


The report was adopted.


6.  Committee Work Plans and Priorities

6.1 The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline

SA Representative:  Hon. M.J. Mahlangu

Priorities:

1. Code of Conduct for Members of the Pan-African Parliament.
2. Consideration of the Draft Proposal on Guidelines for Oversight and
   accountability for the Pan-African Parliament

Both agenda items were presented by the Hon. M.J. Mahlangu (South Africa).
The following issues were considered in respect of the draft proposal on
Guidelines for Oversight and Accountability for the Pan-African Parliament:


 • The Pan-African Parliament must hold a workshop to discuss its  oversight
   powers.
 • The Pan-African Parliament must provide oversight over the African  Union
   Commission.
 • Scrutiny of the Treaty Establishing the African Union, the  Protocol  and
   the Rules of the Pan-African Parliament, to unpack the  oversight  powers
   of the Pan-African Parliament.
 • Separation of the Executive Authority from the Legislative  Authority  is
   necessary to enable meaningful oversight.
 • An in depth study on how similar continental parliamentary  organisations
   conduct oversight.
 • Establishment of a Committee dealing specifically with oversight matters.
 • Analyses of Rule  73(3)  and  Rule  74(1)  as  the  starting  points  for
   oversight functions of the Pan-African Parliament.
 • Determining the oversight role of the  Pan-African  Parliament  vis-à-vis
   other organs of the African Union.
 • Establishing  how  oversight  on  New  Economic  Partnership  for  Africa
   Development (NEPAD) could be conducted.
 • The committee resolved that the Hon. M.J. Mahlangu would table a  follow-
   up report on Oversight  and  Accountability,  which  takes  into  account
   issues raised above.

Code of Conduct for Members of the Pan-African Parliament

After consideration of draft Code of Conduct for Members of the  Pan-African
Parliament, the committee resolved that the Code would be presented  to  the
House during the fourth Session of the Pan-African Parliament for  adoption.


6.2   Committee on Co-operation, International Relations and
        Conflict Resolution

SA Representative:  Hon. B. Mbete

Priorities:
           •  Organisation  of  a  seminar  with  the  aim  of  keeping  the
             Committees’ members up to date.  Resource mobilisation on going
             – Period starting from February until March 2005.
           • Ten days visit for 2 or 3  committee  members  to  the  African
             Union Headquarters  to  collect  information  on  conflicts  in
             Africa and their resolution  as  well  as  information  on  co-
             operation.  Period starting from May 2005 until June 2005.
           • Assigning 2 or 3 members to:
               1. Cote d’Ivoire – 15 days
               2. Democratic Republic of Congo – 15 days
               3. Togo – 15 days
Aim: Information gathering with the view to making  recommendations  on  the
conflicts in these countries.  Period starting from April until May 2005.
    • Participation of 1 or 2 members in high-level research  on  issues  of
      conflict resolutions
    • Observation of elections on the continent by 1 or 2 members  who  will
      be appointed according to the  area  and  in  collaboration  with  the
      Regional Parliamentary Caucuses.


6.3 The Committee on Trade, Customs and Immigration Matters

SA Representative:  Hon. F. Hajaig

Priorities:

    1. Fact finding visit to the commissioners of Trade and  Industry,  and
       Social Affairs of the African Union commission to get status reports
       on their activities with particular reference to trade  regulations,
       tariff laws, immigration rules, regulations and laws.
    2. Invite NEPAD secretariat two days prior to the plenary to brief  the
       committee on their programmes and Strategy  on  tariff  laws,  trade
       customs and immigration.
    3. Visit different economic sub-groupings:  Southern Africa  Developing
       Communities  (SADC),  Economic  Community  of  West  African  States
       (ECOWAS), Common Market for Eastern and  Southern  Africa  (COMESA),
       etc. with a view to discussing sub-groupings interrelationships  and
       coordination in areas of the Technical Credit Insurance  Consultants
       (TCIC) mandate.
    4. Workshop with representative of  the  World  Trade  Organisation  to
       discuss Doha round and agriculture subsidies and non-trade barriers.

6.4 The Committee on Transport, Industry, Communications,
      Energy, Science and Technology

SA Representative:  Hon. S. Vos

Priorities:
      1.  Assessing,  through  meetings,  the  situation  in  each  area  of
         jurisdiction of the Committee.
      2. Making an inventory of all Conventions, Agreements,  Protocols  and
         Treaties governing the various domains.
      3. Study New Economic Partnership  for  Africa  Development  (NEPAD’s)
         programmes and Projects Relevant to the Committee’s Activities.


6.5 The Committee on Justice and Human Rights

SA Representative:  Hon. Adv. Z.L. Madasa

Priorities:

1. Regional workshops for members of the Committee and  other  stakeholders
   and the broad objectives  of  the  workshops  have  been  identified  as
   follows:

      • Capacity-building for all members of the Committee on  their  roles
        and functions in relation to the overall mandate of the Committee.
      • The Committee, will at the same time, be studying and getting first
        hand information on human matters of various regions.
      • Workshop should be held outside the Republic of South to enable the
        Committee to market and advocate its activities to  various  member
        states.
      • The Committee further proposes that the first  workshop  should  be
        held in West Africa and if possible, the Bureau should assist  with
        funding in this regard.

2.  Creation of a database for the Committee

The creation of a database  for  the  Committee  should  be  linked  to  the
process of harmonising laws of member states.  The gathering of  information
on Treaties, Protocols and Conventions  relating  to  Human  Rights  issues.
The Committee should look at the possibility of engaging consultants in  the
creation  of  a  database  and  the  database  should  take   into   account
legislative  information  for  each  country  with  emphasis  on  democratic
principles.

3.  Establishment of a desk on Human Rights

The Committee proposes that the Bureau establishes a desk on human rights.

7. RECOMMENDATIONS

1.  Pan African Parliament Peace Mission to Darfur  (PAP-Rec. 001/05)

The Pan-African Parliament recommends that the African Union should ensure:
   I. The political negotiations in Abuja which are designed to establish  a
      democratic culture in Darfur that can guarantee the population a  fair
      share of power and resources.  This task  should  be  accelerated  and
      time bound;
  II. The Naivasha Model is adopted to conclude the  negotiation  so  as  to
      ensure complementarity in implementation of the mechanism for  sharing
      power and resources in the Sudan;
 III. That the terms of the agreement to incorporate  periodic  consultation
      with all stake holders in the Sudanese society to ensure that no group
      is excluded or marginalised in the sharing of power and resources;
  IV. That immediate steps are taken to influence the Sudanese government to
      find ways and means of quantifying and qualifying the losses caused by
      the war and launching a Trust Fund with the  support  of  the  African
      Union and the  international  community  to  finance  a  comprehensive
      resettlement programme for refugees and displaced persons;
   V. That the mandate of the African Union Mission is enhanced  to  include
      protection of the population in Darfur;
  VI. That AMIS administrative structures are developed  in  line  with  the
      proposals in the Pan-African Parliament  Report  on  the  fact-finding
      Mission to Darfur;
 VII. That the Joint Commission mentioned in  the  Humanitarian  Cease  Fire
      Agreement or a similar institution be established to  receive  reports
      and address queries of violations.
VIII. That the Joint Commission establishes a close  relationship  with  the
      African Commission on Human and People’s Rights to review  the  course
      of action that should be taken to address allegations of violations of
      human and people’s rights, war  crimes,  genocide  or  crimes  against
      humanity;
  IX. That particular emphasis is given to the disarming  of  groups,  which
      are not party to the Cease Fire Agreement, especially  the  JanJaweed,
      so as to bring the whole population of Darfur on  board  to  negotiate
      for peace under a climate of democracy and human rights.
   X. That the  Peace  and  Security  Council  of  the  Union  begin  urgent
      consultation   with   the   UN   Security   Council   to    facilitate
      complementarity in the approaches to promoting a final  settlement  of
      the  Darfur  crisis.   This  should  be  done  in  order   to   foster
      dispensation of  justice  at  the  right  time  and  under  the  right
      circumstances to avert any reversal of the gains made in resolving the
      crisis.

2. World Summit on Information Society (PAP – Rec. 002/05)


The Pan-African Parliament recommends that member Parliaments contribute  to
the success of  the  Summit  by  sending  high-powered  delegations  to  the
Summit.

3. The African Land Title System (PAP-Rec. 003/05)

The  Pan-African  Parliament  hereby  recommends  that  the  African   Union
investigate the viability of harmonising the  establishment  of  an  African
Land Title System.

4.  The Creation of an African Phytogenetic Resource Bank (PAP-Rec. 004/05)


 • The Pan- African Parliament requests the African Union to create  a  bank
   for the storage of the phytogenetic resources of  the  continent  with  a
   view to preserving vegetable species and  reconstituting  the  vegetation
   cover in the event of major ecological disasters.

 • Urges the African Union to promote agronomic research for the improvement
   of vegetable species and to create seed banks based on improved species.

5.  Communications  and  Information  Infrastructure  in  Africa   (PAP-Rec.
    005/05)

The  Pan-African  Parliament  recommends  to  the  African  Union  that  the
establishment of a new database in  the  fields  of  telecommunications  and
transport be considered within  the  New  Economic  Partnership  for  Africa
Development (NEPAD) framework and base on:

    • Private and Public Partnerships
    • Use of digital transmission technologies
    • Support for planning and management of spectrum frequencies
    • Qualitative support for selected projects such as the manufacture of
      computers and telecommunications facilities

Recommends further to the African Union that the important projects within
the NEPAD medium term framework be brought forward in order to allow the
creation of a reliable and efficient African telecommunications and
transport system able to speed up the physical integration of Africa,
eliminate problems relating to distance, facilitate mobility, promote
exchange and legitimately support the lasting development of Africa.


6.  The  Request  directed  to  States  who  have  not  yet   ratified   the
Constitutive Act of the Union and its Protocol (PAP-Rec.006/05)

The Pan-African Parliament urgently appeals to all the African States that
have not yet ratified the Constitutive Act of the African Union and above
all to those who are members of the Pan-African Parliaments to do so as
soon as possible.


7. Encouraging Pan-African Investment and Financing  Institutions  to  Focus
on Africa’s Rural Economy (PAP-Rec.007/05)

The Pan-African Parliament therefore recommends that the African  Union,  in
conjunction with the Private Sector, Pan-African  Investment  and  Financing
institutions,  encourages  new  and  existing   investment   and   financing
institutions to focus on the continent’s rural economies.

8. RESOLUTIONS

1. Signing of Adherence to  the  African  Peer  Review  Mechanism  (PAP-Res.
001/05)

Resolve to reiterate its Recommendation REC  002/04  on  the  importance  of
signing  of  the  African  Peer  Review  Mechanism  (APRM)  by  States   and
Governments as a  demonstration  of  their  commitment  to  development  the
principles of democracy and good governance, Rule of  Law  and  respect  for
human rights.

2.  Resolution on the Development of a Continental  Code  of  Conduct  (PAP-
Res.002/05)

Resolves:
        4. That the African Union develops a Continental Code of Conduct on
           the  Use  and  Exploitation  of  the  Natural  Resources  to  be
           implemented,  alongside  instruments  such  as  the  Environment
           Benefit Index (EBI), by Member  States  through  legislation  in
           their respective national territories;


        5. That each Member State annually reports to the African Union its
           adherence to the said Code of Conduct; and

        6. That the African Union designs continental policy programmes for
           environmental  protection  and  efficient  utilisation  of   the
           natural resources for adoption by  Member  States  and  Regional
           Economic communities.

3.  Appreciation of the Intervention of the President of the  African  Union
in the Togo Crisis (PAP Res-003/05)

The Pan-African Parliament commends H.E. President  Olusegun  Obasanjo,  the
President of the African Union, for his courageous and principled action.

4. Appreciation of the Work of Mr. Kofi Annan, The Secretary General to  the
United Nations (PAP-Res.004/05)

The Pan-African Parliament expresses its support  for  Mr.  Kofi  Annan,  as
Secretary General of the UN, and wishes him success  throughout  his  tenure
of office at the United Nations.

5.  Resolution Relating to the Presidential Elections in Togo  on  24  April
2005 (PAP-Res. 005/05)

The Pan-African Parliament therefore  calls  upon  the  government  and  the
Togolese people to ensure the  calm  and  transparent  organisation  of  the
presidential elections on 24 April 2005.

6.  Establishment of Pan African Investment and Financing  Institutions  for
African’s Rural Economy (PAP-Res. 002/05)

Resolves that  the  African  Union  establishes,  in  conjunction  with  the
Private Sector, Pan African Investment and Financing  institutions  for  the
continent’s Rural Economy.

7. Designing Continental Policy Programmes for Environmental Protection  and
Efficient Utilisation of Natural Resource  (PAP-Res. 004/05)

The  African  Union  should  design  Continental   Policy   Programmes   for
environmental protection and efficient utilisation of the natural  resources
for adoption by Member States and Regional Economic Communities.

8.  Appreciation to H.E.  Olusegun  Obasanjo,  Chairperson  of  the  African
Union, for his Actions on the Togo Crisis (PAP-Res.005/05)

Commend, therefore, the African Union Chairperson  for  his  courageous  and
principled actions.
9.  Dispatch of a PAP Mission to Cote D’Ivoire at the Beginning of May  2005
(PAP-Res.009/05)

Expressing its satisfaction at the avant-garde role and  the  commitment  of
the African Union in establishing peace and security in Africa:

    • Urgently calls upon the African Union to make every effort possible to
      resolve all the conflicts in Africa, especially in Cote d’Ivoire.
    • Urgently calls upon all the  parties  involved  in  conflict  in  Cote
      d’Ivoire to cooperate with the African Union and the peace brokers  in
      Cote d’Ivoire.
    • Exhorts the warring parties to strictly observe the peace agreement.
    • Decides on the dispatch of a Pan-African Parliament Peace mission from
      the Pan-African Parliament to  Cote  d’Ivoire  in  order  to  make  an
      assessment on the ground and to submit a  report  to  the  Pan-African
      Parliament.


10. Dispatch of a PAP Peace Mission to  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
During the First Fortnight of May 2005  (PAP-Res.10/05)

The Pan African Parliament, expressing its satisfaction at  the  avant-garde
role and the commitment of the  African  Union  in  establishing  peace  and
security in Africa:

        ▪ Urgently calls  upon  the  African  Union  to  make  every  effort
          possible to resolve all the conflicts in Africa, especially in the
          Democratic Republic of Congo.
        ▪ Urgently calls upon  all  the  parties  involved  in  conflict  to
          cooperate with the African Union and  the  peace  brokers  in  the
          Democratic Republic of Congo.
        ▪  Exhorts  the  warring  parties  to  strictly  observe  the  peace
          agreement.

Decides on the dispatch of a Pan-African Parliament peace mission  from  the
Pan-African Parliament to the Democratic Republic of Congo in order to  make
an assessment and to submit a report to the Pan-African Parliament.

11. Congratulating H.E. Thabo Mbeki, President  of  the  Republic  of  South
Africa, on His Success in Achieving a Peace Agreement  Between  the  Warring
Parties in Cote D’Ivoire  (PAP-Res.008/05)

The Pan-African Parliament resolves to convey our heartiest  congratulations
to H.E President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa on his successful mediation  of
the conflict in Cote d’Ivoire  and  his  personal  commitment  to  peace  in
Africa.  The Pan-African  Parliament  commends  him  for  his  distinguished
career initiatives in the name of the people of the United Nations.


9.  Conclusion / Way forward


The South African delegation was active in all sessions of  the  Pan-African
Parliament and the delegation is fully supportive  of  all  developments  of
the Parliament.  In particular, the Speaker highlighted  the  importance  of
strengthening  Committees  in  her  solidarity  speech.   This  has  been  a
priority as Committees have developed their work plans and  priorities.   In
addition, some Committees have  been  able  to  produce  reports  that  were
debated in the plenary and were  extremely  beneficial  to  the  Pan-African
Parliament.

The delegation also noted a need to highlight  the  major  achievements  and
gains that were made during  the  Pan-African  Parliament’s  second  session
when  it  adopted  the  rules  of  procedure  to  regularise  the   internal
functioning of the parliament.   These  rules  of  procedure  were  modelled
along the lines of the institution’s Constitutive Act.  At the  end  of  the
second  session  last  year,  2004,  the  Pan-African  Parliament  passed  a
resolution to send  a  mission  to  Darfur  to  establish  facts  about  the
conflict in that region and also make recommendations, which  will  be  sent
to African Union (AU) head of state and governments in  2005.   This  was  a
major step, which showed  Africa’s  readiness  to  attend  to  its  problems
without relying on external powers to do so on its behalf.   The  report  on
the conflict in Darfur was tabled during the third Pan-African  Parliament’s
third session by the Committee which was tasked to do so which  consists  of
Advocate Z. Madasa.

The Pan-African Parliament’s third sitting took another brave  step  towards
addressing the issue of land redistribution  in  Africa,  which  traces  its
background  to  the  wars  of  dispossession  of   the   Africans   by   the
colonialists.  The Pan-African Parliament’s calls for the  establishment  of
the African Land Title System that will go a  long  way  towards  addressing
problems related to land dispossession on the  continent.   The  institution
also took cognisance of the fact that the continent  has  become  a  dumping
ground for all sorts of foodstuffs by the West’s  wealthy  nations.   In  an
attempt to alleviate this burden, it passed  a  resolution  calling  on  the
African Union to create a data bank  for  the  storage  of  the  continent’s
phytogenetic  resources.   This  aims  to   preserve   plant   species   and
reconstitute  the  vegetation  cover  in  the  event  of  major   ecological
disasters, and to promote agronomic research for the  improvement  of  plant
species as well as create seed data banks based on improved species.

The third session also paved the  way  for  tackling  one  of  the  critical
issues that prevents the continent from effectively  becoming  part  of  the
global community and crossing the digital divide,  the  improvement  of  its
telecommunications and information  technology  as  well  as  its  transport
systems.  To achieve this, the Pan-African Parliament  has  recommended  the
establishment of a new database  in  the  telecommunications  and  transport
fields within the NEPAD framework.  This is  to  be  based  on  private  and
public partnerships, with the use of digital transmission technologies,  the
support  for  planning  and  management  of  spectrum  frequencies  and  the
qualitative support for selected projects.  This includes the  manufacturing
of computers and telecommunications facilities, which will make out the  key
components of NEPAD’s framework for the  continent.   It  is  also  becoming
clear  that  the  Pan-African  Parliament’s  advisory  role   will   finally
transform into effective oversight powers when its current role is  reviewed
after the first five years of its existence.  The House have agreed  on  the
Fourth session to be held in September/October  2005  at  Gallagher  Estate,
Midrand.



List of Abbreviations


AU          African Union
HE          His/Her Excellency
NEPAD New Economic Partnership for Africa’s Development
PAP         Pan-African Parliament
SADC  Southern African Development Community
CPA         Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
UNICEF      United Nations Children’s Fund
PACE        The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
ECOWAS      Economic Community of West African States
AWEPA European Parliamentarians for Africa
UNDESA      United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
COMESA      Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
TCIC        Technical Credit Insurance Consultants


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
    Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons on their
    Strategic Planning Workshop, dated 24 June 2005:



    The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
    Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons having held a Strategic
    Planning Workshop from 4-5 March 2005 in Gordons Bay, reports as
    follows:





                                    Index


      BACKGOUND
      OBJECTIVE
      2.1   The Mandate of the Committee
      3.    SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS
      Context
      Presentation by Key Partners
      Presentation by Dr E Kornegay, Chief Director – Programmes: Office of
           the Rights of a Child (ORC)
      The roles and Responsibilities of the Chief Directorate: Programmes
      The Roles and Responsibilities of the National Framework for the
           Advancement and Coordination of Children’s Rights Delivery in
           South Africa and the Restructuring Process
      Pillars of restructuring
      Key Function of the ORC, Accounting Mechanisms and Beneficiaries of
           the Revised Children” Framework
      Proposed Solutions
      Presentation by Ms S Matsepula, Director: Office of the Status of
           Disabled Persons (OSDP)
      Achievements to Date, Definition of Disability, OSDP Budget
      Challenges
      Issues for Consideration
      Presentation by Mr J Mbalula, Chairperson: National Youth Commission
           (NYC)
      Key Focus Areas
      Key Current Issue
      Challenges and Improvements
      Issues for Consideration
      Presentation by Hon Mr GQM Doidge, M P, House Chairperson: Committees
           National Assembly
      Possible Areas of Intervention
      The Strategic Planning Process
      Break Away Group Discussion
      Core Competencies for the Committee
      Developing the Vision
      The Committee’s Mission
      The Strategic Objective of the Committee
      Youth
      Children
      Disabled Persons
      Key Issues highlighted by Groups
      Operating Principles
      Support
      Method of Work
      Meetings and Scheduling of Meetings
      Committee Views
      RECOMMENDATIONS
      CONCLUSION
      APPENDAGES

1.    BACKGROUND

The Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and
Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons (hereinafter referred to as
the Committee) agreed in its meeting that was held on 10 November 2004 to
hold a workshop to strategize and discuss issues that pertain to the smooth
running of the Committee, to revisit its mandate, to discuss outstanding
matters of concern and clarity and to draw a comprehensive programme for
2005 – 2006.

The Committee comprises mainly new members and the aim of this workshop  was
to familiarize members with the functions and responsibilities of the  three
sectors that the Committee oversees namely the offices in the Presidency  of
the Rights of a Child (ORC), the National Youth  Commission  (NYC)  and  the
Status of Disabled Persons (OSDP).   It is the view of  the  Committee  that
it cannot function efficiently and effectively if  it  does  not  align  its
programme with the above-mentioned sectors.

As a Joint Committee  it  consists  of  members  of  both  Houses  i.e.  the
National Assembly (NA) and the National Council of  Provinces  (NCOP)  which
have  different  programmes.  Consequently,  the  Committee  has  difficulty
obtaining a quorum and meetings have had to be postponed due to few  members
attending because of clashes with other Committees.

The cycle of the NCOP has  to  be  taken  into  cognizance  when  scheduling
meetings of the Committee, if one meeting of the  Committee  is  rescheduled
for any reason the Committee has to wait a week or two for it to be able  to
meet again and this has been very problematic.  This  is  one  of  the  main
issues that the Committee  wishes  to  address,  as  the  inability  of  the
Committee to meet and discuss matters of national importance  pertaining  to
its work impacts negatively on the Committee and the sectors over  which  it
must exercise oversight.

2.    OBJECTIVE

The main objective of the Committee is to  develop  a  programme  that  will
help it to organise and coordinate its work in a manner that will enable  it
to function to the best of its ability in carrying  out  its  oversight  and
monitoring role. The programme will lead to a Committee Business  Plan  that
will ensure that expenditure  of  the  Committee  supports  the  key  policy
priorities and that mechanisms are in place to monitor the  achievements  of
targets and reporting to Parliament.

The workshop was also aimed at assisting the  Committee  to  understand  the
work of the three sectors and to align its  programme  accordingly.  Members
of the Committee  also  discussed  the  issue  of  stakeholders  within  and
outside government with the view of having a database that would  help  them
to do a follow up on all  issues  affecting  Children,  Youth  and  Disabled
Persons.


2.1   The Mandate of the Committee


The Committee is required to monitor and evaluate progress  with  regard  to
the improvement in the quality of life and status  of  Children,  Youth  and
Disabled Persons  in  South  Africa.  This  is  to  be  done  with  specific
reference to the Government‘s  commitments  in  respect  of  any  applicable
international instruments and to duties and responsibilities in  respect  of
any legislation.


The Committee is empowered to make recommendations to both or either of  the
Houses, or any joint or House Committee on any matter within  its  functions
as described in the Joint Rule 132 (d). The Committee may also  be  required
to perform any other related task assigned  to  it  by  resolution  of  both
Houses such as making  recommendations  for  appointments  to  the  National
Youth Commission. The  Committee  as  a  forum  of  national  Parliament  is
expected to  focus  its  role  on  the  national  sphere  of  government  in
accordance   with   the   principles   of   cooperative    governance    and
intergovernmental relations as outlined in Chapter 3  of  the  Constitution.
The Committee can on its own initiative also scan departmental  reports  and
other papers tabled.


In monitoring  progress,  it  will  also  engage  with  departments  on  the
implementation of relevant provisions when bills are enacted. In  exercising
its functions, the Committee could be expected to engage on a regular  basis
with the relevant office in the Presidency, ORC,  NYC  and  OSDP  which  are
tasked with the improvement of quality  of  life  and  status  of  Children,
Youth and Disabled Persons and also specifically at national level.


3.    SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS

The delegation comprised the following members and staff:

National Assembly:

ANC:   Ms P Bhengu, Mr I D Mogase, Mr M  I  Moss,  Ms  W  Newhoudt-  Druchen
(Chairperson), Mr L P M Nzimande, Ms T V Tobias; DA: Ms H Weber; IFP:  Mr  B
W Dhlamini; UDM: Ms N Mdaka.

National Council of Provinces:

ANC:  Mr D D Gamede (Deputy Chairperson), Mr T S Setona.

House Chairperson: Committees (NA)

Mr G Q M Doidge

Staff members:

Ms  L  S  Matshikiza  (Committee  Secretary);  Ms   E   May   (Parliamentary
Researcher); Mr F Holliday (Committee Assistant).

Apologies

ANC: Mr M S Sibiya

The following officials were also in attendance:

Dr E Kornegay, Chief Director: Office of the Rights of a Child (ORC)
Mr L Mboyi, Chief Executive Officer: National Youth Commission (NYC)
Mr J Mbalula, Chairperson: NYC
Ms S Matsepula, Director: Office of the Status of Disabled Persons



3.1   Context


The Committee consists of 13 Assembly Members and 9 NCOP Members.  There  is
joint chairing by a  Chair  elected  from  the  National  Assembly  (Ms.  W.
Newhoudt-Druchen)  and  the  Deputy  Chair  from  the  National  Council  of
Provinces (Mr D. D. Gamede). Even though the NCOP  has  9  Members  on  this
Committee, they do not represent Provinces, and they are  not  appointed  as
party representatives either.


As mentioned on page 1 of this  report,  the  Committee  has  experienced  a
number of problems in setting itself up  as  a  committee  and  in  enabling
itself to implement its mandate. The fact that it is  a  committee  covering
three more or less separate categories of persons in society, suggest a  sub
group structure  to  assist  the  Committee  in  dealing  with  these  three
categories adequately. The nature of  its  work  is  crosscutting  and  this
means that issues relating to  youth,  children  and  disabled  persons  are
often neglected in lieu of clearly defined operationally linked areas.




There is a weakness in scale as the scope of the work  to  be  addressed  is
complex and large. For instance,  the  Committee  has  to  ensure  that  all
legislation, with an emphasis on, or lack of  emphasis  on  Youth,  Children
and the Disabled, requires scrutiny. Policy on Youth, Children and  Disabled
Persons, is often emerging and thus  there  is  a  lack  of  a  consolidated
framework  within  which  to  couch  policy.  There  is  a  clear  lack   of
prioritization, where budget allocation and programme  focus  is  concerned.
For instance, a line department such as Housing should  have  an  integrated
housing plan, which takes into account quality of life and equality of  life
issues for Youth, Children and Disabled Persons.


At the same time, the Committee itself  has  been  unable  to  leverage  key
partners such as the NYC, ORC and the OSD. The strategic placement of  these
Offices should enable the Committee to ensure effective change  with  regard
to its target groups.


The main challenges facing the Committee at present are:


      • Understanding the mandate and functioning of the Committee;
      • Scheduling of Committee meetings: It is difficult to ensure a
        quorum at Committee meetings as a result of clashing memberships of
        Committees;
      • Developing a clear programme to guide the work of the Committee;
      • Developing a clear functioning structure for the Committee;
      • Utilising appropriate tools to exercise the  oversight  mandate  of
        the Committee; and
      • Developing effective support mechanisms to facilitate the  work  of
        the Committee.

In view of these challenges, the Committee identified the need  for  Members
of the Committee to receive training and  to  define  the  needs,  role  and
vision of the Committee that would enable  it  to  compile  a  comprehensive
programme for 2005 and beyond. The  Committee  considered  it  important  to
engage with representatives from the children, youth and disability  sectors
to gain insight into the needs of these agencies and to align its  programme
with theirs. Thus, the stated objectives of the workshop were to:


      • Review the Mission and Vision of the Committee;
      • Define the needs of the Committee  to  enable  it  to  execute  its
        mandate effectively;
      • Gain insight into the  challenges  and  priority  areas  of  the  3
        agencies (namely, the ORC, NYC,  OSDP),  with  a  view  to  forming
        strategic partnerships; and
      • Develop the Committee’s Programme for 2005 and beyond
      • The Programme will lead to a  Committee  Business  Plan  that  will
        ensure  that  expenditure  of  the  Committee  supports   its   key
        priorities  and  that  mechanisms  are  in  place  to  monitor  the
        achievements of targets and reporting to Parliament.



3.2   Presentation by Partners



The workshop was conducted by way of presentations by  representatives  from
the 3 Programmes relating to children, youth and  disabled  persons  in  the
Presidency, as well as the House Chairperson of Committees in  the  National
Assembly. These were  followed  by  breakaway  commissions  to  discuss  the
following issues relating to the mission of the Committee:


      • The areas of work to be prioritised in its programme.
      • Its structure.
      • The tools that will be applied.
                     • Stakeholders to be partnered in the execution of  its
                       mandate, and specific Departments to be  targeted  in
                       its oversight work.




3.3   Presentation by Dr E Kornegay, Chief Director: Office of the Rights
       of a Child



The presentation focused on two broad aspects, i.e. the roles and
responsibilities of the Chief Directorate: Programmes in the Presidency and
the National Framework for the Advancement and Coordination of Children’s
Rights Delivery in South Africa.



3.4   The Roles and Responsibilities of the Chief Directorate: Programmes



The Chief Directorate: Programmes oversees the work of the ORC, Office of
the Status of Women (OSW) and OSDP in the Presidency. Its mission is to
provide effective leadership and support to these Programmes. In turn, the
Programmes are required to provide effective coordination to advance
Government’s strategies with regard to children, women, and people with
disabilities.



Although the individual Programmes perform their own specific functions,
there are some general functions that have to be performed by all three
Programmes. These are:



      Providing a coordination framework;
      Analyzing and developing policy;
      Mainstreaming  Government  policy  to  infuse  women,  children’s  and
        disability perspective into the  work  of  the  5  Director-General
        Clusters. The responsibility for  mainstreaming  women,  children’s
        and disabled considerations into the work of the 5 Director-General
        Clusters  has  been  divided  between  the  Programmes,  with  each
        Programme targeting a particular cluster/s;
      Capacity building;
      Advocacy;
      Liaising   and   networking   with   civil   society,    international
        organisations and Government; and
      Monitoring and evaluation.


The Chief Directorate: Programmes reported that it is in the process of
finalising the “10 Year Review”, which examines Government’s performance
with regard to gender, children and people with disability. This report
will cover the ORC’s achievements, challenges and the way forward. It will
be made available to the Committee soon after its launch. It was also
reported that the mainstreaming of children’s rights is had been achieved
and the equality of access to opportunities is ongoing.



3.5   The Roles and Responsibilities of the National Framework   for the
       Advancement and Coordination of Children’s Rights Delivery in South
       Africa and the Restructuring Process



This part of the presentation focused on the restructuring of the National
Framework for the Advancement and Coordination of Children’s Rights
Delivery in South Africa. In terms of the current Framework, the Programmes
responsible for the advancement and coordination of children’s rights
delivery by Government are the ORC and the National Programme of Action
Steering Committee (NPASC). A number of challenges faced by these
Programmes necessitated the restructuring of the Framework to establish a
holistic and coherent one to advance and coordinate children’s rights
delivery. These challenges include structural tension between the ORC and
the NPASC.



The NPASC has a broad coordination mandate, but has no power of
enforcement. It thus cannot compel Departments to act. The ORC derives its
mandate from International Instruments instead of the Constitution. Its
focus was thus on the implementation of international instruments
(externally), instead of focusing internally on the implementation of
national policy in compliance with international instruments. The ORC was
not sufficiently empowered to monitor children’s issues, as this was
primarily done by the NPASC. The work of the ORC was limited to the Social
and Criminal Justice Clusters, with the emphasis on welfare and protection.
There was thus a need to expand its mandate to include the Economic
Cluster. It was difficult for the ORC and the NPASC to provide substantive
leadership in a transforming society; and civil society participation was
inadequate to make sufficient input.



The basic assumptions underlying the restructuring process are that the new
Framework will:



      • Be a high  level  system  that  will  drive  the  mainstreaming  of
        children’s rights into policies, programmes and funding;
      • Clarify the roles and responsibilities of component parts;
      • Address and facilitate the implementation of national priorities;
      • Provide clear guidelines of communication with Government; and
      • Provide substantive leadership on children’s rights.


3.6   The Pillars of Restructuring



Whereas the current Framework was based on 3 pillars (i.e. Government,
Parliament and Civil Society, the restructuring model is based on 4
pillars, namely:



      • Government: This includes the Presidency, National Advisory Council
        on Child’s Rights; Provincial Advisory Councils on  the  Rights  of
        the Child,  Children’s  Rights  focal  points  in  Departments  and
        Provincial Offices on the  Rights  of  the  Child  located  in  the
        Premiers’ Offices and Local Government  Focal  points  and  Child‘s
        Rights Advisory Committees.



      •  Parliament:  This  includes  the   Joint   Monitoring   Committee,
        Parliamentary Committees, Cabinet Clusters and Ministers.



      •  Civil  Society:   This   includes   national   NGOs,   Faith-based
        organisations, Academic institutions; Student Bodies;  Professional
        Associations; Advisory Coalition of Traditional Leaders;  CBOs  and
        the South African Local Government Association (SALGA).



      • Independent bodies: This includes the Constitutional  Court;  other
        Courts; Public Services Commission, Youth Commission; South African
        Human Rights Commission (SAHRC); South African Law  Commission  and
        Public Protector



However, it is important to note that the Programmes only provide
frameworks for the advancement and coordination of children’s rights, while
it is the responsibility of specific Director-General Clusters to develop
programmes to give effect to the frameworks.



3.7   Key functions of the ORC; Accounting Mechanisms and beneficiaries of
       the Revised Children’s Rights Framework (CRF)



The main function of the ORC is the mainstreaming of Children” s rights to
ensure that all matters pertaining to children to the needs of children are
adequately addressed, capacity building for children is crucial to enable
them to partake fully in the economy of the country, advocacy in government
structures to create awareness about children, delivery; policy work;
performance coordination by the various role-players to ensure all of the
above and monitoring and evaluation to ensure compliance to Government
strategy and policies.



The ORC nationally is the administrative body providing support and reports
to the Minister, the ORC in the Province reports to the Premier. The
beneficiaries of the revised CRF are children, families and communities;
all spheres of Government, all component parts of the National Framework;
the National Advisory Council on Child‘s Rights; Specialists in Child‘s
Rights field and ORC.



3.8   Proposed Solutions



The following issues were raised for consideration during the discussion
following the presentation:



It is important that the restructuring of the ORC filters down to
provincial level to ensure synergy between national and Provincial
Programmes. It is imperative to align the work of the ORC with the National
Priorities as enunciated by the President. In evaluating the performance of
Departments, the Constitution (section 28) provides the basis against which
performance can be assessed. At the very least, Departments’ policies and
plans of action should be in line with the Constitution. There is a need to
devise a Technical Working Committee to speed up delivery. The Committee
has to confer with different Chief Directorates in the Presidency to get a
better understanding of their work and priorities. There is a collective
document that is written by government departments and the NGO which
provides an analysis of the current situation in these sectors. A report on
the National Plan of Action will be forwarded to the secretariat for
circulation to all Members of the Committee. The United Nation’s Child
Report will also be made available to the Committee. The working
relationship between the provincial office local government and the
national office should be strengthened in accordance with the restructuring
process.



3.9   Presentation by Ms. S. Matsepula, Director: Office on  the  Status  of
       Disabled Persons (OSDP)

Ms Matsepula explained that the vision  of  the  OSDP  is  the  belief  that
people with disabilities  are  people  first  and  then  disability  follows
thereafter. South  Africa  is  a  democratic  country,  which  embraces  the
concept of inclusion and integration  to  enable  disabled  people  to  have
equal and full participation at all levels of society


The mission of the OSDP is to advance the equality of  disabled  persons  in
South African society by coordinating the tasks of mainstreaming  disability
issues  in  all  sectors  of  society,  and  facilitating  the  process   of
government departments meeting their constitutional  responsibility  towards
disabled persons. It is the office’s responsibility to ensure that  in  each
line  function  concrete  steps  are  taken  to  ensure  that  people   with
disabilities  are  able  to  access  the   same   fundamental   rights   and
responsibilities as any other people.  The  issues  of  disability  must  be
included and integrated in all  government  development  strategies,  plans,
programmes and projects. To this end, the functions of the OSDP are to:

      • Mainstream disability through the Cluster process;
      • Facilitate,  coordinate  and  monitor  the  implementation  of  the
        Integrated National Disability Strategy;
      • Provide  an  advisory  service  to  national  and  provincial  line
        functions for the inclusion and integration of disability into  all
        policies and programmes; and
      • Ensure wide public education, as well as capacity building for both
        the disability movement and Departments.

The OSDP has identified key priority areas on which it will focus in line
with Government’s priorities as identified at the Government Lekgotla.
These are:

      • Developing policy, to enable  Departments  to  develop  disability-
        inclusive policies;
      •  Mainstreaming  disability  issues  through  the   Director-General
        Cluster process;
      • Developing a monitoring and evaluation  framework  with  disability
        specific indicators;
      • Coordinating the effective implementation of Government’s work with
        regard to disability; and
      • Advocating Government’s strategic agenda through awareness raising.

3.10  Achievements to Date, Definition of Disability, OSDP Budget

The South African Government adopted the White Paper  on  INDS  in  November
1997, which is premised on the social model of disability. The model,  which
is  a  human  rights  approach  to  disability,  places  emphasis   on   the
shortcomings of society and its inability to accommodate  diversity  instead
of viewing disability a welfare concern only. The INDS  provides  government
and society  with  guidelines  that  promote  non-discrimatory  development,
planning, programme implementation and service delivery. The  implementation
of  the  African  Decade  Programme  for  Disabled   People   led   to   the
establishment of a secretariat to  run  the  Africa  Decade  programme.  The
office actively participated in and on behalf of Southern African  countries
in the development of a proposed Comprehensive  and  Integral  International
Convention on the Protection and Promotion of  the  Rights  and  Dignity  of
Persons with Disabilities.

Government officials were trained  to  understand  the  rights  of  disabled
persons and the implementation of the INDS. The objective of  this  exercise
was to create a skilled, equipped, motivated and empowered critical mass  of
people to ensure delivery  to  disabled  persons  in  all  departments.  The
training of trainees programme is an inclusion of the implementation of  the
INDS in the curriculum of SAMDI. The office has  successfully  designed  and
completed a training manual that will assist councillors  with  disabilities
at local government level to function optimally. A book on  the  history  of
the Disability  Rights  Movement  in  SA  has  been  developed.  The  office
convened consultations with tertiary institutions to  ensure  the  inclusion
of skills to implement INDS in all universities curricula and this  resulted
in the establishment of a disability study course at the University of  Cape
Town. The course focuses on  the  promotion  of  human  rights  of  disabled
persons.

The office also facilitated the establishment  of  Disability  Units  within
all provincial governments and  municipalities.  Presently  there  are  nine
Provincial Disability Units that are  established  in  the  offices  of  the
Premiers and 28 local Government Disability  Units  in  Municipalities.  The
largest number of 17 is in Limpopo. A training  manual,  which  will  assist
councillors with disabilities, has been designed and completed to help  them
to carry out their duties in an efficient and effective ways. The  education
awareness campaign that was developed and conducted by the  office  has  led
to the development of a media toolkit that  disabled  persons  will  use  to
engage media. Most departments have awareness programmes and  activities  in
support of National and International Days for  persons  with  disabilities.
The promotion of awareness for all employees with  disabilities  is  one  of
the  fundamental  prerequisites  of  creating  empowerment  and   supportive
environment.

The  policy  reference  groups  between  the  government   departments   and
representatives of the disabled persons head been convened and  the  purpose
thereof was to develop disability sensitive  policies  in  the  departments.
The office succeeded in negotiating job creation targets for disable  people
in  various  economic  development  sectors.   The  departments  have   been
provided with advice on the employment of disabled  persons  in  the  public
service, equity plans have been  developed  through  the  employment  equity
units in the departments with the view of including disabled person  in  the
staff complements and similar guidance have been  given  to  parastatal  and
private organisations.  The development  of  capacity  in  organisations  of
disabled  persons  equipped  them  to  undertake  advocacy,   organisational
development and project management programmes  and  to  establish  relations
with  organisation  of  disabled  persons   in   Sweden   to   promote   the
understanding of rights through a twinning programme.

The office successfully imitated a process on disability specific  indicator
for use in the  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Frameworks  of  government.   A
cohesive disability sector in civil society with the transformation  of  the
other African Federal Council on Disability has been developed  and  enables
all various  disability  groupings  to  coordinate  their  activities  in  a
unified way with role players within government and in the private sector.

There is no definition on disability;  the  compromise  is  that  a  working
draft  definition  was  drawn.   It  is  an  operational   definition   used
presently, however a decision will be taken in  a  Cabinet  meeting  due  to
take place in two weeks to see if it  is  an  appropriate  definition.   The
office was allocated R1 million for the current financial year and this  has
not met all the requirements of the office.  The OSDP is looking forward  to
the help of the Committee for redress in this issue.


3.11  Challenges


Despite extensive work in fulfilling its mandate through its work with all
spheres of Government, parastatal and the general public, the OSDP faces a
number of challenges that impact negatively on service delivery. These
include reliance on donor-support: much of the work undertaken by the OSDP
is funded by donor support. The work is thus to a large extent influenced
by donor specifications, thereby distracting from implementing Government
objectives; lack of capacity in terms of human resources: at present, the
OSDP has only 5 persons on its permanent staff establishment, 2 at Director
level and 3 at administrative level. In addition, 2 more people have been
appointed through donor support. This has resulted in work overload and
staff burnout; lack of support from supervisors-internally (Presidency);
and lack of support from National and Provincial Departments and Local
Government structures.


The OSDP proposed the following solutions to address these challenges:



    • Financial support to the OSDP should be expanded  through  the  Medium
      Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) to reduce its  dependency  on  donor
      support;
    • Support from supervisors should be improved. A  process  is  currently
      underway to develop clear roles and guidelines to ensure that approved
      systems are functional as they relate to the Public Finance Management
      Act (PFMA);
    • Supervisors in the line function National and  Provincial  Departments
      and Local Government structures must give practitioners the  necessary
      support to enable them to perform their duties effectively;
    • The process of  recruiting  staff  in  the  National  OSDP  should  be
      expedited, as undue delays in the process impact negatively on service
      delivery in terms of the Programme’s annual programme.

3.12  Issues for consideration


The following issues were raised for consideration raised during the
discussion following the presentation:


      • There is a lack of systems to monitor  the  appointment  of  people
        with disabilities in the public service;
      • No standard definition of ‘disability’ exists. However, there is  a
        working definition that is used by the Departments  of  Health  and
        Social Development as an operational tool. A  Memorandum  has  been
        submitted to Cabinet to establish whether  the  working  definition
        constitutes and appropriate definition;
      • Disability issues are not integrated into the work of departments;
      • It is important that the Committee is  informed  of  the  budgetary
        constraints faced by the OSDP timeously to  enable  it  to  provide
        input to the Minister of Finance when drawing up the MTEF; and
      • The Committee should call on different departments to account to it
        with regard to budgetary allocations for expenditure on  disability
        issues.


3.13   Presentation  by  Mr.  J.  Mbalula,   Chairperson:   National   Youth
       Commission (NYC):


The NYC was established in 1996 through the National Youth Commission Act,
Act 19 of 1996.  It is a statutory body of Government responsible for youth
development within government and for providing ongoing advice to
government on matters of youth development.



The mandate of the NYC is to:



    • Set up appropriate youth policy instruments for the country;
    •  Develop  a  comprehensive  National  Youth  Action   Plan   for   the
      implementation of the Policy. The Policy covers 3 areas,  namely,  the
      role of the youth, the role  of  Government  and  the  role  of  civil
      society structures;
    • Develop mechanisms to redress the imbalances of the past;
    • Promote a uniform approach by all agencies of Government in  terms  of
      youth development;
    • Investigate  appropriate  programmatic  responses  to  the  challenges
      facing young people;
    • Prioritise resource allocation to youth  affairs  through  Government;
      and
    • Maintain close relations with similar bodies.


The NYC has identified key result areas for the implementation of the
National Youth Policy, which are:



      Advocacy;
      Lobbying;
      Monitoring and evaluation;
      Policy formulation and analysis;
      Communication and outreach programmes; and
      Research development on youth issues.

3.14  Key Focus Areas


The Commission’s work focuses on 4 key areas, namely:



      • Policy implementation and Influence
      • Profiling the Commission
      • Stakeholder Engagement and
      • International Relations


The office has to implement policy and influence stakeholders to ensure
that all spheres of government incorporate an approach to youth development
envisaged in the national Youth Development Policy Framework (NYDPF) and
appropriate programmes. The coordination of state organs is aimed at
ensuring an integrated and inter-sectoral approach to youth development and
to strengthen policy research, development and analytic function thus
integrating the participation of young people into the mainstream economy
of the country.





The profiling of the Commission is aimed at encouraging the participation
of the youth in decisions that affect their lives. The office engages
stakeholders in order consolidate strategies in society and at
repositioning itself through leadership enhancement. It is also part of the
Commission‘s agenda to include youth development in international
relations.


3.15  Key Current Issue


The key current issue that the Commission is engaged in is the
restructuring of the Commission to create one national organisation that
will ensure a unified approach by all youth development agencies. This will
include incorporating the Umsobomvu Youth Fund into the Commission.



3.16  Challenges and Improvements



The Commission reported that despite the existence of the National Youth
Policy Framework, the challenge remains to integrate youth development
comprehensively into Government policies, resources allocated to youth
development are limited. There is also a need to explore how civil society
organisations working in the field of youth can be resourced. There is
insufficient support for youth development work; and it is critical for the
Commission to devise a mechanism through which Government Departments can
be held accountable and to provide recourse to the Commission if
Departments do not deliver.



3.17  Issues for Consideration



The following issues were raised for consideration:



It is important that youth development work filters down to reach the youth
in deep rural areas as well. A proposal was made that the Commission
produce Compact Discs (CD’s) of its programmes for distribution to those
youth who do not have access to its programmes. At present, the work of the
Commission targets youth in higher education, youth in trouble with the
law, youth in rural areas and youth with disabilities. However, there is a
need to include illiterate youth in the work of the Commission to make them
employable. For example, consideration could be given to taking such youth
into voluntary service in the police or military to develop and expose them
to opportunities; and the role of the Commission is always misunderstood,
with the result that role-players undermine its monitoring and evaluation
role.



A National Youth Convention will be convened around September to evaluate
policy. The Young Farmers Programme is functioning and this has been made
possible by the Department of Trade and Industry Strategy on economic
participation. The Land Bank contributed by injecting funds to the
programme. These programmes are running in the Free State, North West and
Northern Cape. The one in the Western Cape is on hold because of lack of
funds. Mr Mbalula expressed the Commission’s appreciation of the Hon.
President, Mr T M Mbeki‘s visit to one of these programmes and that they
are functioning well.



The Commission will be hosting the National Youth Month in June and a guide
with all these programmes will be produced, it will also include access to
matric results. Even though there is an existing NYPF, the commission has
to do an investigation on how best it can integrate youth development.
There is a need to inject funds to youth development; the NYPF support has
to be strengthened as it is currently under resourced.  The reference point
for this development will be the youth policy, departments will have to be
told hold accountable and to this end the Commission requests the
assistance of the Committee to intervene.





3.18  Presentation by the Hon. Mr. GQM. Doidge, MP: House Chairperson:
       Committees, National Assembly



The presenter made some general remarks with regard to the mandate of the
Committee and the challenges faced by it, and proposed certain solutions to
address the challenges.




General remarks with regard to the mandate of and  challenges  for  the  JMC
include:


Structure of the Committee

In terms of the Joint Rules, the Committee comprises Members of both  Houses
NA and NCOP, which have different and separate programmes. Furthermore,  the
role and structure of the NA differs from that of  the  NCOP.  Consequently,
scheduling of Committee meetings poses a challenge,  as  it  is  not  always
easy to secure a quorum at such meetings. Although  the  Rules  provide  the
framework of what the Committee must do, the onus remains on  the  Committee
to find creative ways in which to execute its mandate.

The Rules of Parliament and the Public Accounts Committee (PA Committee)  as
a case study

The Rules of Parliament are not static. The JMC is  at  liberty  to  propose
amendments to the Rules to facilitate its work by submitting a  proposal  to
the Joint Rules Committee. The Committee can  seek  authorization  from  the
Joint Rules Committee or by way of House Resolutions as per  Joint  Rule  16
(1a) and (1b i and ii) which stipulates that a joint Committee has such  sub
committees as are established by the Joint Rules;  and  may  appoint  a  sub
committee when there is provision for such appointment in the  Joint  Rules;
or authorised by the Joint Rules Committee or by resolutions adopted in  the
Assembly and the Council. This will help the Committee to  alter  its  modus
operandi, adjust the rules through the office of the  speaker  and  to  form
sub committees and this will help it to function  optimally.  The  Committee
will meet less  frequently  e.g.  when  it  has  to  consider  reports  from
established  sub  committees.  An  example  was  given  whereby  the  Public
Accounts Committee developed itself a working method. They had workshops  on
methodology and their report was  tabled  in  the  House  and  it  became  a
document of the House.

Scheduling of Committee meetings and reporting Mechanisms
The parent Committee might meet once a month or once a term. It can look  at
dynamic reporting mechanism. It can  report  on  its  findings,  on  written
instruments, it can respond to papers referred to it, it can report  on  the
work that it is doing and follow up on recommendations. The Committee  needs
to establish a network for itself in the Presidency  and  identify  its  key
partners. It is also important for the Committee to have  right  venues  for
meetings. The issue of mainstreaming needs to be brought to the  Committee‘s
Plan of Action.

Budget Cycle and relevant reports for the Committee

The Committee has to evaluate what it has achieved  in  the  present  budget
cycle. The 10 year Report and  the  Situational  Analysis  Report  had  been
completed and are waiting permission for publication. These  documents  will
be available to the Committee soon after publication.

Legal Capacity for the Committee

 The Committee on Commissioning research can be guided e.g.  by  the  office
of the Right of a Child  to  establish  whether  the  Children’s  Bill  does
address all  that  has  to  be  there.  On  monitoring  and  evaluating  the
international instruments the Committee can once they are ratified,  monitor
them as to how our country complies with these instruments and follow up  on
them. The Committee will be given legal advice to help with  the  monitoring
and evaluation of these instruments.

International Conferences, International and Provincial Study Tours

The Committee can go on international exposure visits twice in  a  five-year
term according to the new  policy  of  Parliament.  There  is  no  limit  to
provincial fact - finding missions, except that these can  only  take  place
when Parliament is  not  in  session.  The  executive  has  to  pay  if  the
Committee is invited to participate in the UN and a delegate can be sent  to
those conferences.

Departmental Strategic Plans and Annual Reports

The  Committee  was  advised  to  look  at  the  strategic  plans   of   the
departments, their annual reports and to work closely  with  the  Presidency
e.g. the PA Committee set up Wednesdays for hearings  with  the  Director  –
Generals. The departmental strategic plans  sets  out  performance  measures
and targets and annual reports show how appropriated funds  have  been  used
to implement plans, this then gives an  indication  on  whether  performance
has been acceptable and whether funds were used for the intended purpose.

Specialised support for the Committee (Subject Specialist)

Apart from procedural and  general  administrative  support,  the  Committee
requires a full – time subject specialist who would maintain a  register  of
relevant international commitments, advise on the substance  and  nature  of
such commitments, scan bills and tabled papers to  alert  the  Committee  to
issues requiring consideration, maintain  a  data  base  of  academics,  Non
Governmental Organisations and other interested groups which  could  provide
a resource base and draft reports and recommendations. The services  of  the
researchers could still be used to undertake specific research  projects  as
may be required from time to time.

Relationship with Chapter 9 Institutions - Chapter  9  (section  181(1))  of
the Constitution establishes various institutions to aid and complement  the
work  of  Parliament  in  overseeing  the  work  of  the  Executive.   These
institutions  are  called  State  Institutions   Supporting   Constitutional
Democracy. They are  independent  and  impartial,  able  to  exercise  their
powers and perform  their  functions  without  fear  or  prejudice  and  are
subject to the Constitution and the law only. They have  the  following  two
roles in relation to Parliament: (i) they should be  seen  as  complementary
to Parliament’s oversight role as they, together  with  Parliament,  act  as
watchdog  bodies  over  the  Government  and  Organs  of  State;  (ii)   the
Constitution renders them accountable to  the  NA.  Section  181(5)  of  the
Constitution imposes a duty upon them to report on their activities  to  the
Assembly at least once a year. They therefore serve as a support and aid  to
Parliament in its oversight function by providing it with  information  that
is not derived  from  the  Executive.  The  Committee  should  thus  develop
cooperative relations with these institutions.

Oversight Tools

There are many tools that can be applied by the Committee  to  exercise  its
oversight function. These include the following:

        i) Briefings,  Hearings and Presentations
       ii) Holding hearings with specific departments
      iii) State of the Nation Address (SONA) as a reference
       iv) The Estimates of National Expenditure (ENE)
        v) The Budget Speech
       vi) Interrogate Departmental Budget Reports
      vii) Writing letters where necessary
     viii) Visits to the Presidency
       ix) Be familiar with the Strategic Plans of Departments  and  Annual
           Reports
        x) Peruse all reports from the three sectors e.g. the State of  the
           National Youth Report
       xi) Interaction with relevant Departments, Parliamentary  Committees
           and Chapter 9 institutions
      xii)  Interrogate  Parliamentary  Process  Report  e.g.   Situational
           Analysis Report and the 10 Year Review Report among others.
     xiii) Utilising the Constituency period fruitfully
      xiv) Provincial fact finding missions and International study tours

However, the challenge that exists for the JMC is to devise a way  in  which
to utilise the existing tools effectively.

Committee Reports

Committees are not autonomous of the House, but must report to the House  on
its activities. Such reports can stem from  the  referral  system,  or  from
Committees’ proactive work. However,  Committees  do  not  report  regularly
enough


The presenter proposed the following solutions  to  address  the  challenges
faced by the Committee:


      • Focus groups - It was suggested that  the  Committee  organise  its
        work into smaller working groups to focus on  the  different  areas
        covered in its mandate. The work of the smaller groups  could  feed
        into the work of the full Committee. For example, if  a  Department
        is summoned, it  could  be  done  under  the  banner  of  the  full
        Committee. The focus groups should find creative  ways  of  dealing
        with the subject matter assigned to it by:


            o Developing a critical understanding  of  issues  relevant  to
              their subject area;
            o Keeping track of debates in their subject area;
            o Commissioning research, monitoring, engaging and reporting on
              target areas identified for their subject area; and
            o Tabling progress reports and reporting  to  Parliament  on  a
              regular basis on progress made.


The development of smaller focus groups  could  assist  in  alleviating  the
problem of establishing a quorum at the meetings of the Committee.

      • Revision of meeting times
        It was suggested that the Committee review  its  meeting  times  so
        that it meets less frequently, thereby avoiding the problems caused
        by clashing memberships of Committees.


      • Networking
        The Committee was encouraged to establish a network of partnerships
        to facilitate its work, by developing  dynamic  relationships  with
        institutions or organisations involved in  the  area  of  children,
        youth and persons with disabilities.

      • Building capacity
        Once  the  Committee’s  strategic  plan  is  developed,  it  should
        identify the resources that will be required to meet the objectives
        outlined in the plan.

      • Mainstreaming
        The Committee should find ways to input  into  the  work  of  other
        Committees to ensure that issues relating to  children,  youth  and
        persons  with  disabilities  are  mainstreamed  into  the  work  of
        Committees.


   19. Possible Areas of Intervention



The purpose of this section is to provide an overview of the functions and
main challenges highlighted by the respective presenters, as well as issues
for consideration emanating from the discussions that followed the
presentations. A number of possible areas for intervention by the Committee
emerged from the presentations.



These include:



    •  The  Committee  was  challenged  to  encourage  other   Parliamentary
      Committees to  mainstream  issues  relating  to  children,  youth  and
      disabled persons into their work by requesting departments to  include
      information on such issues in their  briefings.  This  will  stimulate
      Departments to report holistically on these areas, as it is impossible
      for the Committee to target all Departments single-handedly;
    • A proposal was made that, as part of its oversight work, the Committee
      should follow up with the relevant departments on  the  implementation
      of recommendations contained in the report of the Task  Group  on  the
      Sexual Abuse of Children;
    • The Committee should interrogate departmental budgets with a  view  to
      monitoring the allocation of funds for issues  relating  to  children,
      youth and disabled persons;
    • The Committee was called upon to  assist  the  Programmes  in  calling
      Departments to account, as they  do  not  have  the  power  to  summon
      Departments;
    • The NYC requested the assistance of the  Committee  regarding  funding
      for youth development. The Committee is called upon to find  out  from
      departments whether funding for youth development  is  part  of  their
      agenda, a similar request came from the OSDP and
    • The Committee should monitor and, where possible, provide  input  into
      processes currently being undertaken by the 3 Programmes.

3.20  The Strategic Planning Process


The Committee agreed to be more strategically focused in order to fulfil
its mandate. The sessions for the second day went into more detail
regarding the 3 areas, namely, Youth, Children and Disabled Persons.


3.21  Break-Away Group Discussions

In an attempt to facilitate the process of developing a  programme  for  the
Committee,  the  workshop  undertook  2  breakaway  sessions.  Deliberations
during the  breakaway  sessions  were  aimed  at  developing  more  specific
direction for the Committee  programme  in  terms  of  Children,  Youth  and
Disabled Persons.

The aim of the first breakaway session was to brainstorm  ideas  around  the
development of a Mission Statement for  the  Committee.  In  developing  the
Mission Statement, groups were tasked  with  addressing  questions  relating
to:

      Who the Committee is;
      The purpose for the existence of the Committee;
      How the Committee fulfils its role; and
      Who the Committee serves in fulfilling its role.



During the second breakaway session, groups were tasked with generating
ideas around the following aspects of the Committee’s work:


      • Identify 5 priority areas per sector;
      • Identify the Departments to be targeted;
      • Create a structure for the execution of the tasks of the Committee;
      • Identify the key partners that will assist  the  Committee  in  the
        execution of its mandate; and
      • Identify tools and support systems that the Committee will  use  in
        the execution of its mandate.


3.22  Core Competences for the Committee




The following core competences were proposed for the Committee:




      • The ability to exploit existing partnerships;
      • The ability to learn lessons from other committees;
      • The ability to translate these lessons into working  solutions  for
        the Committee;
      • The ability to actively track and monitor key focus areas within  a
        determined timeframe; and
      • The ability to impact  on  key  focus  areas  in  partnership  with
        Offices in the Presidency.


3.23  Developing the Vision



The Committee members were divided into 3 groups and were  asked  to  assess
and comment on the  current  vision  of  Parliament.  Hereafter  each  group
crafted a Mission statement for the Committee. The Committee felt  that  the
Vision of Parliament should be scrutinised.

The current vision of Parliament is:


      “To build an effective peoples’ Parliament that is responsive to the
      needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a
      better quality of life for all the people of South Africa.”

Responses ranged from acceptance of the Parliamentary Vision as is, to
amendment of the vision in the following ways:

      (i)   “We the elected representatives of the people, who  through  the
           Peoples Parliament, the JMC in particular, monitor and  evaluate
           the  responsiveness  of  the  government  and   relevant   state
           institutions supporting democracy to the needs  and  aspirations
           of the sectors in realizing a better quality of life and  status
           of youth children and disabled persons.”

      (ii)  “We exist for the protection, development and integration of
           Youth Children and Disabled Peoples’ issues”.


3.24  The Committee’s Mission



The Committee felt that the crafting of a Mission Statement was crucial, as
it would ensure clarity of purpose. The following drafts of a Mission
Statement read as follows:


      (i)   “(We are a) Joint Committee assigned to  highlight  and  monitor
           the issues of Youth, Children and People  with  Disabilities  by
           ensuring  that   all   Departments,   Commissions,   and   other
           stakeholders deliver on their mandate with specific reference to
           Youth, Children and people living with disabilities  by  forming
           mutually beneficial partnerships with the above entities”.



      (ii)  “(We will achieve our objectives) By effectively monitoring  and
           evaluating government programmes on  an  ongoing  basis  and  by
           regularly reporting to the Peoples Parliament on the  compliance
           and progress of the implementation  of  instruments,  programmes
           and service delivery to each of the sectors.”


      (iii)“Through diligence, partnership and  continuous  engagement,  the
           JMC on Youth, Children and Disabled Persons will:


            • Monitor the implementation of policy, strategy and programmes
            • Identify and ensure that corrective recommendations are acted
              upon
            • Report regularly
            • Compel state organs to deliver on their mandate and build a
              culture of accountable co-operation

3.25  The Strategic Objectives for the Committee


The Committee recognizes that if it is to be effective,  it  would  have  to
highlight and address each issue relating to  Youth  Children  and  Disabled
People in each piece of legislation, in each Departmental Programme  and  in
each  Departmental  Budget.  It  would  also  have  to  incorporate   issues
emanating from participative processes in communities,  and  from  organised
associations for Youth Children and Disabled  People.  Given  the  size  and
capacity of the Committee, it is impossible to monitor all these aspects  of
its mandate comprehensively and adequately.


For the purposes of impacting on key portfolios, the Committee Members  were
divided into 3 sub groups, namely, Youth, Children,  and  Disabled  Persons.
These subgroups were asked to identify 5 strategic objectives per group  and
to  link  the  strategic  objectives  to  actions  for  the  Committee.  The
following strategic objectives and actions were  identified  by  sub  groups
focusing on Youth, Children, and Disabled Persons.




3.26  Youth


|Strategic Focus Area           |Action for Committee  |Target Departments |
|Budget Oversight               |Interrogate           |All                |
|                               |Departmental Budgets  |                   |
|                               |with a view to        |                   |
|                               |monitoring the        |                   |
|                               |allocation of funds   |                   |
|                               |for issues relating to|                   |
|                               |youth                 |                   |
|Mainstreaming Strategy         |Ensure that           |To be assigned     |
|                               |mainstreaming strategy|                   |
|                               |is applied to all     |                   |
|                               |Departments (focus on |                   |
|                               |Target Departments for|                   |
|                               |this financial year)  |                   |
|National Youth Service         |Ensure that Youth have|DPSA               |
|                               |access to bursaries in|Department of      |
|                               |Science and Technology|Finance            |
|                               |as per the national   |Department of      |
|                               |commitment of the     |Education          |
|                               |Minister of Finance   |                   |
|                               |                      |                   |
|HIV and AIDS and TB            |Ensure that grants for|Social Development |
|                               |child headed          |Department of      |
|                               |households are        |Health             |
|                               |distributed           |                   |
|                               |effectively           |                   |
|Support to Programmatic Work of|Ensure Youth are      |• Agriculture and  |
|Various Departments            |trained in            |Land Affairs       |
|                               |Agribusiness and as   |                   |
|                               |emerging farmers      |                   |
|                               |                      |                   |
|Website                        |To be assigned        |                   |
|Youth Toll Free Line/ Youth    |To be assigned        |                   |
|Information Guide/ Youth       |                      |                   |
|Information Services           |                      |                   |
|Economic                       |Ensure employment of  |Public works       |
|Participation/Relationships    |Youth through the     |DOL                |
|with Umsobomvu Youth Fund      |Extended Public Works |DWAF               |
|                               |Programme             |DEAT               |
|                               |DOL placement of      |Agriculture and    |
|                               |Learnership candidates|Land Affairs       |
|                               |–% of jobs created    |                   |
|                               |focused on youths     |                   |
|                               |                      |                   |
|                               |Ensure Youth          |                   |
|                               |entrepreneurship with |DTI                |
|                               |a focus on Youth      |DEAT (Provincial)  |
|                               |Co-ops (Agri and Trade|DEAT(National)     |
|                               |and Industry)         |                   |
|                               |                      |                   |
|                               |Ensure that Youth are |                   |
|                               |absorbed in franchises|DTI                |
|                               |and that training is  |DEAT (Provincial)  |
|                               |provided              |DEAT(National)     |
|                               |                      |                   |
|Local Government               |To be assigned        |                   |
|Capacity Building              |Ensure access for     |DPSA               |
|                               |Youth on Bursaries    |DOF                |
|                               |focusing on Science   |Department of      |
|                               |and Technology as per |Education          |
|                               |the national          |                   |
|                               |commitment from the   |                   |
|                               |Minister of Finance   |                   |
|                               |                      |                   |
|                               |                      |DPSA               |
|                               |Ensure access to      |DOL                |
|                               |Learnerships (5% of   |                   |
|                               |each Departments      |                   |
|                               |establishment)        |                   |
|                               |                      |                   |



3.27  Children


As protection of the vulnerable includes children, the Committee identified
the media and its impact on the young as a key area to be monitored.

|Strategic Focus Area  |Action for Committee    |Target           |
|                      |                        |Departments      |
|Budget Oversight      |Interrogate Departmental|Sport            |
|                      |Budgets with a view to  |Social           |
|                      |monitoring the          |Development      |
|                      |allocation of funds for |DOE              |
|                      |issues relating to      |DOL              |
|                      |children                |                 |
|Mainstreaming Strategy|Ensure that             |All              |
|                      |mainstreaming strategy  |                 |
|                      |is applied to target    |                 |
|                      |departments             |                 |
|Media                 |Ensure that Media Houses|Communications   |
|                      |are screening programmes|ICASA            |
|                      |for Violence, Language, |BCCSA            |
|                      |Nudity, Sex and         |DOE              |
|                      |Prejudice               |                 |
|Safety in Schools     |Ensure that issues of   |DOE, DOL, Safety |
|                      |safety and security in  |and Security,    |
|                      |schools are dealt with  |SAPS, Sport,     |
|                      |at a                    |Presidency       |
|                      |policy/implementation   |                 |
|                      |level                   |                 |
|Recreational Services |Ensure appropriate      |Sport, Arts and  |
|                      |recreational services   |Culture, DOL,    |
|                      |are developed for       |Safety and       |
|                      |Children                |Security, SAPS,  |
|                      |                        |Local Government |
|                      |                        |(SALGA),         |
|                      |                        |Presidency       |
|Interface with civil  |To be assigned          |                 |
|society               |                        |                 |
|Early Childhood       |Ensure that resources   |DOE, DOL, DOH,   |
|Development (ECD)     |and policy development  |Social           |
|                      |are assigned to ECD     |Development,     |
|                      |                        |Presidency       |
|Policy Gaps           |Ensure that policy gaps |DOE, DOH, DOL,   |
|                      |are identified and      |Sport, Arts and  |
|                      |policies are developed  |Culture,         |
|                      |                        |Presidency       |
|Database Development  |Ensure that a database  |STATS SA, DOE,   |
|                      |is developed and updated|DOH, Safety and  |
|                      |for tracking and        |Security, SAPS,  |
|                      |monitoring issues       |Presidency       |
|                      |affecting Children      |                 |
|Legislation           |Ensure that all         |All              |
|                      |legislation affecting   |                 |
|                      |children is monitored   |                 |
|                      |for compliance. Ensure  |                 |
|                      |that public             |                 |
|                      |participation processes |                 |
|                      |are complied with       |                 |
|                      |respect to the          |                 |
|                      |processing of           |                 |
|                      |legislation             |                 |
|Children’s Day        |Ensure that Programmes  |All              |
|                      |are included in all     |                 |
|                      |Department’s plans with |                 |
|                      |regard to celebratory   |                 |
|                      |events such as          |                 |
|                      |Children’s’ Day         |                 |
|Follow up on Reports  |Ensure follow up with   |Refer to Report  |
|                      |the relevant Departments|for target       |
|                      |on the implementation of|departments      |
|                      |recommendations         |                 |
|                      |contained in the report |                 |
|                      |of the Task Group on the|                 |
|                      |Sexual Abuse of         |                 |
|                      |Children.               |                 |



3.28  Disabled Persons


The principle of “Nothing About Us, Without Us” is the principle that needs
to be reflected in all aspects of Departments’ strategies and policies.

|Strategic Focus  |Action for Committee     |Target Departments|
|Area             |                         |                  |
|Budget Oversight |Interrogate Departmental |All               |
|                 |budgets with a view to   |                  |
|                 |monitoring the allocation|                  |
|                 |of funds for issues      |                  |
|                 |relating to disabled     |                  |
|                 |persons                  |                  |
|Presidency       |Ensure unnecessary delays|Committee to      |
|                 |in policy implementation |address directly  |
|                 |are addressed            |                  |
|Mainstreaming    |Ensure that mainstreaming|All               |
|Strategy         |strategy is applied to   |                  |
|                 |target Departments       |                  |
|Transport        |Ensure meaningful        |Transport         |
|                 |accessibility to public  |Public Works      |
|                 |transport and related    |DPSA              |
|                 |facilities               |DOL               |
|Health           |Ensure the following     |DOH               |
|                 |Health Care priorities   |DOE               |
|                 |are focused on:          |                  |
|                 |Access to healthcare     |                  |
|                 |Early childhood          |                  |
|                 |development for children |                  |
|                 |with disabilities        |                  |
|                 |Disability detection and |                  |
|                 |assessment               |                  |
|                 |Rehabilitation           |                  |
|Social           |Ensure drafting of a     |Social Development|
|Development      |definition and assessment|                  |
|                 |of disability            |                  |
|                 |Ensure adequate provision|                  |
|                 |of social grants for     |                  |
|                 |poverty alleviation      |                  |
|Trade & Industry |Ensure development of an |DTI               |
|                 |Economic Participation   |DOL               |
|                 |Programme                |DOE               |
|Labour           |Ensure Skills development|DOE               |
|                 |is implemented           |                  |
|                 |Ensure Employment Equity,|                  |
|                 |Basic Conditions of      |                  |
|                 |Employment, Code of Good |                  |
|                 |Practice are applied     |                  |
|Education        |Ensure access to         |DOE               |
|                 |(inclusive) education and|Social Development|
|                 |school feeding           |                  |
|Housing          |Ensure access to         |Housing           |
|                 |construction             |                  |
|                 |Ensure access to         |                  |
|                 |accessible accommodation |                  |
|                 |and ownership            |                  |
|Communication    |Ensure access to         |Communication     |
|                 |broadcasting and         |DOL               |
|                 |communication            |ICASA             |
|                 |Ensure access to         |BCCSA             |
|                 |information technology   |                  |
|                 |Ensure skills development|                  |
|                 |and employment           |                  |
|                 |opportunities in         |                  |
|                 |broadcasting             |                  |
|Public Service   |Ensure implementation of |DPSA              |
|                 |the Presidential review  |                  |
|                 |with regard to Batho Pele|                  |
|                 |Ensure implementation of |                  |
|                 |Community Development    |                  |
|                 |Workers                  |                  |
|Science &        |Ensure promotion and     |Science and       |
|Technology       |development of Braille as|Technology        |
|                 |an augmentative tool for |                  |
|                 |readers who require it   |                  |
|Arts & Culture   |Ensure development and   |Arts and Culture  |
|                 |promotion of sign        |                  |
|                 |language                 |                  |
|                 |Ensure economic          |                  |
|                 |development and skills   |                  |
|                 |development through the  |                  |
|                 |Arts                     |                  |
|Public Works     |Ensure accessibility to  |DPSA              |
|                 |Public Buildings and     |                  |
|                 |services                 |                  |
|Provincial and   |Ensure access to service |Local Government  |
|Local Government |delivery and             |(SALGA)           |
|                 |implementation of        |                  |
|                 |Indigent Policy          |                  |


     3.29  The following key issues were highlighted by all the groups:


      • Unnecessary delays in the development of programme  policy  in  the
        Office of the Presidency;
      • An input has been made to the MTEF to assist with the needs of  the
        OSDP. A suggestion was made that tax should be directed to the OSDP
        and contribute to disabled persons in the economy;
      • Inter-Departmental collaboration is weak;
      • Line Department  responses  with  regard  to  Youth,  Children  and
        Disabled Persons are not forthcoming. In 2001, only  3  Departments
        responded to Disability alignment;
      • Staff who advocate for Youth, Children and Disabled Persons  issues
        are normally at a low  level  in  the  organisation.  This  is  not
        aligned to the national  priority  provided  by  the  placement  of
        Youth, Children and Disabled Persons in the Presidency;
      • The monitoring of Provincial Departments was raised as a problem as
        there is currently no link with the Provinces;
      • A lack of an overall communication strategy was highlighted by all
        three groups;
      • The lack of a link between the  work  of  the  JMC  QLS  of  Youth,
        Children and  Disabled  Persons  was  raised  with  regard  to  how
        Committee work is taken to the Constituencies;
      • The need was raised for identifying national priorities; and
      • The National Plan of Action is being updated. The issue raised here
        related to the need for a Provincial Plan of Action to enable
        holistic oversight of issues relating to Youth, Children and
        Disabled Persons.




3.30  Operating Principles


It was suggested the following principles be adopted to ensure effective
delivery on the mandate of the Committee:


    • Dedicated membership of the Committee
    • Scheduling of meetings to avoid clashes and provide adequate resources
      for the Committee to do its work; and
    • Scheduling to facilitate Committee sub-group effectiveness


3.31  Support


The Committee requires a much more comprehensive and focused support  system
to fulfil its mandate. Therefore, it must be very clear on its  deliverables
so that the appropriate support is provided  to  it.  The  existing  support
structure is able to provide this support  to  a  limited  degree.  However,
this is set to change as an investigation is  currently  being  commissioned
to propose a robust support structure for Committees in Parliament.

A proposal was forwarded for a  Committee  Support  Coordinator  to  oversee
Secretarial support, Research support and Administrative support.


In terms of systems  and  procedures,  Members  felt  that  current  support
provision  is  not  adequate  with  regard  to  document   management,   the
production  process,   prioritisation,   research,   meeting   and   hearing
preparation, follow-through and staff management.

The proposals regarding more effective support for this Committee included:

      • A shared support structure in which legal, research and information
        services work as a technical support team.

Integral to the success of this support team, the Committee has to:


      • Have regular briefings with the team
      • Assist with the scrutiny of issues
      • Track issues with the team
      • Assist in developing tools for use by the team
      • Identify emerging issues for the benefit of the Team and the
        Committee


3.32  Method of Work


The Committee has to decide on a  range  of  tools  to  use  to  manage  its
oversight function. Amongst these are:


      • Tools used in plenary (questions, motions, statements, debates);
      • Tools used as part of the oversight function (public hearings, site
        visits); and
      • Tools  used  in  ensuring  the  legislative  process  (tracking  of
        legislative process, briefings).


The Committee needs to redefine  its  operating  structure  and  systems  to
enable it to fulfil its mandate with regard to its  role  of  oversight  and
monitoring.  According  to  a  discussion  document  on  the  Mandates   and
Functioning  of  Joint  Monitoring  Committees,  it  was  found   that   the
Committee’s  monitoring  role  is  specifically  related  to   “Government’s
commitments”. Further, the Committee as  a  Forum  of  Parliament  would  be
expected to focus  its  role  on  the  national  sphere  of  government  (in
accordance  with  the  principles  of  co-operative  and   intergovernmental
relations in the Constitution, Chapter 3) [4]


What this means for the Committee is  that  it  has  to  monitor  and  track
national  policy,  programmes  and  budgets.  The  Committee’s  mandate   is
specific and multi-sectoral covering all national Departments and Organs  of
State.


However, practical issues relating to the quality of life and status of
Youth, Children and Disabled Persons are often experienced directly at
community or provincial level. It has been suggested that the provincial
legislatures establish similar committees to monitor compliance on a
provincial level. This would allow for meaningful interaction with the
Committee and would result in the Committee having a comprehensive “window”
on national and provincial competences concerning Youth, Children and
Disabled Persons.


Bills that are brought before Parliament may respond to particular policy
directives affecting Youth, Children and Disabled Persons directly or
indirectly. The Committee should therefore scan all Bills for impact on the
Quality of Life and Status of Youth, Children and Disabled Persons. The
Committee would have to engage with relevant Committees on any issues of
concern in a Bill.



In monitoring progress it would also engage  with  specific  Departments  on
the implementation of relevant provisions  (affecting  Youth,  Children  and
Disabled Persons) when Bills are enacted.

The Committee can on its own initiative also scan departmental  reports  and
other papers that are tabled.

As a basis for carrying  out  its  role,  the  Committee  should  compile  a
register of international commitments entered into by government.


In exercising its functions, the Committee has agreed, together with the
Office of the Presidency, in particular with the (ORC), (YC), and the
(OSDP), to engage in a more constructive manner so that the Committee might
fulfill its mandate more effectively.



3.33  Meetings and Scheduling of Meetings




One of the difficulties experienced by the Committee was the effective
scheduling of meetings and the availability of Members for these meetings.




By virtue of  being  joint  structures,  the  Committee  has  difficulty  in
scheduling meetings to accommodate the activities and  programming  of  both
Houses. A schedule was developed by the previous Chairperson  of  Committees
in the NA, in which it was agreed to set aside Fridays for Joint  Monitoring
Committees. This was not successful as Committee members  still  experienced
clashes with NCOP meetings scheduled  for  Fridays  and  Members  were  also
unavailable due to other commitments.


The current situation requires creative  planning  and  scheduling  to  deal
with this problem. It was suggested that meetings be planned in advance  and
placed on the Order Paper and that Members prioritise Committee meetings.


In addition, the Committee should  make  use  of  an  integrated  electronic
scheduling system to facilitate easy access  and  information  sharing.  The
Committee could then schedule meetings at short notice to  scan  Bills,  for
instance, as it would have an overall view of all meetings scheduled.

3.34  Committee Views

The Committee resolved that it should strengthen its ties with all  relevant
departments by working  closely  with  Director-Generals  and  all  relevant
Committees in  Parliament,  tracking  all  legislation  that  has  a  direct
bearing on the Committee.  This  will  be  done  by  deploying  one  or  two
representatives  in  these  meetings,  ensuring   that   matters   affecting
children, youth and disabled persons are properly addressed and attended  to
prior the finalization of such legislation.

The Committee acknowledged that unemployment is global problem  and  advised
that youth can do voluntary services e.g. in police or military service  for
them to learn.  The Committee has to hold  briefings,  hearing  of  evidence
and write letters where necessary and to solicit research capacity form  the
office of Dr Gabriel and in the office of legal advisors within  Parliament.
 The Committee  can  also  write  letters  to  SALGA  and  to  Provinces  to
establish on how issues are mainstreamed.  The Committee  acknowledged  that
the NCOP would have a more dynamic interaction with Provinces.   Furthermore
in future engagements, the Umsobomvu Youth Fund  should  appear  before  the
Committee to brief it on its functions and progress and  problems  if  there
are any.  It should have a  similar  working  relationship  with  the  other
three sectors.

The Committee has to improve on communication,  there  is  a  need  to  take
these matters beyond Parliament and the society needs to be  informed  in  a
manner that would make them really understand issues.  The  Committee  needs
to have a database e.g. on all the reports that come to it by liaising  with
the Minister Pahad’s office, source out information  on  Budget  Vote1  e.g.
establish the role of the Committee in the budget process.  It is  the  view
of  the  Committee  that  the  creation  of  subcommittees   would   curtail
absenteeism in meetings, which is caused mainly by the clashes  of  meetings
among other reasons.

4.    RECOMMENDATIONS

The Committee made the following recommendations:

      • Subcommittees should be formulated and the Committee has  to  elect
        conveners and agree on the functional areas  of  those  committees,
        targeting  priority  areas  that  they  have   to   cover.    These
        subcommittees  have  to  find  creative  and  effective   ways   of
        researching areas of interest that are relevant to their  theme  by
        using the right tools e.g. strategic plans of relevant departments,
        budget speeches and by referring to the State of the Nation Address
        content.
      • The Committee can propose amendments through available channels  to
        the Rules Committee.
      • The parent Committee should meet once a month or  once  a  term  to
        deliberate and finalise the business of  the  subcommittees  or  to
        consider reports of the work of its subcommittees.
      • The subcommittees would meet at times convenient for all members of
        that particular subcommittee.  The  convener  will  work  with  the
        Chairperson, the Deputy Chairperson and the Committee Secretary  to
        ensure  the  smooth  running  of  the  process.   The  subcommittee
        meetings should be advertised in the order paper.
      • Both the Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson should  be  present
        in all the subcommittees whenever they convene.
      • There should be a standard format of reporting (a Dynamic Reporting
        Mechanism)
      • The Committee should get reports of the Employment Equity  Act  and
        Skills  Development  Act  among  other  relevant   legislation   to
        establish the extent to which the Department of Labour  managed  to
        address matters affecting the development of  Children,  Youth  and
        Disabled Persons.
      • The Committee requires a Subject  Specialist  that  will  help  the
        Committee to fulfil its mandate
      • Reciprocal communication – inter-sectoral,  inter-departmental  and
        inter-governmental  collaboration  has  to  be  strengthened,   the
        Committee should invite relevant departments, relevant  sectors  to
        give an account of their respective budgets  on  disability,  youth
        and  children.   It  can  also  invite  or  write  letters  to  the
        communities or local government to check on the  level  of  support
        given for the projects and programmes aimed at the  improvement  of
        quality of life and status of children, youth and disabled persons.
      • It is critical for  the  Committee  to  call  Disability  Units  to
        account  on  their  budget  so  that  the  Committee  can  make   a
        determination on whether the money allocated to them is  enough  or
        not enough for these units to function optimally.
      • The Committee has to look at  the  programme  of  the  Medium  Term
        Expenditure Framework (MTEF), hold discussions with  the  MTEF,  be
        aware of the its time frames and work according to the cycle of the
        MTEF so that it can be better positioned to raise issues  affecting
        its work timeously.
      • The Committee would report to both Houses on the work  that  it  is
        doing


5.    CONCLUSION

The Committee could not formulate its programme for 2005 to 2006 due to  the
work that members had  to  cover  within  the  two  days  of  the  strategic
planning workshop. It was important for the Committee to first wait for  the
report that would emanate form the workshop in  order  to  come  up  with  a
comprehensive programme. The Committee agreed to hold a follow  up  workshop
for this purpose. The Committee took a resolution that it  would  report  to
both Houses on its work and follow up on  its  recommendations  by  checking
the implementation thereof


6.    APPENDAGES




  WORKFLOW, OPERATING MODEL, STRUCTURE AND INTEGRATED

  OVERSIGHT MODEL



The following diagrams  present  a  workflow,  an  operating  model,  and  a
structure, and an integrated oversight model for the Committee.

   JMC ON IMPROVEMENT OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH, CHILDREN AND
                          DISABLED PERSONS WORKFLOW
























                                          Designed by Consultancy In Session




International Conventions inform the policy and strategy positions with
regard to Youth, Children and Disabled Persons. The Presidency houses
Offices representing Youth, Children and Disabled Persons. Oversight of the
Executive is enabled through Departments, which are responsible for
governance, management and implementation. Amongst others, the Committee
monitors and tracks Legislation, Programmes and Budgets of Departments for
compliance with the rights of Youth, Children and Disabled Persons.

   JMC ON IMPROVEMENT OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH, AND DISABLED
                           PERSONS OPERATING MODEL

















                                          Designed by Consultancy In Session

The strategic planning process for the Committee is based on the
Constitutional mandate of the Committee. Its Vision and Mission are its
strategic statements of intent.

The Operating Model, consisting of an appropriate organizational design
structure, systems (Committee Programme and reporting systems) and
Committee support, will ensure successful service delivery.







   JMC ON IMPROVEMENT OF QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH AND
                  DISABLED PERSONS STRUCTURE AND SUB GROUPS













                                          Designed by Consultancy In Session


The structure for the Committee is as follows:

      • A core committee consisting of 24 fulltime Members and 10
        alternates;
      • A convenor for each of the 3 sub-groups namely, Youth, Children and
        Disabled;
      • A Working group consisting of selected Members. The Chair or Deputy
        Chair rove within these groups;
      • Focal Points to streamline Committee delivery as mandated; and
      • Partnerships with relevant institutions to enhance strategic impact
        of the Committee.




JMC QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF YOUTH, CHILDREN AND DISABLED PERSONS
INTEGRATED OVERSIGHT MODEL






















There are various ways in which oversight takes place. Amongst these are:

      • Departmental Hearings;
      • Visits (National and International);
      • Committee initiatives; and
      • Referrals of reports from the House(s).


The information gathered during this process is evaluated, monitored and
tracked by the Committee in partnership with the YC, ORC and OSDP, as well
as other related role-players. The oversight function is active when
challenges and gaps are identified and solutions are defined and channelled
to the appropriate source.

The workshop resolved that:

      The  breakaway  sessions  were  useful  in  mapping  the   Committee’s
        direction with regard to children, youth and disabled persons,  but
        more work will be required to develop a comprehensive work plan for
        the Committee;


      The Committee will have a follow-up meeting (possibly in the form of a
        workshop) to develop its programme, based on information  assembled
        during this workshop; and


      The interaction between the Committee and  the  3  Programmes  in  the
        Presidency must be significantly enhanced.



2.    Report of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Amendment Regulations to
      Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act, dated 12 August
      2005:


      The Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Amendment Regulations to Public  Funding
      of  Represented  Political  Parties  Act,  having   considered   draft
      amendment  regulations  tabled  by  the  Minister  for   Justice   and
      Constitutional Development on 22 July 2005, referred to it, recommends
      to the President, in terms of section 10(1) of the Public  Funding  of
      Represented Political Parties Act, 1997 (Act No. 103  of  1997),  that
      the said regulations be amended to read as follows:


                                  SCHEDULE


      Definitions


           1.  In this Schedule "the  Regulations"  means  the  regulations
      published under Government Notice No.  R 117 of 20 November 1998.


      Amendment of Regulation 5 of the Regulations

            2.   Regulation 5 of the Regulations is hereby amended—
      (a)   by the substitution  for  subregulation  (1)  of  the  following
subregulation:
              "(1) Subject to subregulation (3), all allocations to which a
           political  party  is  entitled  as  determined   in   terms   of
           regulations 3 and 4, must be paid  to  the  political  party  in
           question in four equal instalments, each within three months  of
           the previous payment.  The first instalment must be paid  within
           four weeks of the beginning of the financial year in question.";
            and
      (b)   by the addition of the following subregulation:
             "(3) (a) The Commission must, within ten days after the date on
           which the Speaker of a  legislature  has  published  the  notice
           contemplated in item 5(3) of Schedule 6A to the Constitution, re-
           allocate in accordance with the provisions of regulations 3  and
           4, as the case may be, fifty (50) per cent of the  total  amount
           of funding determined  in  terms  of  regulation  2(1)  for  the
           financial year in question to the political parties that, at the
           expiry of the period referred to in item 5(3) of Schedule 6A  to
           the Constitution, qualify for the allocation of moneys from  the
           Fund in terms of section 5 of the Act.
             (b) All allocations to which a political party is  entitled  in
           terms of paragraph (a), must be paid to the political  party  in
           question in two equal instalments.  The first instalment must be
           paid within the first fifteen days of  October  and  the  second
           instalment must be paid within the first fifteen days of January
           of the financial year in question.".

      Amendment of Regulation 8 of the Regulations

           3.  Regulation 8 of the Regulations is  hereby  amended  by  the
      substitution for subregulation (2) of the following subregulation:
             "(2) The information required for the purposes of subregulation
           (1) must be furnished to the Commission—
           (a)   by the accounting officer referred to in section  6(1)  of
               the Act within three months after the end of  the  financial
               year in question;  or
           b) in the case of a  political  party  contemplated  in  section
              6A(3) of the Act, by the person who last held the  office  of
              accounting officer referred to in section 6(1) of the Act  of
              that party or, if he or she is not available, the  leader  of
              that party within two months after the date on which a  party
              is required to close its books  and  records  of  account  in
              terms of section 6A(4) of the Act.".


                           TUESDAY, 23 AUGUST 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 22 August 2005 in terms of Joint
    Rule 160(4), classified the Repeal of Black Administration Act and
    Amendment of Certain Laws Bill [B 25 – 2005], introduced in the
    National Assembly, as a section 76 Bill and as a Bill falling within
    the ambit of section 18(1)(a) of the Traditional Leadership and
    Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No. 41 of 2003).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 23 August 2005 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


          i) Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill [B 22B – 2005] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).
          The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security
          and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

2.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

          a) Statute of the Centre for Science and Technology of the Non-
             Aligned Movement and Other Developing Countries, tabled in
             terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Statute of the Centre for
             Science and Technology of the Non-Aligned Movement and Other
             Developing Countries.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve Bank
         for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

      b) Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of Southern
         Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


      c) Activities Report of the Development Bank of Southern Africa for
         2004-2005.


      d) Development Bank of Southern Africa – Footprints of Development
         2001-2005.


      e) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board for
         2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 51-2005].


      f) Government Notice No 1114 published in Government Gazette No 27773
         dated 15 July 2005: Amendment of the list of public entities as
         contained in schedule 2 and 3 of the Public Finance Management Act,
         1999.


2.    The Minister of Communications


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Broadcasting
         Corporation (SABC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      a) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
         Mr K Sulliman, an additional magistrate at the Durban Magistrate
         Court.


      b) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
         Mr M S E Khumalo, magistrate and Head of office at the Amsterdam
         Magistrate Court.


      c) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
         Mr M F Mathe, an additional magistrate at the Pine Town Magistrate
         Court.

-----------------------
[1] In the first year (2004) the Pan-African Parliament operated  without  a
budget and therefore relied on voluntarism  by  National  Governments.   The
Parliament was established in terms of Article 5 of the Constitutive Act  of
the Union as the representative body of the African people  to  enable  full
participation in the development of their continent, promotion of peace  and
human rights and development of culture of democracy in Africa.

[2] , The PAP work plan is attached as Annexure 1.

[3] The PAP budget is attached as Annexure 2.
[4] Handiek, K. Mandates and Functioning of Joint Monitoring Committees,
2004


