---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 26 October 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-10-26
---

WEDNESDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2005
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 15:03.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                                ANNOUNCEMENT


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I wish to announce that the hon
Ntwanambi, the hon Mchunu and the hon Matloahela were all sworn in as
permanent delegates earlier today. [Applause.] There is one member that you
may not know. Mrs Matloahela has joined the good team of the NCOP and she
is from the Northern Cape.

Hon members, I also wish to announce that I am making available to the hon
Council the estimated budget for the Taking Parliament to the People visit
to Limpopo from 31 October to 4 November 2005, as I have undertaken to do.
I am formally tabling the estimated budget in the House. It will be
circulated to members. [Applause.]

                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move on behalf of the
IFP on the next sitting day of the House:

  That the Council –

  (1) notes with great shock that Dipuo Mokoena took a baby to the
        Shoshanguve Clinic for a check-up and was turned away by a nurse
        because she did not bring the birth certificate of the child along;


  (2) further notes that the mother had to return with the baby, without any
        medication or being attended to by any medical practitioner, and
        when she arrived home two hours later the child had died; and


  (3) conveys it message of condolence to the family and urges that such
        unprofessional and unethical conduct of the nurse should be
        investigated and appropriate steps taken to curb the reoccurrence of
        such an incident.


Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the
next sitting of the Council:

  That the Council –
  (1) notes that on 13 October 2005 an Azapo member in the NA was elected as
        a member of the Pan-African Parliament to represent the opposition;


  (2) further notes that the majority of opposition members supported the
        election of the hon Joe Seremane to represent the opposition in the
        Pan-African Parliament; and


  (3) concludes that the ANC nevertheless misused their majority in the NA
        to designate not only who should represent the majority party but,
        bizarrely, also who the opposition parties’ representative should be
        and therefore resolves to call on the majority party to uphold the
        principles of multiparty democracy in Parliament by allowing the
        opposition to choose their own representatives to fill positions
        reserved for the opposition. I so move. [Applause.]


                                   RULING


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, in terms of Rule 491, no member
while addressing the Council should pre-empt the discussion of the matter
appearing on the Order Paper. Hon member, the election of the member of the
Pan-African Parliament appears on the Order Paper today as the first Order.
The hon member’s motion is contrary to the provisions of the Rules and
cannot be proceeded with.

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Chairperson, I respect your interpretation, but I was
actually referring to the decision that was made in the NA on 13 October. I
am not anticipating what is happening today. My motion actually referred to
something that had already happened more than a week ago.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I have ruled on that matter. Let the Council
proceed.




                     INTERVENTION BY MINISTER OF HEALTH


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council –

  (1) commends the Minister of Health for protecting the vulnerable at the
       mental hospitals by taking the drastic steps of closing down the
       wards that were not fit for hospitalisation of our sick and, further,
       charging the Chief Executive Officer for neglecting the interest of
       the poorest of the poor; and


  (2) acknowledges that this sends  a  clear  signal  to  the  whole  health
       industry that the lives of our poor people are just as  important  as
       those of the rich.
   Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


              CONGRATULATIONS TO FREE STATE CHEETAH RUGBY TEAM


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D A WORTH: Chairman, I move without notice:

  That the Council –

   (1)      congratulates all the players and management of the Free State
        Cheetah Rugby Team on winning the Currie Cup last weekend;


   (2)      notes that -


        (a) this victory confirms that it was the correct decision to award
             the fifth regional team in the Super Team League to the
             central region; and


        (b)      this is a lesson to the Blue Bulls team that nobody  stays
             in power forever.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                          RUGBY PLAYER OF THE YEAR


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Chair, I move without notice:

  That the Council congratulates Bryan Habana, the Springbok wing,
  who was last night nominated as Rugby Player of the Year  and  Top   Try-
  scorer of the Year.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.




                        AFRICAN PEER REVIEW MECHANISM


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I would like to move a motion printed
on the Order Paper in the name of the Chairperson of the NCOP as follows:

  That the Council -


  (1) notes that -


        (a) the decision to establish  the  African  Peer  Review  Mechanism
              (APRM) was taken at the founding conference  of  the  African
              Union held in Durban in 2002; and


        (b) South Africa will be the eighth country to be  reviewed  by  the
              APRM;


  (2) recognises that the mandate of the APRM is to ensure that the policies
        and  practices  of  participating  states  conform  to  the   agreed
        political, economic  and  corporate  governance  values,  codes  and
        standards contained in  the  Declaration  on  Democracy,  Political,
        Economic and Corporate Governance;


  (3) acknowledges that at a meeting at the  Gallagher  Estate  in  Midrand,
        Gauteng, on Wednesday 28  September  2005,  representatives  of  the
        people of South Africa conducted deliberations  on  the  process  of
        APRM in our country and that delegates  from  government,  business,
        trade unions, academia, and the entire  spectrum  of  civil  society
        were present;


  (4) believes that every review exercise carried out under the authority of
        the APRM  must  be  technically  competent,  credible  and  free  of
        political  manipulation  and  that   these   stipulations   together
        constitute the core guiding principles of the APRM;


  (5) observes that Parliament has set up joint  committees  to  inform  and
        engage the public in the process of the APRM;


  (6) congratulates the African Union and President Thabo Mbeki for ensuring
        that our country plays a progressive role in the reconstruction and
        development of the African continent; and


  (7) wishes the African Peer Review Mechanism success in its  work  in  our
        country.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As the decision is dealt with in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all
delegate heads are present in the Chamber to cast their province’s votes.
Are all the delegation heads present in the Chamber? In accordance with
Rule 71 I shall first allow the provinces an opportunity to make their
declarations of vote. Is there any province that wishes to do so? None. We
shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do so in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour of, against or abstain. Eastern Cape?

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Support, Chair.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Vrystaat steun. [Free State supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal iyaxhasa. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: We support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

Motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

              ELECTION OF MEMBER TO THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, as a result of Adv Z L Madasa, a
former member of the ACDP, joining the ANC, it is necessary for Parliament
to elect one member from the opposition parties to serve at the Pan-African
Parliament to replace Adv Z L Madasa. I will now recognise the Chief Whip
of the Council.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I hereby nominate the hon P J
Nefolovhodwe to be elected as a member of the Pan-African Parliament. Thank
you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Any seconder?

Mr E M SOGONI: I second it, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Any further nominations?

Mr A WATSON: Chair, I take pleasure in nominating the hon Joe Seremane to
fill that position.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Any seconder?

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: I second the nomination of Mr W J Seremane.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Any further nominations? Hon members, two
candidates have been nominated, namely P J Nefolovhodwe and W J Seremane.

I shall now put the question that, firstly, P J Nefolovhodwe be elected as
member of the Pan-African Parliament, and secondly I will also put the name
of W J Seremane.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their votes. Are all delegation heads present in the
Chamber?

Because there are two members we will have to vote on both the members that
have been nominated. We will thus vote twice. I am going to put each name.
I am advised that I must start with Mr W J Seremane. But before we vote, in
accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow the provinces an opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province
that wishes to do so? None.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do so in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour of, against or abstain. Eastern Cape?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Eastern Cape?

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Against, Chair.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State against.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Against.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal against.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo against.

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Chairperson, on a point of order: In terms of the KwaZulu-
Natal legislature’s Rules, I am advised that the NCOP committee has to meet
to confirm a mandate. If they cannot agree amongst themselves, the House
actually in a plenary confirms that mandate. Neither of those circumstances
has taken place. Therefore there is no confirmed mandate for KwaZulu-Natal,
so they may not vote in this debate.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Such mandates are for section 76 legislation
and not for what we are voting on at the present moment.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, regarding that matter, as Mr
Krumbock seconded Mr Watson it was not a mandate of the legislature. He
just did it spontaneously.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I have ruled on that matter. Let us proceed.
Mpumalanga?

Mr A WATSON: Chair, on a point of order: The Chief Whip is wrong.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Watson, take your seat. I have ruled on
that matter. Let us continue. Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga votes against.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr A WATSON: Chair, on a point of order.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am dealing with a motion, Mr Watson. Please
take your seat.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, I rise on a point of order on the vote that has just
been cast.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Let me just finish with my motion. Northern
Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Northern Cape votes against.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West votes against.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Against.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All nine provinces have voted against the name
of hon Seremane. [Applause.] I shall now put the name of Mr Nefolovhodwe.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Eastern Cape?

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Eastern Cape supports, Chair.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Siyamxhasa. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal iyaxhasa. [KwaZulu-Natal Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo iyathega. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga iyasekela. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: E a thega. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z KOLWENI: North West phambili. [North West supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK:  Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Nine provinces voted for Mr Nefolovhodwe.
[Applause.]

Mr P J Nefolovhodwe is accordingly elected as a member of the Pan-African
Parliament in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I did not want to disrupt voting time but
I want to request you to call upon hon Krumbock to withdraw a word, because
he said that what was happening in the House was a “farce”. This word is
unparliamentary and he must withdraw it.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Krumbock, can you withdraw the word
“farce”? It is unparliamentary.

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Chair, I am afraid I cannot. The fact that the majority
party can choose the opposition representative is a farce.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: If you cannot withdraw that word, can you
please excuse yourself from this House for the rest of the day?

The member thereupon withdrew.

                      ROAD ACCIDENT FUND AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Hon Chairperson and hon members, earlier this
year in my Budget Vote address to the National Assembly I indicated
government’s firm determination to realign the Road Accident Fund with its
fundamental purpose, namely the provision of assistance to those injured in
accidents. To succeed, we have had to assert the need for greater equity
for road users against the need for the sustainability of the fund.

After two years of numerous drafts, legal and constitutional opinions and
statistical analysis, the Bill was passed in the National Assembly in mid-
September. This Bill that seeks the consideration of the NCOP today is
markedly different from the original Bill. Its contents have been widely
amended according to the considered wishes of the National Assembly.

In essence, the amendments to the Road Accident Fund Act remove unfair
discrimination against passengers that has plagued our system for decades.
For the first time the veil of comfort provided by the Road Accident Fund
is extended to those millions, mostly poor people, who rely daily on public
transport to travel to work or, indeed, even to seek work.

Those who help reduce congestion on our roads and contribute to a cleaner
environment by making use of public transport and lift clubs will no longer
be limited unfairly regarding protection. In order to provide this wider
service it has become necessary to place certain limits on the magnitude of
loss of income claims.

I am very much aware of the petition initiated a week or two ago on the
Internet – itself a fundamental resources of privilege in our society –
objecting to the democratic and transformative provisions of the Bill.
Whilst, at one level, I can understand the frustration of those who have to
accept lower levels of compensation for their levy contributions, I would
urge that they acknowledge and consider appropriate personal insurance
options. However, although government is able to provide a measure of
support to protect the lives and livelihoods of road accident victims, we
are not going to continue to subsidise unequal lifestyles in our unequal
society.

There is no truth in the fantasy that the Bill imposes a blanket limit on
all types of injuries. The Bill ensures fairness by shifting the focus to
the primary victims of accidents as well as those seriously injured. No
longer will the fund be faced with high claims from those who sustained no
injuries or were not involved in an accident. No longer will legal costs be
able to outstrip the compensation paid to victims. The time for
opportunistic claims is over; and the time for a more social and just
appreciation of the disparities in wealth and access to support from the
state is upon us.

This Bill also prevents the perpetuation of inequalities in the provision
of health care by introducing public health tariffs. This is done without
limiting choices in treatment or restricting those who need to receive it.
To ensure that accidents are responded to efficiently, allowance was made
for golden hour tariffs. Again, we are aware that those who choose to
receive private or international care will have to protect this right
through available medical aid cover.

The amendments introduced in this Bill therefore speak to the
constitutional imperative to ensure progressive realisation of the right to
social security and health care; and the provision of relief without the
introduction of unfair discrimination. The Bill provides for good
governance and addresses the financial position of the fund by effecting
savings on legal costs, medical expenses and compensation paid. But this
Bill is something of a rest stop along the highway. It is not meant to
address all the problems of the Road Accident Fund. It only provides some
immediate measures to alleviate obvious problems.

The amendments do not change the system of compensation that continues to
exclude those unable to prove fault on the part of another driver, and
continues to discriminate against those unable to look after themselves
after an accident. For us to address this adversarial and expensive system,
which perpetuates inequities and inequalities, we will have to rethink our
policy on public support to victims of road accidents. The department has
prepared reports on the consequences and implication of introducing an
equitable, reasonable and affordable system that provides relief to the
injured and disabled. I look forward to sharing these proposals with you in
the near future.

Despite its inability to solve all the problems faced by the fund, the Bill
tabled here this afternoon will ensure that we are able to manage the risks
faced by the fund, both in the immediate future and during the proposed
restructuring. I am very certain that the department and Parliament will
work together to develop a more comprehensive plan around the fund in due
course.

In conclusion, the key to the sustainability of any system of compensation
is the improvement of road safety. Through improved road behaviour, better
enforcement and road traffic management; by increasing the use of public
transport; and by ensuring appropriate use of all transport modes, we can
succeed on this front. Therefore I have the honour to present the Bill to
the NCOP for your kind consideration. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R J TAU: Hon Chair, hon Minister, special delegates, colleagues and
friends, it is common knowledge by now that the Urban Areas Act and the
pass laws controlled the movement and residential rights of black South
Africans.

Therefore, it is not surprising that vast distances are regularly and
frequently travelled across South Africa by the unwilling, formerly
disenfranchised of this evil, social experiment. According to Justice
Wills’ report migrant labourers continue to commute between their homes and
families in the former Bantustans to the urban areas where they have sought
work and in which they now live.

The black peasantry from the remote and underdeveloped countryside travel
to metropolitan areas for medical treatment, schooling, further education
and shopping. To deal with the administrative bureaucracy black workers in
urban areas commute from the former black group areas townships to
factories, offices and places of employment, which are usually found in
industrial and formerly white group areas.

Residents, many of them children, in black urban areas walk to and from
their homes to spaza shops, crèches, schools, clinics and places of
employment by day on unsafe and congested roads that lack pavements; they
walk at night on roads without adequate lighting.

Therefore it is quite clear that the Bill before us today is quite a
critical and important piece of legislation that comes a long way, that is,
in terms of process. At the heart of it we all know that it has got to do
with improving the lives of ordinary people living in the Republic.

For many years reports have been put to the public and to Parliament about
the corruption that existed in the Road Accident Fund. It is also clear
that, year after year, we have heard of reports about the unscrupulous
people who have defrauded the fund to a point where the poor, who were
mostly to have been the beneficiaries, were negatively affected in the
process. This resulted in the establishment of the commission, of course,
that was intended to ensure that it does a thorough investigation and
recommendation of what needs to be done.

Having noted the above, from the National Household Travel Survey 2003
results, it is very clear that the majority of the South African population
using our roads on a daily basis is concerned about safety on our roads.
While we take note of the fact that some other factors are being raised in
the survey, it becomes equally important that we observe the issues raised
by our people around road safety. Therefore, it is quite clear that the
majority of our people are exposed to accidents on our roads.

This Bill seeks to address some of the challenges that our people are
confronted by in events where they become involved in accidents. The select
committee has noted some of the fundamental issues that the Bill seeks to
address in order to ensure that the fund becomes effective, self-
sustainable and responds proactively and evenly to the needs of our people.

For many years, our people, in particular the poor and illiterate, have
been exposed to unscrupulous lawyers who have worked tirelessly to rip off
the fund by submitting false claims on behalf of the poor, and they are
still getting away with that. For many years we have also read of doctors
who have collaborated with some of these lawyers to put false claims
against the fund, much to the disadvantage of the poor.

For many years, we have been presented with reports about the fund not
being able to pay out legitimate and correct claims to deserving people,
because of internal problems that the fund was experiencing as a result of
lack of better management systems and proper governance of the fund.

As for public representatives and in particular those with a working-class
background and who serve poor constituencies, I bet that few or none will
disagree with me when I say that one of the most difficult questions that
has always been put to us has been about the functioning of the Road
Accident Fund. I say this precisely because the people who are using buses,
taxis, bakkies, or lorries as a means of transport are the poor and the
rural masses who, in most instances, are the ones who find themselves
exposed to road accidents and corrupt officials who come as service
providers.

With this Bill before us we feel much more empowered and better positioned
to give responses to the most difficult questions put to us from now
onwards. I say this because the Bill put before us today seeks to undo most
of the wrong things that have bedevilled the fund for many years. Some of
the things that the Bill seeks to address include the establishment of a
board where the CEO has management skills - not necessarily the other
things that have always been raised around what kind of CEO is needed to
manage this particular fund - and to have a co-operative governance
approach to the fund as contemplated in the Constitution.

It is also important for members to note that with the restructuring
process of the fund we shall see a situation where the liability of the
fund will be based on the tariffs for the health services provided by the
public health establishments, as contemplated in the National Health Act of
2003.

At the same time it should also be noted that in the event where emergency
medical treatment is provided, the fund should negotiate a reasonable
tariff with the provider, of course guided by the availability of
resources. It is our view that this approach will encourage the use of
public institutions and it thereby seeks to strengthen and build a positive
public perception about medical services as provided by public health
institutions.

It is further interesting to note the fact that the Bill seeks to
restructure the financial period from May to May. The committee has also
noted this approach with great interest in that, at least, that will bring
the financial period of the fund in line with the financial systems of the
country. The alignment of the fund to the Public Finance Management Act and
principles of good co-operative governance will seek to clarify the roles
and responsibilities of the Minister, the board, the fund and the executive
of the fund.

The overall effect of the Bill will be to reduce the liabilities of the
fund. This approach will see an improvement in the finances of the fund in
that it is estimated that an amount of between R500 million to R1,6 billion
can be saved over a period of 5 years. This will serve as a good turnaround
financial strategy as opposed to the millions of rands that the fund has
lost over time. We take the point that this Bill is a process in the
correct direction, because that is exactly what it seeks to do, to
stabilise the fund.

I raise this because, as a committee, we note some areas that need some
further work to be done. One amongst the key areas is the extent to which
the rural poor are going to be affected. We raised this point, informed of
the fact that most accidents that occur in rural areas are mainly caused by
stray animals, as opposed to accidents that happen in urban and semi-urban
areas. The Bill is silent on how the rural poor are going to be covered by
the fund.

It is therefore the view of the committee that some work still needs to be
done in that particular area because, if not, the rural poor stand to fall
out of the framework of the benefits of the intended objectives of the
Bill. During the presentation we noted that areas formally earmarked for
black South Africans are those least provided with modern and well-
maintained transport infrastructure. There are  dirt tracks; streams
without bridges; unmonitored fords over rivers; potholes in single lane
roads; on the absence of safety shoulders; poor and sometimes nonexistent
roads signs and markings; and a lack of pavements or unpaved pedestrian
areas all abound in rural areas, and especially in those urban and rural
areas that were historically designated for black people.

Hence, it is not surprising that long distances are travelled by the poor
and less sophisticated for which they are not exposed to public transport
necessarily. We therefore as a committee also call upon the private sector
to work in partnership with our government in improving the conditions of
our commuter roads. We call upon, in particular, the insurance companies
and medical aid schemes to make a meaningful contribution in improving
these conditions instead of standing aside and complaining about the extent
to which the fund takes a long time to pay their claims. That also goes for
the law firms of South Africa that have benefited over many years as
private service providers. They should make their positive contribution.

It must also be noted that we appreciate the role that other companies in
South Africa have played in promoting road safety measures through
electronic and print media. We however feel that more needs to be done for
our people in the rural areas and in particular in schools as spearheaded
and led by our government and the department in particular.
As the chairperson of the select committee, I think it is important that I
must make the point that we appreciate the role that the department has
played to consistently, and on a regular basis, seek to give better clarity
to members of the committee.  And on the basis of that, as a committee, we
support the Bill. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, a friend of mine,
who is a sales representative, drives home from the country trip on a
Friday evening, after slogging it out in the hot Mpumalanga Lowveld,
visiting potential customers and negotiating sales from early in the
morning till late each day. But he is happy, because tonight, for the first
time this week, he will be having supper with his wife and four children.

He will be even happier to tell them that he has had a good week, and if
his sales continue along the same lines, he will be averaging more than R20
000 a month. This means that he will be able to afford next year’s school
fees, new clothes for the children, and maybe even a short holiday at
Loskop Dam. But his dreams are short-lived, because as he enters town,
passing the country club, a drunken millionaire in a fancy, expensive,
imported motorcar comes speeding out of the club grounds and crashes into
my friend’s car.

My friend is very badly hurt. Bystanders try to assist my friend and others
call a nearby private hospital to send out an ambulance, but the private
hospital refuses to attend to a road accident because they are no longer
recognised. The good Samaritans are referred to the state facilities in the
town, only to be informed that they will have to wait for the ambulance,
which is at the local shopping centre where the driver and medics are
buying takeaways for their colleagues back at the emergency centre.

The ambulance finally arrives two hours later and transports my friend to
the local hospital where no resuscitation equipment is available and where
his family is informed that no state hospital in Mpumalanga is equipped
with a spinal unit or a burn unit.

Although his life was saved, he is today badly scarred, totally paralysed,
and unable to work. He is now paid an amount of only R9 000 a month after
deduction, as compensation against that total loss of income and ability to
earn for his family. The family now battles to make ends meet.

His friends urged him to sue the shirt off the drunken millionaire, but the
lawyers explained that the new Act prohibits him from claiming any further
from a third party whatsoever.

Whilst the latter part of my rendition is factual in many provinces like
Mpumalanga - and it is, of course, a fictitious story about a fictitious
friend - I pray that nothing like that really ever happens. But my friend
could as well have been any one of us in this House, or any of our friends.
The circumstances would be true if we passed this Amendment Bill today.
This is bad legislation, to say the least.

The original Road Accident Fund replaced the old Third Party Insurance, but
it was still aimed at protecting the victims of a road accident against the
guilty third party. In other words, it took the place of the guilty party.
The new Bill does away with it.

For this benefit motorists have paid a small contribution, all motorists,
regardless of where they come from, in a form of a fuel levy, and will
continue to pay this levy, but probably at a much higher rate in future, if
we pass this Bill today. So, motorists will in future get far less for much
more. Because of this motorists will now have to revert to very expensive
private insurance, as the Minister has referred to, if they can afford it.
That is the crunch.

They will still run the risk of losing medical aid benefits in case of a
road accident, and on top of that they will be prohibited from any form of
legal redress in the future.

It is a pity that my time is limited, because I could probably speak for
another hour on the demerits of this Bill - a Bill that seeks to save a
very badly run organisation from total financial ruin, but does little or
nothing for those who contribute to it. Worst of all, it will render the
masses in our country, who cannot afford private insurance, totally
helpless.

The Minister says that they are doing away with unequal subsidies. There
were no unequal subsidies. The motorists have footed the bill all along
through the years. It has been bad management that has squandered the money
of the Road Accident Fund.

There was no discrimination, as the Chair of the Committee referred to,
because all motorists, regardless of race, creed, or affluence, were
covered equally by the fund for every litre of petrol they put in, and for
every kilometre they travelled. There was no inequality. The new Bill will
be unequal, will do away with benefits that motorists presently have, and
should have. Therefore the DA, I regret, will not support the Bill. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, in the
preamble of the Freedom Charter, the Charter declares that South Africa
belongs to all who live in it, and that no government can justifiably claim
authority, unless it is based on the will of the people.

The Freedom Charter thus begins with a section of what is and has been a
cardinal democratic principle, that all can live in South Africa, whatever
their origin. The profound meaning of this correct assertion goes deeper
than the legal recognition of citizen rights. On the one hand it means that
the authority of those who govern must be derived from the will of the
people, and on the other, that all of us who have a legal, legitimate claim
to this country, have a responsibility to its development and progress.

The Bill before this House today is precisely aiming to address these two
important issues of development and progress. The objectives of the Road
Accident Fund Amendment Bill are twofold. Firstly, it is to provide for the
more equitable, fair and transparent compensation system, and secondly, to
improve the governance and financial position of the fund.

The Bill therefore focuses on three important principles, namely, fairness,
transparency and governance. Let me first start with the fairness of the
system. The Bill ensures that more compensation reaches the primary victims
of road accidents by reducing the settlement costs. The Bill further
protects the seriously injured, who will be able to receive compensation to
help them to adjust their lives accordingly.

Key elements in this regard include the following: Firstly, the Bill
introduces a medical threshold to access compensation for pain and
suffering, and the loss of enjoyment of life. This ensures that the fund
shall only compensate those whose are seriously injured for their losses.
Those victims who have sustained slight injuries, or whose injuries are of
a temporary nature will therefore only be compensated for the medical care
and limited loss of income suffered.

This will decrease the liability of the fund to approximately R1,1 billion
per year, and will thus allow the fund to accommodate all passengers in
providing compensation. Secondly, the Bill removes the liability of the
fund to compensate secondary victims who witnessed or heard of the
accident. As the common law recognises the rights of secondary victims to
recover damages, people in this category will be allowed to claim against
offending drivers or owners through the common law process.

Currently those who have medical insurance may receive private or even
international treatment at a high cost to the fund, whilst the majority of
South Africans are treated in our public hospitals. The Bill now introduces
a system where medical costs will be based on public health care tariffs,
which will allow for greater transparency and will benefit all equally.

It is important to understand the different levels of compensation relating
to income or support, health care and pain and suffering. The threshold on
claims for general damages has no, and I repeat, no impact on the medical
claim of any victim of road accidents. It is important to note that the
future medical treatment for which there is no, and I repeat, no
restrictions, includes the following areas of compensation, firstly,
personal attendant care for those who are unable to cope on their own;
secondly, medicines and aids such as wheelchairs which are critical to
limiting disability; thirdly, transport allowance and modifications to
homes or vehicles, and institutionalisation costs for those in need of
special care. There are no, and I repeat, no limits introduced to claims
for past and future medical treatment.

However, the Bill does introduce a public sector tariff on medical care
needed. This does not prevent any victim from accessing private or even
international services. However, the compensation claimable from the fund
will be the public sector tariffs only.

In this regard it is important to note that 86% of the population makes use
of public health care services, and hence will be able to receive
compensation for all necessary and reasonable treatment. The only specific
limitation is in the loss of income claims. Medical treatment is claimable
by all, and those who suffer serious injuries are not limited in their
claim for pain and suffering.

The weak and elitist arguments of Mr Farrow of the DA, and those of the hon
Mr Watson here today, again demonstrate the true colours of the DA, in that
their concerns are not really based on the well being of the previously
excluded community, but primarily focus on ensuring a status quo to protect
their lifestyle, at all costs, at the expense of the poor.
Further, the DA’s total obsession with the perceived overempowerment of the
National Minister to appoint the RAF Board and its CEO, clearly
demonstrates that they have no regard for the fundamental issues of social
justice, development and progress that the Bill seeks to advance.

In conclusion, although the Bill is not perfect in all aspects, it is a
transitional Bill aimed at stabilising the fund to ensure the survival and
sustainability of the fund and also ensures that those who were previously
excluded will now also benefit from the Bill. Therefore the ANC supports
the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo ohloniphekile noNgqongqoshe ohloniphekile, mhlawumbe
ngingakaqali nje ngingaphawula ngezithombe ezibonakala laphaya kumabonakude
ezesabisanayo - ungathi akuthina. Angimuhle-ke ezithombeni, Sihlalo.
[Uhleko.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Hon Chairperson and hon Minister, perhaps I need to start by
talking about the horrible pictures that we see on TV. It is not like us, I
do not look good in pictures.] [Laughter.]]

The Road Accident Fund has come a long way. This fund has had its ups and
downs in the past. It cannot be denied that the Bill seeks to improve the
governance of the fund. What is scary, however, is the limitation on
liability in sections 18(1), 18(2)(a) and 19(b) of the Act in which certain
claims are limited. The worst of all of them is the compensation for loss
of income that is limited to a gross of R160 000, before tax, per year, not
taking into account what your earnings were before the accident.

I am not convinced that much had been put into practice when the common law
rights were removed or when certain common law claims were abolished. This
will leave some of us as victims without any way of supporting our families
or ourselves.

Okunye engikubona kuyingozi ukuthi uma ngingalimala noma ngixhwale engozini
yemoto yami kungekho enye imoto engishayisane nayo, ngeke nginxeshezelwe.
Umbuzo uthi ngubani okhokhayo esikhwameni ngendlela yokuthenga uphethiloli?
Lokhu kungishiya nomqondo wokuthi umuntu ozuzayo yilowo oshayiswa yimoto
nothole ukwethuka noma ozwe isenzo esinyantisa umzimba. Ngqongqoshe, yikho-
ke okwenze iqembu leNkatha Freedom Party ukuthi lifinyelele esinqumeni
esithi kuningi okungazange kufinyelelwe kukho. Izinguquko ezenziwe
azizukuwusiza umphakathi odla imbuya ngothi. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[What I also view as dangerous is that I may be injured or become disabled
in a car accident without being involved in a head-on collision with
another car, and then I will be not compensated. The question is, who
contributes to the fund in the process of buying petrol? This leaves me
with the conclusion that the person who benefits is the one who is hit by a
car, the one who is traumatised and the one who has heard a terrible thing.
Minister, that is why the Inkatha Freedom Party has come to the conclusion
that there are a lot of issues that were left hanging. The changes that
have been made are not going to help poor people.]

The other factor that needs clarity is the question of medical aid versus
the fund. It is not clear what criteria will be used when payment is
determined for a person who is totally physically indisposed. The process
is of such a nature legal knowledge is needed. The liability of the fund in
respect of bodily injury to or the death of anyone will be limited in total
to the amount representing the difference between the amount that that
third party could have claimed from the fund or such agent.

Ngqongqoshe, ngalezi zizathu esengizibeke ngenhla ngibuye nenqina
kamabuyaze lapho iqembu lithe ngeke linginike igunya lokuthi ngiwuxhase lo
Mthethosivivinywa. Ngakho-ke ngiwela kulelo-ke lokuthi ngingawuxhasi
njengoba ngithunyiwe. Ngalokho-ke i-IFP ngeke ikwazi ukuwuxhasa lo
Mthethosivivinywa. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Minister, for the reasons that I have mentioned above, I came back empty-
handed. The party said that it would not give me the authority to support
this Bill. I will therefore stick to that. As instructed, I will not
support it. The IFP does not support the Bill.]

Mnr F ADAMS: Agb Voorsitter van Komitees, agb Minister, agb lede en
kollegas van die Huis, vandag staan ek in hierdie Huis as ’n trotse lid van
die party wat omgee vir alle mense in Suid-Afrika - nie net vir ’n handjie
vol mense nie, maar vir alle mense. Dit wil ek baie duidelik stel, agb mnr
Watson, ek staan vandag as ’n lid . . [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson of Committees, hon Minister, hon members and
colleagues of this House, I am standing in this House today as a proud
member of the party that cares for all the people in South Africa - not
just for a few people, but for all people. I want to put this very clearly,
hon Mr Watson, today I stand as a member . . . [Interjections.]]

I stand today as a member of the ANC in this House. [Applause.]

Komplekse wetgewing het nog altyd gesorg dat daar misverstande is, en
daarom is dit belangrik vir ons as wetgewers om hierdie komplekse wetgewing
te verstaan en te verduidelik. Dit skok my om vandag hier te sit en luister
hoe ’n mens in ’n komitee saamstem met ’n wetsontwerp, maar dan hier kom
staan en van trant verander. Dit gaan ’n mens se verstand te bowe dat ’n
mens kan baklei en sê jy stem saam met alles, maar dan hier kom en sê jy
stem nie meer saam nie. Dit verwar ons mense daar buite in Suid-Afrika.

Daarom het ons in die ou Nuwe Nasionale Party gesê ons gaan saam met die
ANC, want hulle praat met een stem. Een stem! [Tussenwerpsels.] Hulle sê
nie een ding daar in ’n kamer en dan gaan hulle buite en sê ’n ander ding
nie. Hulle maak een wet wat almal pas, en die agb Lamoela weet dit. Sy weet
dit voor haar siel dat dit die ANC is wat Suid-Afrika op ’n wenpad sit. U
het dit vanmiddag in die Nasionale Vergadering gehoor. [Tussenwerpsels.] U
het vanmiddag van die goeie werk wat die ANC al die jare gedoen het.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

’n Mens kan sien hoe die agb Watson en Lamoela aangaan, want hierdie
wetgewing het ’n impak op die arm mense, die mense wat nie kan bekostig om
’n prokureur te betaal nie. Mense soos ons, mnr Watson en mev Lamoela, wat
prokureurs kan bekostig, het nie hierdie tipe wetgewing nodig nie, en dis
waarom hulle teen die wetsontwerp kan gaan. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dis waarom
hulle teen die wetsontwerp kan stem, maar ons kyk na ons mense. Ons kyk na
ons plattelandse gebiede. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ons weet vir ’n feit daar was prokureurs en regsgeleerdes wat ons mense
uitgebuit het. [Tussenwerpsels.] Mense wag nou nog, tot vandag toe, nog
steeds op eise. [Tussenwerpsels.] Tot vandag toe wag hulle nog steeds op
eise. Dis darem lekker om in die ANC te wees, want ek het nou meer tyd om
die DA te ontbloot!. [Gelag.] [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Complex legislation has always caused misunderstandings, and that is why
it is important for us as legislators to understand this complex
legislation and to explain it. I am shocked to sit here today and listen to
how a person who concurred with a Bill in a committee comes here and
changes his tune. It is beyond me that a person can fight and say that he
agrees with everything, but then comes here and says that he no longer
agrees with it. It confuses our people out there in South Africa.

That is why we, in the old NNP, said that we were going to join the ANC;
because they speak with one voice. One voice! [Interjections.] They do not
say something in a room and upon leaving it say something else. They make
one law to suit everybody, and the hon Lamoela knows it. In her heart of
hearts she knows that it is the ANC who put South Africa on the road to
success. You heard about it this afternoon in the National Assembly.
[Interjections.] This afternoon you heard about all the good things that
the ANC has done all these years. [Interjections.]

One can see how the hon Watson and Lamoela are carrying on, because this
legislation has an impact on the poor people, the people who cannot afford
to pay an attorney. People like us, Mr Watson and Mrs Lamoela, who can
afford attorneys, do not need this type of legislation, and that is why
they can oppose this Bill. [Interjections.] That is why they can vote
against this Bill, but we look after our people. We look after our rural
areas. [Interjections.]

We know that it is a fact that there were attorneys and lawyers who
exploited our people. [Interjections.] People are still waiting, to this
day, on claims. [Interjections.] To this day they are waiting on claims. It
is so good to be part of the ANC, because now I have more time to expose
the DA! [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

I’ve got much more time to show South Africa that the DA is not the party
to be trusted, and that the ANC is the party to be trusted.
[Interjections.] Yes, that I would like to do. [Interjections.]

Dit is ’n feit dat daar nog steeds vandag prokureurs is wat ons mense . . .
Daar wag nog steeds mense in my kiesafdeling op vergoeding terwyl die
prokureurs sê: “Vergoeding het nog nooit plaasgevind nie, maar uit ons
trustfonds leen ons vir jou hierdie of daardie bedrag.”

Hierdie wetsontwerp stel dit aan die kaak. Hierdie wetsontwerp beskerm nie
net die elite nie. As die agb lid net wil ophou praat, en luister, sal sy
hoor . . . [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is a fact that there are still attorneys today who . . . our people . .
. There are still people in my constituency who are waiting for
compensation, while the attorneys are saying: “Compensation has not taken
place yet, but we are lending you this or that amount from  our trust
fund.”

This Bill shows this up. This Bill does not protect the elite only.
[Interjections.] If the hon member would just stop talking, and listen, she
will hear . . . [Interjections.]]

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chair, would the member take a question? [Interjections.]

Mr F ADAMS: No, Chair, the member is wasting my time. [Interjections.] That
is what the DA is always good at doing: wasting time, and they are wasting
my time now.

As die agb lid net wil stilbly en luister, sal sy hoor ek het gesê daar is
sekere - sékere - prokureurs wat deur hierdie wetgewing vasgevat gaan word.
[If the hon member would just keep quiet and listen, she would have heard
that I said there are certain
– certain - attorneys who would be clamped down on by this legislation.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, could the hon Mrs Lamoela
respect Rule 33 of this House? Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Continue, hon member.

Mr F ADAMS: Thank you, Chief Whip.

Om te sê ’n dronkbestuurder kom 100% los is onwaar. Daar is sekere goed in
hierdie wetgewing wat nog aandag moet geniet. Niks is perfek nie, maar ten
minste is daar ’n poging aangewend. Ten minste kan ons vorentoe beweeg in
Suid-Afrika. Ons hoef nie stil in ’n groef vasgevang te staan nie. Dit laat
my dink, as ’n mens kyk na die manier hoe party rugbyspanne in Suid-Afrika
rugby speel, dan moet ’n mens wonder of die manne wat rugby speel – ek sê
party rugbyspanne, maar ek noem nie name nie  – nie almal DA-ondersteuners
is nie.
Wat die DA nie kan verstaan nie, is dat die regering van die dag daar is
vir alle mense. Leer dit tog. Kry dit vandag in jul koppe dat die regering
van vandag nie net vir ’n sekere groepie sorg wat met dik tjekboeke en
kredietkaarte rondloop nie, maar vir alle mense. Vir alle mense!
[Tussenwerpsels.] Dít is vir wie die regering van die dag sorg.

Ons wil die Minister bedank daarvoor. Dankie, Minister, vir u sienswyse.
Dankie vir u visie om Suid-Afrika ’n beter plek te maak. Aan u departement,
en spesifiek me Marisa du Toit, wil ons sê baie dankie, want u weet, me
Marisa du Toit het haar tyd geneem om hierdie wetsontwerp aan ’n komitee
met die agb Watson, die agb Mzizi en almal van ons deur te trap, maar nog
steeds kom staan hulle hier en maak sekere aanmerkings en aantygings. Die
ANC steun hierdie wetgewing. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is not true to say that a drunk driver gets off 100%. There are certain
things in this legislation to which attention should still be devoted.
Nothing is perfect, but at least an effort has been made. We can at least
move forward in South Africa. We do not have to be at a standstill, stuck
in a rut. This makes me think; if you look at the way some rugby teams in
South Africa play rugby you have to wonder whether the men who play rugby –
I am saying some rugby teams, but I am not mentioning any names – are not
all DA supporters.

What the DA cannot understand is that the government of the day is there
for all people. Please learn this! Get it into your heads today that
today’s government does not care only for a certain small group who is
walking around with fat chequebooks and credit cards, but for all people.
For all people! [Interjections.] That is for whom the government of the day
cares.

We want to thank the Minister for that. Thank you, Minister, for your point
of view. Thank you for your vision to make South Africa a better place. To
your department, especially Ms Marisa du Toit, we want to say thank you
very much, because, as you know, Ms Marisa du Toit took her time to work
carefully through this Bill in a committee with the hon Watson, the hon
Mzizi and all of us, but they still come and stand here, making certain
comments and allegations. The ANC supports this legislation. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZOKUTHUTHA: Sihlalo, ngiyabonga ngokuthi amalungu oMkhandlu
kaZwelonke weziFundazwe ayawuxhasa lo Mthetho esiwubekayo namhlanje
ngaphandle nje kwedlanzana labantu abangafuni ukwemukela lo Mthetho.
Ngivumelana kakhulu nelungu elihloniphekile u-Van Rooyen othi lama lungu e-
DA kungathi awafuni ukuhambisana nenqubo entsha yobuso wentando yeningi
eNingizimu Afrika. Zonke lezi zinto abakhuluma ngazo bafuna ukuthi lama
lungelo alaba Bantu abanezimali aqhubeke abe khona eNingizimu Afrika into
lo Mthetho ofuna ukuyiqeda ukuze uquqaba lwabantu baseNingizimu Afrika
lukwazi nalo ukuthi luthole ukunxeshenzelwa uma bengene ezingozini.

Umnu u-Watson ungathi uyakhohlwa ukuthi sesisembusweni wentando yeningi
manje. Lo Mthetho akhulula ngawo athi wawungabandlululi kuqala,
wawubandlula ngoba zazikhona lezi zinkulungwane ezingama-25 zamaRandi
ewumnqamulajuqu ikakhulukazi kubantu abasebenzisa abasebenzisa izinto
zokuhamba ezisetshenziswa umphakathi. Leyo nto-ke siyayazi ukuthi abantu
abaningi abamnyama abagibela izinto zokuhamba ezisetshenziswa umphakathi
bese-ke befakelwa lezi zinkulungwane ezingama-25 zamaRandi. Lo Mthetho-ke
uyayishintsha le nto ukuze kube khona ukulingana lapha eNingizimu Afrika.
Ngibuye ngaphoxwa-ke nawumfowethu-ke uMzizi ngokuhamba ne-DA. Ngithi hhayi
buya ekhaya Mzizi bakufaka ehlathini laba bantu. [Uhleko.] (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, I appreciate it that the members
of the National Council of Provinces support the Bill that we tabled today,
with the exception of a small group of people who do not want to accept
this Bill. I fully agree with the hon Van Rooyen that the members of the DA
do not want to subscribe to the new system of democracy in South Africa.
All these issues they speak about are aimed at protecting and continuing
the rights of the rich people in South Africa, which this Bill intends
revoking so that ordinary citizens could receive compensation when they are
involved in accidents.

Mr Watson forgets that we are in a democratic state. The law that he said
was not discriminatory was indeed discriminatory, because it made provision
for R25 000 compensation for those people who used public transport. We
know that the majority of black people use public transport and are the
ones who would receive this R25 000 compensation. This Bill is going to
change all that and bring about some kind of equality. I have also been
disappointed by the hon Mzizi for aligning himself with the DA. I want to
say, no Mzizi, come back home, these people are leading you astray.]
[Laughter.]]

I want to state, in conclusion, that hon members should also be aware of
recent sweeping statements that have been made in the media – that the
proposed caps in terms of this amending Bill will leave those injured
without the necessary compensation; which has also been exemplified by what
the hon Watson has just said.

I need to indicate to this NCOP that this perception has been created that,
for example, a labourer, unable to work owing to a broken leg, will be left
with no compensation. This, of course, is not true. The intention of
introducing these thresholds and caps is to limit the growing
misappropriation of funds. We have seen evidence, as highlighted by the hon
Tau, of this unfair and inequitable trend in which the slightly injured
claim more than the seriously injured, and high claims for income are
growing at an unsustainable rate. Even those who were not involved in road
accidents have been able to claim exorbitant amounts of money. So this Bill
brings that to an end.

The second point I want to highlight is that owing to the impact of the
proposed changes on all road users, this legislative process was supported
by constitutional opinions throughout the process. The opinion of senior
counsel was obtained, and we are satisfied that as the National Assembly
and, of course, the NCOP that these proposed amendments are reasonable and
justifiable. Similar care will also be taken to ensure that the regulations
that are going to come about are also subject to the same scrutiny.
Our perception at Transport is that the complaints that have been received
in this regard reflect the belief that the common law provides a yardstick
for constitutional rights. Understanding that the Bill of Rights should be
our yardstick, we are very confident that any constitutional challenge
relating to this Bill will not succeed.

Finally, the select committee of the NCOP also raised a concern relating to
the powers of the executive authority in appointing the accounting
authority and officer of the fund. This is a very valid concern. The Bill,
however, does require a transparent process in which all the names of
nominees, their nominators, the scales of the nominees and the names of
those who are going to be shortlisted be made public.

We therefore believe that the strong focus on transparency will satisfy the
concerns that have been raised by some of the hon members, and I do hope
that the process will also be equally characterised by those high levels of
engagement. I therefore wish to take this opportunity of thanking all the
NCOP members, those who participated in this debate, for supporting this
necessary amendment to the Road Accident Fund. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.


    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LAND AND ENVIRONMENTAL
           AFFAIRS ON OVERSIGHT VISIT TO THE KRUGER NATIONAL PARK



Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson and hon members, I’m just making a statement on
the report on the study tour of the Select Committee on Land and
Environmental Affairs to the Kruger National Park. It is a pleasure as the
Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, to bring before this
House the findings of our oversight visit to the Kruger National Park.

The report sets out the findings and recommendations of  the  delegation  as
they emerged from the presentation by the  various  officials  and  the  on-
sight tours of the facility. It also provides  an  analysis  of  issues  and
problems identified at the Kruger  National  Park  and  recommendations  put
forward by this committee. The core function of the Kruger National Park  is
to ensure biodiversity. Wilderness tourism, while it’s mission statement  is
to maintain biodiversity in all it’s natural  facets  and  fluxes,  provides
for tourism and other human benefits and builds  a  strong  constituency  to
preserve as far as possible the wilderness qualities and cultural  resources
associated with the KNP.

This endeavour focuses mainly on developing communities within the park  and
other stakeholders and economic development,  looking  also  at  communities
outside of the park. It seeks to engage  people  and  make  them  understand
what is going on around them, making them aware of how they can  benefit  by
looking  after  their  natural   environment,   also   through   learnership
programmes where students are more actively involved.

On the issue of the land question, someone says  the  forced  relocation  of
Makhuleke’s community 36 years ago may have been  a  blessing  in  disguise.
His people had to give up what must count  as  one  of  the  most  beautiful
parcels of land in South Africa. It had been theirs  for  many  generations.
But in the era of white  minority  domination,  this  did  not  matter.  The
government wanted the territory, known as Phafuri, included  in  the  Kruger
National Park. They were bundled on government trucks with  such  belongings
as they could take with them and transported to a place about  50  km  away.
That place must have seemed drab by comparison.

Makhuleka’s community rephrased . . . let  me  put  it  this  way:  we  have
succeeded in turning misfortune into fortune. A  new  game  lodge  has  been
opened on the northern bank of the Livubu River.  The  new  facility  should
see a marked increase in visitors to the area, which despite  its  exquisite
scenery of rocky hills, tall  trees  and  extraordinarily  rich  variety  of
birds and animals, has tended to remain somewhat off the tourist map.

The Great Limpopo Transfrontier Park is a  merger  of  the  Kruger  National
Park, Mozambique’s Limpopo National  Park  and  Zimbabwe’s  Sengwe  National
Park. Tourists will be able to drive across  the  international  borders  of
the three countries within the  boundaries  of  the  park.  We  are  looking
forward to 2010. Scores of land owners around the Kruger National Park  want
the judiciary to mediate over the sales of their farms. They fear  they  may
not  realise  the  true  value  of  their  land,  while  the  national  body
representing landless people is up in  arms  over  the  slow  pace  of  land
reform.

It is only the scientists in the Kruger National Park  who  say  that  there
are too many elephants in the Kruger National  Park,  but  other  scientists
don’t agree. The international fund for animal  welfare  says  the  proposed
culling of thousands of elephants in the  Kruger  National  Park  to  reduce
numbers flies in the face of independent scientific  thought,  and  shows  a
blatant disregard for credible scientific opinion.

Veterinary wildlife  services  form  an  integral  function  of  the  Kruger
National Park, as they are responsible for restocking  of  new  parks,  game
sales policy and  strategy  management,  animal  diseases  control,  problem
animal treatments and research. One of the main functions  of  the  park  is
the restocking and relocation of game, especially big game, to other  parks.


Most of the newly-formed parks  lack  huge  game  populations,  whereas  the
Kruger National Park has a  huge  game  population  due  to  the  moratorium
banning the culling of animals. The  Kruger  National  Park  does  not  only
translocate animals to neighbouring  and  sub-Saharan  countries,  but  also
exports animals internationally to countries such as Canada, Australia,  New
Zealand, Singapore and the USA.

The management team of the  Kruger  National  Park  is  in  the  process  of
changing the current zoning Act to comply with  the  National  Environmental
Management: Protected Areas Act. The fence along the  Kruger  National  Park
borders poses a unique  problem,  as  it  was  initially  designed  to  keep
diseased animals from entering the Kruger National Park. The  fences  belong
to the Department of Agriculture and have not been properly  maintained  for
a number of years, leading to certain problems, such as animals leaving  the
park and entering surrounding neighbourhoods, causing  property  damage  and
sometimes death. This is becoming  a  problem  for  the  Park.  Poaching  of
elephants and rhino  for  commercial  gain  is  also  a  major  problem,  as
poachers enter through the broken fences.

The committee took an on-site tour of the compound and  the  following  were
their findings: The guests’ accommodation and campsites used by campers  are
in need of major upgrading; there is not enough accommodation  suitable  for
individuals who are wheel-chair bound or physically disabled  and  there  is
no  proper  drainage  system  in  the  campsite.  Ablution  facilities   are
inadequate and need upgrading.
The  seven  ablution  facilities,  serving  84  campsites,  have  no  proper
lighting and are not accessible to those who are in wheelchairs. People  use
the Kruger National Park as a shortcut to the neighbouring  countries.  Most
of them overnight in the park and this also brings in revenue for the  park.
It was suggested that an extra fees should be charged for heavy vehicles  to
travel in the park, and such fees would contribute to road maintenance.

There is no adequate housing  complex  for  ground  staff.  To  address  the
problems proper infrastructure is needed to accommodate the staff. A  clinic
situated near the staff quarters is not enough to service all the  staff  in
the park. Prices charged at shops in the park are exorbitant, putting  local
tourists at a disadvantage. The  tendered  contract  period  for  businesses
like restaurants and shops is too long, and this prevents local  communities
from taking such opportunities. Many services are outsourced, and the  local
communities are not given the opportunity to offer those services.

Therefore, the Kruger National Park has to be upgraded, so that as  we  move
towards the 2010 Soccer Cup activities in South Africa we will  be  able  to
accommodate  more  people.  We  put  this  report  before  this  House   for
acceptance. I thank you.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, it’s obvious that if it weren’t for our cluster
of select committees, this House would have had very little business today.


My persoonlike verbintenis met die Kruger Nasionale Park strek oor meer as
40 jaar en daar was ’n tydperk in my lewe toe ek vir sakedoeleindes feitlik
elke maand in die wildtuin was, en dan het ek nog soms vakansies my gesin
ook saamgeneem. Ek kan dus met reg sê dat ek die Kruger Nasionale Park goed
ken. Tewens, dit was ook hierdie liefde vir daardie omgewing wat my daartoe
gedryf het om my in die aangrensende natuurbewaringsdorp te vestig en om
daar polities betrokke te raak.

Dit was egter self ’n hele aantal jare gelede, en my aangrensende
betrokkenheid het eintlik die plek ingeneem van my vorige besoeke aan die
wildtuin. Die natuur en wild aan die suidekant van die Krokodilrivier is
uiteraard dieselfde as dié aan die noordekant in die Krugerwildtuin.
Die nadeel van hierdie sywaartse betrokkenheid was egter dat ek die
afgelope klompie jaar nie my gereelde besoeke aan die wildtuin kon voortsit
nie, en intussen het ons land op alle vlakke politieke en maatskaplike
veranderinge ondergaan wat uiteindelik die pad oopgemaak het vir die
voorheen benadeelde gemeenskappe om ook op alle vlakke betrokke te raak -
soos dit hoort.

Ek moet egter ruiterlik erken dat ek, soos baie ander mense, soms oop oë
aan die slaap is en soms skielik verras word, partykeer aangenaam en
partykeer minder aangenaam.

Ons komitee se kort besoek aan die Kruger Nasionale Park was een van
daardie baie aangename verrassings. Ons is daar verwelkom deur ’n
parkpersoneel wat ’n nuwe geslag hoogs gemotiveerde natuurbewaring- en
toerismebeamptes verteenwoordig; mense wat nie net die diversiteit van ons
land verteenwoordig nie, maar wat absoluut toegewyd is aan hulle taak om
die natuur, die wildlewe en die infrastruktuur van die Krugerwildtuin - een
van die drie toerismejuwele van ons land - volhoubaar te bestuur en ook vir
toekomstige geslagte te bewaar.

Ek wil graag met my bydrae hier vandag in die annale van die Parlement laat
aanteken dat ek saam met my kollegas hulde bring aan hulle almal wat onder
die bekwame leiding van dr Bandile Mkhize ’n wonderlike taak verrig, nie
alleen met betrekking tot bewaring en toerisme nie, maar ook met
baanbrekerswerk op die gebied van veeartsenykundige navorsing wat wêreldwyd
erken word.

As daar een negatiewe punt is waarna ek moet verwys, en ek dink die
voorsitter het dit ook aangeraak, dan is dit die nypende tekort aan fondse,
toerusting en infrastruktuur wat hierdie mense se taak bemoeilik, en ek
doen dus graag ’n beroep op die betrokke departemente en ministeries om
hieraan aandag te gee. Ek glo my kollega, Neels van Rooyen, hom sal weerhou
van politiek, en dat hy verder sal uitbrei op hierdie belangrike saak, maar
ek laat dit aan hom oor.

Kan ek net sê ons land se Inkomstediens doen uitstekende werk om meer
belasting vir die land in te vorder, en ek glo ’n klein deeltjie daarvan
sal ’n groot verskil maak aan die wildtuin, en aan natuurbewaring en
wildbewaring in die algemeen.

’n Laaste puntjie wat ek graag wil noem, is die toestand van
natuurbewaringsdorpe wat grens aan die wildtuin. Baie van hierdie dorpe is
opgerig as vakansiedorpe of –gebiede, maar het die uitsluitlike doel om die
natuur- en wildlewe te bewaar en te bevorder. Kom ek noem een so dorp,
naamlik Marlotpark in Mpumalanga, wat die Krokodilrivier as grens met die
Krugerwildtuin deel.

Die oprigtingsakte van hierdie dorp en andere maak byvoorbeeld voorsiening
vir wildbestuur, natuurbestuur en bewaring, net soos in ’n wildtuin, en
erwe mag byvoorbeeld nie omhein word nie, sodat wild vryelik kan
rondbeweeg. Daarbenewens is meer as die helfte van die grond toegewys aan
wild en nie aan woonerwe nie.

Die agb Voorsitter van hierdie Huis – hy’s nou ongelukkig nie vanmiddag
hier nie – weet dat daar ’n nuwe bedeling van plaaslike bestuur in die land
is. Ek was bevoorreg om saam met hom daardie wetgewing te skryf, so ek en
hy weet dat daar min plek is in moderne wetgewing vir natuurbewaring, as
dit kom by plaaslike regering.

Daardie wetgewing het weggedoen met meer as 600 klein dorpies en dorpe, wat
opgeneem is in van ons 280 groter dorpe en metropolitaanse stede. Dorpe
soos Marlotpark wat aan die wildtuin grens, en talle ander wat aan ander
wildtuine en wildgebiede in ons land grens, is nou hoogstens ’n deel, as
hulle gelukkig is, van ’n wyk wat hulle deel met gebiede wat deur die
landbou beset word of selfs deur residensiële gebiede. Van natuurbewaring
is daar min sprake, want munisipaliteite het enorme prioriteite ten opsigte
van dienslewering en behuising, en hulle kan dus min aandag gee aan
natuurbewaring. Tewens, hulle kan dit nie bekostig nie. Ek glo dat
natuurbewaring in ieder geval nie by plaaslike regering tuishoort nie.


My beroep is dus in hierdie debat  oor  die  besoek  aan  die  wildtuin  dat
ondersoek ingestel moet word na die moontlikheid dat sulke gebiede deur  die
Krugerwildtuin en ander bewaringsgebiede van Sanparke gekoöpteer word of  op
die een of ander manier ingesluit moet word om toe te  sien  dat  die  regte
bestuur daar toegepas word, dat volhoubare bewaring behoorlik  nagekom  word
en gepaard moet gaan met die teenwoordigheid van mense  wat  hierdie  ideale
deel. As ons hierdie ideaal kan bereik, sal ons ver gaan om die  ideale  van
ook die Kruger Nasionale Park te beskerm en uit te bou. Die  mense  van  die
Kruger Nasionale  Park  verdien  die  lof  van  hierdie  Huis.  Ek  dank  u.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)





[My personal association with the Kruger National  Park  extends  over  more
than 40 years and there was a time in  my  life  when  I  visited  the  park
virtually every  month  for  business  purposes,  and  on  occasion  in  the
holidays I also took my family. I can therefore rightly claim  that  I  know
the Kruger National Park well. Besides, it  was  also  this  love  for  that
environment that inspired me to settle in the adjacent  nature  conservation
village and to become politically involved there. That was  quite  a  number
of years ago, however, and my contiguous involvement  actually  replaced  my
previous visits to the park. The environment and wildlife  on  the  southern
side of the Crocodile River is obviously the same as that  on  the  northern
side in the Kruger Park.





The drawback of this lateral involvement, however, is that I have  not  been
able to continue my regular visits to the park in recent years  and  in  the
interim our country has undergone political and social change at all  levels
that  has  eventually  cleared  the   way   for   previously   disadvantaged
communities also to become involved at all levels – as is right and proper.





I must admit frankly that  I,  like  so  many  other  people,  sometimes  go
through life with my eyes closed and am  sometimes  surprised  unexpectedly,
sometimes pleasantly and sometimes less pleasantly.





Our committee’s short visit to the Kruger National Park  was  one  of  those
very  pleasant  surprises.  We  were  welcomed  there  by  park  staff  that
represent a new generation  of  highly  motivated  nature  conservation  and
tourism officials; people who  not  only  represent  the  diversity  of  our
country, but who are absolutely dedicated to  their  task  of  managing  the
natural environment, the wildlife and the infrastructure of the Kruger  Park
- one of the three gems of tourism of our country - in a sustainable  manner
and also to preserve it for future generations.





By means of my contribution here today, I would like it to  be  recorded  in
the Parliamentary annals that my colleagues and I pay homage to  those  who,
under the competent leadership of Dr  Bandile  Mkhize,  fulfil  a  wonderful
task, not only with regard to conservation and  tourism,  but  also  through
ground-breaking work in the sphere of research in  veterinary  science  that
is acknowledged throughout the world.





If there is one negative aspect to which I  must  refer,  and  I  think  the
chairperson has also touched on it,  it  would  be  the  acute  shortage  of
funds, equipment and infrastructure that impedes the work of  these  people,
and I therefore gladly request the relevant departments  and  Ministries  to
devote attention to this. I believe my colleague,  Neels  van  Rooyen,  will
refrain from  politicking  and  that  he  will  further  elaborate  on  this
important matter, but I shall leave that to him.





May I just say that our country’s Revenue Service does outstanding  work  to
collect more taxes for the country and I believe that a small part  of  that
will  make  a  great  difference  to  the  game  reserve,  and   to   nature
conservation and wildlife conservation in general.





A last point I should like to  mention  is  the  conditions  in  the  nature
conservation villages that border on the park. Many of these  villages  were
erected as holiday resorts or areas,  but  have  the  exclusive  purpose  of
conserving and promoting the environment and wildlife. Allow me  to  mention
one such a village, namely Marlot  Park  in  Mpumalanga,  which  shares  the
Crocodile River as boundary with the Kruger Park.





The memorandum of association of this village and others makes, for  example
provision   for   wildlife   management,   environmental   management    and
conservation just as in the  park,  and  plots  may,  for  example,  not  be
fenced, so that wildlife may roam freely. Besides that, more than  half  the
land has been allocated to wildlife and not to residential plots.





The hon Chairperson of this House  –  unfortunately  he  is  not  here  this
afternoon – knows that there is a new dispensation in  local  management  in
this country. I was privileged to write that legislation  with  him,  so  he
and I know that there is  little  room  in  modern  legislation  for  nature
conservation where local government is concerned.





That legislation did away with more than  600  little  villages  and  towns,
which have  been  incorporated  into  some  of  our  280  larger  towns  and
metropolitan cities. Villages like Marlot Park that border on the  park  and
many others that border on other parks and wildlife  areas  in  our  country
are now – at most, if they are lucky - part of a ward they share with  areas
that are occupied by agriculture or even  by  residential  areas.  There  is
little  indication  of  nature  conservation,  because  municipalities  have
enormous priorities  with  regard  to  service  delivery  and  housing,  and
therefore they cannot devote  much  attention  to  nature  conservation.  In
fact,  they  cannot  afford  it.  I  believe  that  in  any   event   nature
conservation does not belong with local government.





My appeal in this debate about the visit to the  park  is,  therefore,  that
the possibility of either co-opting or in one way or another including  such
areas into the Kruger Park and other  conservation  areas  of  Sanparks,  be
investigated to ensure that the correct management be  applied  there,  that
sustainable conservation be properly enforced and that it be accompanied  by
the presence of people who share these ideals. If we can attain this  ideal,
we will be well on our way to protecting and to expanding the ideals of  the
Kruger National Park. The people of the Kruger  National  Park  deserve  the
praise of this House. Thank you.]


Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Hon Chairperson, hon members, in his address to the NCOP
in KwaZulu-Natal in 2004, President Thabo Mbeki threw down the gauntlet to
the NCOP to spend more time on oversight activities in provinces in an
attempt to fast-track delivery.

The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs undertook an
oversight visit to the Kruger National Park from 2 March to 5 March this
year, with the objectives of ascertaining, amongst other things, the role
the park plays in uplifting the local and surrounding communities and the
preparedness of the park to accept the influx of tourists during the 2010
World Cup, as well as to assess the general working conditions of employees
in the park.

May I, at the outset, raise my concern about the absence of officials from
the national department and the SA National Parks Board from this important
debate on the oversight visit to the Kruger National Park by the select
committee.

Let me first congratulate the management of the Kruger National Park on
receiving prestigious Professional Management Review awards for being the
best organisation within the tourism sector in Mpumalanga. Rated by
Mpumalanga businesses, business associations, local and provincial
government, as well as trade unions, the Professional Management Review
awards included a diamond award for game parks and a gold award for Kruger
Park’s consistent contribution to black economic empowerment in the
province of Mpumalanga. These awards are given to companies that did the
most to enhance Mpumalanga’s economic growth and development.

Indeed, the Kruger National Park is a world-class tourist destination and a
resource that all South Africans can be proud of. The high level of
professionalism and diligence with which the staff at all levels execute
their tasks exemplifies the sort of perception that should be a yardstick
for all public servants. Again, I would like to congratulate them on
setting these high standards.

However, the declining and ageing infrastructure at Skukuza Camp is a
matter of great concern and impacts negatively on staff operations and
tourists’ experiences. Visitor stats for the 12 months ending March 2004
indicate an alarming, declining trend. Unit nights sold declined from
353 982 the previous year to 352 195, and guests to the park declined from
1 336 981 the previous year to 1 285 251.
On-sight inspection at Skukuza of available tourist accommodation,
including camping sites, confirmed the declining nature of all categories
of tourist accommodation.

In view of the current pricing structure, it seems that both local and
international tourists are currently finding it difficult to perceive value
for their money from the tourist experience offered.

During a private visit to Skukuza, I also experienced the bad state of
repair of equipment in one of the luxury accommodation units. On arrival,
the fridge was not working; the TV set was not functioning properly, and
two power failures were experienced owing to poor electrical connections in
the unit.

An area of great concern to the select committee was the state of staff
accommodation in that staff have to live in small one-roomed units. After
11 years of our new democracy it is totally unacceptable for people to
still be subjected to what is clearly apartheid type of accommodation. It
is obvious that a lot still needs to be done to upgrade all the categories
of accommodation, including the accommodation of staff before the 2010
World Cup.

At an operating loss of R22 million for the 2004-05 financial year, it will
require that the national department rethink its current funding model to
the board to ensure the upgrading of infrastructure and accommodation
facilities. We cannot accept a situation in which private tourists’
accommodation is subject to a grading system, whereas the department’s
accommodation is currently falling short of achieving any grading by the
National Grading Authority.

The high prices charged by outsourced restaurants and retail facilities
within the park also need mentioning, since it seems that these
institutions base their pricing policy and strategies on the overseas
tourist and totally disregard the local tourist’s disposable income.
Clearly, prices cannot be dictated by the park. However, the contract
period of outsourcing needs to be looked at again since it creates a
monopolistic environment within the park, which leads to unrealistic
pricing policies by the current contract holders.

The commercialisation programme of the park seems to favour contract
holders of the retail facilities inside the park at the cost of the
surrounding communities. The latter are restricted to trading outside the
park. Their clientele consists of travelling tourists in a hurry to reach
the park. On the other hand, the retailers inside the park have the luxury
of a captive market.

This unfair monopolistic situation must be addressed as a matter of urgency
to ensure that the local communities also receive their fair and promised
share of the lucrative craft industry, which, in most cases, is their sole
source of income. This is not simply a case of fairness, but also of good
economics. Fair competition has never done the consumer any harm.

In conclusion, I wish to extend my thanks to the staff at Skukuza for their
kind assistance during our visit. The Kruger National Park is truly a
national natural wonder that should be the pride and joy of every South
African. To become that it must be affordable to every domestic tourist,
bring benefit to the surrounding community and become a sought-after
employer. The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism holds the key
to this ideal. I trust that they will take up the challenge of creating a
perfect tourist experience, which will benefit all. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: As the decision is dealt with in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether delegation
heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all
delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
the voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per
province. The delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether
they vote in favour of or against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr M O ROBERTSON: I-Eastern Cape iyaxhasa. [Eastern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Vrystaat steun. [Free State supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Gauteng iyaxhasa. [Gauteng supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Mr H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga ke a rona. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: We support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
   AFFAIRS ON REMUNERATION OF MR H W MOLDENHAUER, FORMER CHIEF MAGISTRATE,
                                  PRETORIA

Mnu S SHICEKA: Sihlalo, manje yimina ozophetha imbenge. Yimina ogoqayo kule
nkulumo-mpikiswano yanamhlanje. Ngizoqala ngokuthi ngithanda ukwamukela
amalungu amasha kulo Mkhandlu oguquka nomama uNtwanambi. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, I am going to do the conclusion. I am doing the
summary of today’s debate. Firstly, I would like to welcome the new members
to the Council, including Mrs Ntwanambi.]

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
considered a report on the determination of the Magistrates Commission to
withhold Mr H W Moldenhauer’s remuneration tabled by the Minister for
Justice and Constitutional Development in terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the
Magistrates Act of 1993, reports as follows.

The select committee noted that on 10 March 2003 the Magistrates Commission
provisionally suspended magistrate Moldenhauer from office in terms of
section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act of 1993. Section 13(3)(a) in
particular was amended with effect from 1 November 2003. The Magistrates
Commission used that section when it suspended magistrate Moldenhauer. The
power, therefore, to suspend a magistrate didn’t rest or was not vested in
the Magistrates Commission. That power, from 1 November 2003, is vested in
the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development. Of course, that
happened with the advice of the Magistrate’s Commission.

We further noted that the Magistrates Commission on 3 March 2005 determined
to withhold Mr Moldenhauer’s remuneration, in terms of section 13(4A) of
the Act. However, in terms of section 13(4A)(a) of the Act, the commission
would only be in a position to make such a determination in respect of a
magistrate who is under provisional suspension in terms of section
13(3)(a), that is provisional suspension effected by the Minister.

What this means is that in terms of this Act, the commission didn’t have
the power to suspend Mr Moldenhauer – and not only not to suspend him but
also did not have the power to withhold his salary. That power was vested
in the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development. In terms of
this it means the process that was followed by the Magistrates Commission
was flawed. In that case, it means they assumed power that was not theirs.
You can imagine the lawyers and magistrates who sit in that commission
doing that.

Maybe they could argue that, alternatively, if it is argued that the
reference in section 13(4A) to section 3(a) of the act should be
interpreted to include a magistrate suspended in terms of section 13(3)(a)
of the Act prior to its amendment, as the commission apparently did when
taking its decision in terms of section 13(4A)(a) of the Act, Mr
Moldenhauer should have been entitled to the benefit of the provisions of
section 13(3(e) of the Act. I want to quote this section. It says:

      The provisional suspension of a magistrate in terms of paragraph (a)
      lapses after 60 days from the date of suspension, unless the
      commission, within that period, commences its inquiry into the
      allegation in question by causing a written notice containing the
      allegation concerned to be served on the magistrate.


Consequently, Mr Moldenhauer’s provisional suspension, which was affected
on 10 March 2003, should have automatically lapsed in June 2003. If you use
arithmetic – you know, the old mathematics – you would say that sixty days,
beginning from March, would lapse in June 2003.

The inquiry commenced on 7 April 2005. This means it commenced two years
after that thing had happened. In such a case the Magistrates Commission
could not have determined to withhold Mr Moldenhauer’s salary during March
2005 since, technically, he would not have been under suspension at that
time. In terms of section 13(4A)(c) of the Magistrates Act, Parliament, as
soon as it is reasonably possible, should consider the report tabled by the
Minister and pass a resolution as to whether or not the determination made
by the Magistrates Commission is confirmed either with or without
amendment, or set aside.

The select committee is of the opinion that the commission could not have
taken the decision in terms of section 13(4A)(a) of the Act and,
accordingly, recommends that the House resolves to set aside the
determination by the Magistrates Commission to withhold Mr Moldenhauer’s
remuneration. Because of procedural fairness, the case is determined on two
issues: substantive fairness and procedural fairness. In this case, the
Magistrates Commission has erred on procedure. Therefore in terms of
professional fairness, this matter is set aside. That’s what we recommend
to the House.

Now, we must ask ourselves: Who is this Moldenhauer? Who is this gentleman?
This gentleman was the chief magistrate in Mpumalanga. [Interjections.] You
can hear that that hon member agrees. He moved to Pretoria, which is now
called Tshwane. When he arrived in that area he made huge strides in
transforming the judiciary. He caused a lot of improvements in the courts
in that area. That caused a lot of divisions within the judiciary, and the
old establishment did not particularly like him. The new people who are for
transformation liked what he did.

Now it might be possible that these actions that were done in violation of
the law were based on his transformatory agenda and transformatory mind.
The democratic Parliament is setting aside the wrong deeds that were
committed at that time. The question that we must ask ourselves is: Where
is Mr Moldenhauer now? Because the environment in which he worked was not
too good, due to what all of us know – that is the transformation of the
judiciary, and at the same time the fact that he had ill-health, he was
boarded on medical grounds. He is no longer part of the judiciary. However,
we are saying that he must be paid his money back. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: That concludes the debate. I shall now put
the question. The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision
is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to
make their declaration of votes if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
the voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they
vote in favour of or against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Eastern Cape is in favour.
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State is in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Makayithole imali yakhe uMoldenhauer. [Moldenhauer must be
given his money.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: IkwaZulu-Natali iyawuxhasa. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ea thega. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga steun. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Kapa-Bokone ea amogela. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?
Rev P MOATSHE: Ke ya rona. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Die Wes-Kaap steun. [The Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All provinces voted in favour. I therefore
declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Hon members, we have noted the problem regarding the screens. The matter
was reported to the IT section by procedural officers. I didn’t raise that
question before because that would have caused havoc in this House, that is
the manner in which members of this House were appearing on the screen. As
I look at the screen, it seems that I am not myself! We apologise for that.

The Council adjourned at 16:58.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                           MONDAY, 17 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


            i) Genetically Modified Organisms Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2005]
               (National Assembly – sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its
               introduction published in Government Gazette No 27913 of 26
               August 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as
         referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 18 October 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


                          TUESDAY, 18 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

        1) Defence Special Account Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2005] – Act No 18
           of 2005 (assented to and signed by President on 4 October 2005).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


   a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of Trade and
      Industry for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
      the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2004-2005.


   b) Report and Financial Statements of Trade and Investment South Africa
      for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
      Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


   c) Report and Financial Statements of Support Program for Industrial
      Innovation (SPII) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
      Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


   d) Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and Human Resources
      for Industry Programme (THRIP) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
      the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.
   e) Report of the National Industrial Participation Programme 2005.


                         WEDNESDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Reintroduction of Bills


    (1)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


      Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29 – 2005 (Reintroduced)] (National
         Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of
         its introduction published in Government Gazette No 27984 of 31
         August 2005.]


    Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and
    Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
    Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160,
    on 20 October 2005.



                          THURSDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Health


         i) Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Amendment Bill [B 35 –
            2005] (National Assembly – sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill
            and prior notice of its introduction published in Government
            Gazette No 28106 of 14 October 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Health of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         21 October 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

        2) The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


         (i)     Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill [B 36 –
              2005] (National)
            Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
         notice of its introduction
            published in Government Gazette No 28063 of 23 September 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial
         and Local Government of the National Assembly, as well as referral
         to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
         of Joint Rule 160, on 21 October 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      (1)   South African Red Cross Society Bill, 2005, submitted by the
         Minister of Health on 20 October 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Health and the Select Committee on Social Services.



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     a) Government Notice No R.431 published in Government Gazette No 27560
        dated 13 May 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the Standards Act,
        1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     b) Government Notice No R.518 published in Government Gazette No 27615
        dated 3 June 2005: Import Control in terms of the International
        Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).


     c) Government Notice No R.567 published in Government Gazette No 27685
        dated 24 June 2005: Proposed introduction of a compulsory
        specification for replacement elastomeric cups and seals for
        hydraulic brake actuating cylinders for use in motor vehicles using
        non-petroleum base hydraulic brake fluid, in terms of the Standards
        Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     d) Government Notice No 641 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Lafarge Gypsum
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     e) Government Notice No 642 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Nampak Metal
        Packaging Limited – Bevcan, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962
        (Act No 58 of 1962).


     f) Government Notice No 643 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Pulp United (Pty)
        Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


     g) Government Notice No 644 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Nampak Products
        Limited – Corrugated Flexographic Printing Project, in terms of the
        Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


     h) Government Notice No 645 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Sud-Chemie SA
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     i) Government Notice No 646 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Trident Steel
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     j) Government Notice No 647 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: UCAR South Africa
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     k) Government Notice No 648 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Duys Engineering
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     l) Government Notice No 649 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Duys Engineering
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     m) Government Notice No 650 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: MOLT Fruit
        Processing (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No
        58 of 1962).
     n) Government Notice No 651 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Silicon Technology
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     o) Government Notice No 652 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Pulp United (Pty)
        Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


     p) Government Notice No 602 published in Government Gazette No 27713
        dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
        Office – Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the Designs Act,
        1993 (Act No 195 of 1993).


     q) Government Notice No 603 published in Government Gazette No 27713
        dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
        Office – Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the Trade Marks Act,
        1993 (Act No 194 of 1993).


     r) Government Notice No 604 published in Government Gazette No 27713
        dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
        Office – Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the Patents Act,
        1978 (Act No 57 of 1978).


     s) Government Notice No 605 published in Government Gazette No 27713
        dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
        Office – Amendment to Companies Administrative Regulations, in
        terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


     t) Government Notice No 606 published in Government Gazette No 27713
        dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
        Office – Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the Registration of
        Copyright in Cinematograph Films Act, 1977 (Act No 62 of 1977).


     u) Government Notice No 607 published in Government Gazette No 27713
        dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
        Office – Amendment to Close Corporations Administrative Regulations
        - 1984, in terms of the Electronic and Communications and
        Transactions Act, 2002 (Act No 25 of 2002).


     v) Government Notice No 655 published in Government Gazette No 27735
        dated 8 July 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the Standards Act,
        1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     w) Government Notice No 1099 published in Government Gazette No 27735
        dated 8 July 2005: Notices of initiation of investigation into the
        alleged dumping of detonated fuses and delay detonators (commonly
        known as shock tubes), originating in or imported from the Peoples
        Republic of China, in terms of the International Trade
        Administration Commission of South Africa.


     x) Government Notice No 1100 published in Government Gazette No 27735
        dated 8 July 2005: Customs and Excise Tariff applications: List
        9/2005 in terms of the International Trade Administration
        Commission of South Africa.


     y) Government Notice No R.622 published in Government Gazette No 27762
        dated 8 July 2005: Amended Safeguard Regulations in terms of the
        International Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).


     z) Government Notice No 766 published in Government Gazette No 27846
        dated 5 August 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the Standards
        Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


    aa) Government Notice No R.779 published in Government Gazette No 27847
        dated 5 August 2005: Amendment in terms of the International Trade
        Administration Commission of South Africa.


                           FRIDAY, 21 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration and report:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
             Agency (NDA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 197-
             2005].

    2.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of
             Communications for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 27 for 2004-
             2005 [RP 212-2005].

    3.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

          a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre
             for the Arts for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
             Language Board (PanSALB) for 2004-2005, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005 [RP 205-2005].

    4.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:

          a) Proclamation No R.47 published in Government Gazette No 27986
             dated 31 August 2005: Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the
             Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act, 1997 (Act
             No 103 of 1997).


    5.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance:


          a) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Decentralised Development Programme,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
             Decentralised Development Programme.

        (c)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Promotion of Rural Livelihoods in
             Eastern Cape Province Project, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
             Promotion of Rural Livelihoods in Eastern Cape Province
             Project.


        (e)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Training and Support for Natural
             Resource Management (Transform) Project, tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (f)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
             Training and Support for Natural Resource Management
             (Transform) Project.


        (g)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Broadening Agricultural Services and
             Extension Delivery Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
             of the Constitution, 1996.


        (h)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
             Broadening Agricultural Services and Extension Delivery
             Project.


        (i)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Training System for Education, Training
             and Development Practitioners (ETDP SETA) Project, tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (j)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
             Training System for Education, Training and Development
             Practitioners (ETDP SETA) Project.


        (k)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Trade and Industrial Policy Secretariat
             (TIPS) Consultancy Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
             of the Constitution, 1996.


        (l)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
             Trade and Industrial Policy Secretariat (TIPS) Consultancy
             Project.


        (m)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning Assistance for the National Housing Finance
             Corporation (NHFC) Programme, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (n)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
             Assistance for the National Housing Finance Corporation (NHFC)
             Programme.


        (o)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Municipal Finance Management Programme,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (p)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
             Municipal Finance Management Programme.


        (q)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Provincial Administration Support
             Programme in the Eastern Cape, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (r)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
             Provincial Administration Support Programme in the Eastern
             Cape.


        (s)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Vocational Education and training Fund
             Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


        (t)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
             Vocational Education and training Fund Project.


        (u)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Urban Upgrading and Development
             Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


        (v)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
             Urban Upgrading and Development Programme.


        (w)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Planning and Implementation Management
             Support Systems for Municipalities Programme, tabled in terms
             of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (x)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
             Advisory Support for the Consolidation of the Mpumalanga
             Provincial Administration Project.


        (y)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Basic Employment and Skills Training
             Programme in the Free State and Eastern Cape Provinces, tabled
             in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (z)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
             Basic Employment and Skills Training Programme in the Free
             State and Eastern Cape Provinces.


        (aa)     Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Norway
             regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
             Administrations, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


        (bb)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Kingdom of Norway regarding Mutual
             Assistance between their Customs Administrations.


        (cc)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Turkey regarding
             Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (dd)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Republic of Turkey regarding Mutual Assistance between
             their Customs Administrations.


        (ee)     Government Notice No R.794 published in Government Gazette
             No 26868 dated 12 August 2005: Determination of amounts for
             purposes of the Act, in terms of the Military Pensions Act,
             1976 (Act No 84 of 1976).


        (ff)     Government Notice No R.860 published in Government Gazette
             No 27976 dated 2 September 2005: Determination of limit on
             amount of remuneration for purposes of determination of
             contribution in terms of section 6, in terms of the
             Unemployment Insurance Act, 2002 (Act No 4 of 2002).


    6.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs:

          a) Trade and Economic Agreement between the Republic of South
             Africa and the Republic of Turkey, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Trade and Economic Agreement
             between the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of
             Turkey.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication
         Board for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 158-2004].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
     (a)               Additional Protocol to the Trade, Development and
         Cooperation Agreement (TDCA) between the Republic of South Africa
         and the European Community (EC) and its member states, tabled in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Additional Protocol to the Trade,
         Development and Cooperation Agreement (TDCA) between the Republic
         of South Africa and the European Community (EC) and its member
         states.


                           MONDAY, 24 OCTOBER 2005



TABLINGS



    National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency
        Affairs Board for 2004-2005,
           including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for Gender
           Equality (CGE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
           120-2005].



                          TUESDAY, 25 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees


     1) Mr S D Montsitsi has been elected as Chairperson of the Joint
        Standing Committee on Defence with effect from 21 October 2005.



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Medium Term Budget Policy Statement 2005 [RP 201-2005].


        Referred to the Joint Budget Committee and the Portfolio Committee
        on Finance for consideration and report in accordance with their
        respective mandates.


       i) Adjustments Appropriation Bill, 2005 [B37-2005].
            Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for
        consideration and report.


(b)   Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure 2005 [RP 202-2005], which
includes:

           1.    Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Adjustments
      Estimates, 2005-
                 2006;

           2.    Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Adjustments
             Estimates, 2005-2006;


           3.    Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Adjustments
             Estimates, 2005-
                 2006;

           4.    Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


           5.    Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Provincial and Local
                 Government", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           6.    Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Public Works", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


           7.    Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Government Communications and
                 Information System", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           8.    Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "National Treasury", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


           9.    Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Enterprises",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           10.   Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service and
                 Administration", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           11.   Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Public Service Commission",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           12.   Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "South African Management
                 Development Institute", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           13.   Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Statistics South Africa",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           14.   Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Arts and Culture", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


           15.   Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Education", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


           16.   Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Health", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;
           17.   Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Labour", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


           18.   Memorandum on Vote No 18 - " Social Development",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           19.   Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Sport and Recreation South
                 Africa", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           20.   Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Correctional Services",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           21.   Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Defence", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


           22.   Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Independent Complaints
                 Directorate”, Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           23.   Memorandum on Vote No 23 - " Justice and Constitutional
                 Development ", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           24.   Memorandum on Vote No 24 - " Safety and Security",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           25.   Memorandum on Vote No 25 - " Agriculture", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


           26.   Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Communications", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


           27.   Memorandum on Vote No 27 - " Environmental Affairs and
                 Tourism", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           28.   Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Housing", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


           29.   Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Land Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


           30.   Memorandum on Vote No 30 - " Minerals and Energy",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           31.   Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           32.   Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


           33.   Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


           34.   Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2005;

    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
    report.

2.    The Minister of Defence


       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 – Department of
          Defence for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements of Vote 22 for 2004-2005 [RP
          159-2005].

3.    The Minister of Labour


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund (UYF)
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


                         WEDNESDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bill returned to Executive

    (1)    On 25 October 2005 the Acting Speaker and the Chairperson, after
         consultation, referred the Diamonds Amendment Bill [B 27 – 2005],
         introduced in the National Assembly as a section 75 Bill on 30
         August 2005, back to the Minister of Minerals and Energy, as it
         contains both section 75 and section 76 provisions.

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)


     (1)    The JTM on 25 October 2005 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3),
         classified the following Bill as a section 74 Bill:


         (i)     Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2005]
              (National Assembly – sec 74)


     (2)    The JTM, on 25 October 2005 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3),
         classified the following Bills as section 75 Bills:


         (i)     Independent Communications Authority of South Africa
              Amendment Bill [B 32 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)


         (ii)    Genetically Modified Organisms Amendment Bill [B 34 –
              2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)


         (iii)    Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill [B 36 –
             2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)

3.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 37 – 2005] (National
         Assembly – sec 77)


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         25 October 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

4.    Reintroduction of Bill


    (1)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


      Diamonds Amendment Bill [B 27 – 2005 (Reintroduced)] (National
         Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of
         its introduction published in Government Gazette No 27929 of 19
         August 2005.]


    Reintroduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and
    Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
    Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160,
    on 26 October 2005.


    In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of the
    Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three
    parliamentary working days.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


a)    Group Annual Financial Statements of the National Empowerment Fund
   for 2004-2005,
      including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
Statements for 2004-2005.



COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
    the International Plant Protection Convention, dated 26 October 2005:


         The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
         considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         International Plant Protection Convention, referred to it,
         recommends that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Convention.


    Report to be considered.

