---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 November 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-11-16
---

WEDNESDAY, 16 NOVEMBER 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr L K JOUBERT: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall
move: That this House debates the report on the Public Service and
Administration Portfolio Committee on its oversight visit to the Eastern
Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo and the North West provinces at the first
available opportunity. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP I give notice that I
shall move: That the House debates the education needs for disabled
children and the integrated education model.


                      NEW ORDER INSERTED ON ORDER PAPER


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
without notice:

   That after Order No 3 on the Order Paper, the Debate on International Day
   of Tolerance, the following  new  Order  be  inserted  which  relates  to
   consideration of the National Council of Provinces amendments:

Agreed to.

                      PRECEDENCE BE GIVEN TO ORDER NO 1

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE LARGEST MINORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker,
I move without notice:

   That, notwithstanding Rule 29(8) and Rule 113 (1),  Order  No  1  on  the
   Order Paper be given precedence.

Agreed to.


                       FAREWELL SPEECHES TO STAND OVER


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
without notice:

That the farewell speeches stand over. [Laughter.]


Agreed to.


            DEBATE ON SIXTEEN DAYS OF ACTIVISM: ACT AGAINST ABUSE


The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, our democratic
South Africa has to leave no stone unturned in dealing with the challenge
of violence against women and children. I am glad that we are having this
debate today to highlight the issues and the challenges that lie ahead. I
am privileged that I can open this debate, though saddened that we still
have to debate such issues in our society. This debate, which opens the 16
Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children campaign, is
something that we hope we can repeat; that is, the issues and the
discussions are things that we can repeat within our communities.

In a poem called, Liberation, Abena Buia says:

   We are all mothers and we have that fire within us
   The fire of powerful women
   Whose spirits are so angry when they are disturbed
   And you shall not escape
   What we will make of the broken pieces of our lives.

As South Africans we know the reality of the impact of brutality of the
police state that we were subjected to as women, as men and children and
whole communities. Our embrace of reconciliation is borne out of our desire
never to return to that state of affairs, too many bear the scars and that
is why we are resolute in our commitment to build a culture of peace in our
country, and indeed on our continent where all must be safe.

It is in this spirit that South Africans, both the government and our
people, have embraced the UN campaign of No Violence Against Women, and
within SADC we have also expanded the campaign to be the campaign of No
Violence Against Women and Children. Our people all over South Africa, both
men and women and business, have embraced this noble campaign.

Each year, from 25 November to 10 December, government joins civil society
in the international campaign of 16 Days of Activism for No Violence
Against Women and Children. This is our commitment to friendship, peace and
security, not for some but for all, particularly the most vulnerable in our
society.
We need to continue building this partnership with civil society -
government alone cannot succeed in the fight against women and child abuse.
We need whistle-blowers from within society and we need caregivers to
support survivors and isolate perpetrators. All these efforts must ensure
that our campaign for the prevention of these abuses is also strengthened.

Because most abuse cases take place in the home, families and communities
should assist in exposing offenders. In particular, we need families as the
first line of defence. Women whose children are abused by stepparents and
relatives, and makotis who are beaten by husbands and boyfriends need their
families to stand by them.

Men and boys should learn that women and children should be protected and
not abused. We need our education system and social institutions to play a
greater role.

In the context of HIV/Aids in our society where women, because of power
relations, bear the biggest burden and babies of HIV positive women become
casualties, gender relations matter. The tragedy of HIV/Aids is one illness
where infection can happen even without the two parties knowing. It has a
stigma, the illness can be draining to affected and infected and above all
it creates orphans who live to become vulnerable as children and adults,
and it is going to be our challenge as society who must show care and take
some responsibility. Government is doing all it can through the law and in
other ways to fight violence against women and children and we thank the
partners who are making a sterling contribution to make sure that we make a
difference.

The Sexual Offences Bill broadens the definition of “sexual violence” and
helps ensure heavy sentences for convicted offenders. The public must feel
the impact of this legislation. Our responsibility as communities and this
House is to ensure that it does happen.

Specialised training for police officers makes them more sensitive in
dealing with cases of violence against women and children, and it is
important and appreciated that policemen and women have been trained and
deployed.

There are now 40 sexual offences courts across South Africa and more are
being set up. The campaign has increased the awareness among the populace
and this is evidenced by increased reported incidents of abuse. The
government has set up Thuthuzela Centres that are aimed at reducing
secondary victimisation. The conviction rate in the Thuthuzela Centres has
improved to between 85% and 90% in those centres linked to sexual offences
courts. This is a marked improvement as in normal sexual offences courts it
comes to merely 63%.

The finalisation of case cycles from reporting to conclusion has been
reduced to within six months. But let us be sure, in the first instance,
that every home is a site of struggle against violence and a place of
safety for women and children so that a home is truly a home. I urge the
whole of South Africa to take up the spear within their homes and fight
against all forms of abuse. We urge them to speak out and make that crucial
decision of standing up and being counted now. The abusers should also seek
help and own up. They should take that step so that they ensure that they
don't hurt another child or woman. No child or woman should suffer at their
hands.

Everyone at home, at school, at work and in the community, is urged to wear
the white ribbon every day for 16 days from 25 November to 10 December to
show they do not accept women and child abuse. Wearing a white ribbon will
let victims and survivors know that we are united in support; it might
encourage perpetrators to change their ways; it will help bring more people
into the fight against abuse.

We should use the 16 Days of Activism to commit ourselves and persuade
others to give practical support throughout the year and to call on all to
desist from committing acts of abuse. Increased violence over the festive
period requires an extra effort to reduce violence and ensure that services
and support are accessible. Parents must look after their children. Don't
let alcohol deter you from taking your parental responsibility and cause
you to neglect your children. Don't leave your children alone with
strangers or friends and relatives that you cannot trust absolutely.

Together, let us build a South Africa that truly protects women and
children. I therefore applaud Parliament for putting forward this important
matter on their agenda today. As a member of this House, I look forward to
our ongoing work throughout the year, in making sure that South Africa is
truly a safer place for all our children and women. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mufumakadzi T J TSHIVHASE: Ndi a livhuwa Tshanda tsha Mulangadzulo,
vhathomphiwa vhothe vha re fhano buthanano lino, na vhathu vhashu ngeyo
nnda mahayani na vha re afha ntha kha galari.

Ndi tshi khou livhuwa u newa tshifhinga tsha u amba nga heyi thoho ine ya
khou sumbedza vhathu vhashu vhe nga itsho tshifhinga vha vha vho pfiswa
vhutungu nga muvhuso wa tshitalula, hune ra tou vha na vhutanzi zwavhudi-
vhudi zwauri u bva tsikoni Mudzimu o ita munna na musadzi vha tshi lingana
kha Genesi 1:26. O ri ndi ita muthu tshifanyiso tshashu, a ita munna na
musadzi vha tshi lingana. A ri ndi do ni nekedza vhana ya vha mpho ya vho
inwi ine ya vha mbebo. Ni vha fune nahone ni vha tonde. Hezwo zwithu zwa
siya ro newa ndila ya kutshilele. Zwa siya muvhuso wa tshitalula nga
tshenetsho tshifhinga tsha musi rine ri sa athu vhusa u tshi talula vhathu.

Ri na vhutanzi ho fhelelaho uri the tripple oppression [u tsikeledziwa
kararu ha vhathu] zwi amba mini vhukati hashu ro dzula fhano. Musi milayo i
tshi khou itwa i tshi khou kwanyeledza vhafumakadzi tsho vha tshi tshipida
tsha u vha tambudza na u vha vhaisa, nahone vha tshi itelwa miholo ine ya
tou tea vhafumakadzi. Hezwo zwithu zwothe zwo vha zwo vhifha.

Ra da ra vhona hafhu mvelele ye ya vha tshipida kha u tambudzwa ha
vhafumakadzi vhashu vha tshi tsikeledzwa nga ndila dzothe dzo fhambananaho.
Milayo ye ya vha i tshi itwa nga ngomu hayani yo vha i tshi vhaisa
vhafumakadzi fhedzi, nahone vha tshi itwa zwithu zwi pfisaho vhutungu.

Hunwe u tsikeledziwa hafhu ra dovha ra hu vhona musi vhanna vhavho vha tshi
vha pfisa vhutungu nga ngomu hafha hayani, vha tshi vha ita dziphuli, vha
tshi vha rwa nga hune vha funa ngaho nahone Vha tshi ita zwine vha funa nga
zwifhinga zwine vha funa. Hezwo zwa ri sumbedza zwauri ndi tshinwe tshipida
tsha u tsikeledzwa nahone i dovha hafhu ya vha thambudzo.

Ra da ra vhona hafhu na vhurereli hone hune hu tshi khou dzhia vhukando ha
uri vhafumakadzi vha pfiswe vhutungu ha ndila heneyo. Rine sa vhafumakadzi
a ri khou ima nazwo hezwo zwithu ngauri zwo vhaisa vhana vhashu na
vhafumakadzi. (Translation of Tshivenda paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs T J Tshivhase: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon members and everyone in
the gallery, I am very grateful to be taking part in this debate, which is
about our people who suffered during the era of the apartheid regime. We
are very much aware that from the very
beginning, God created both man and woman. He made them equal. This can be
traced in the book of Genesis 1:26 where God said, ``Let us make a human
being in our image.’’ He then created man and woman as equals. He also
promised to bless them with the gift of giving birth. Following that, he
also issued a command that they had to love and take care of their
children. In this manner, God has been prescriptive as to how we should
live. However, the previous regime continued to oppress our people.

I believe we all understand what triple oppression means to us. Women have
been victims of this. Laws were passed to oppress women, complicating their
lives, and they were also denied salaries similar to those of their male
counterparts. They were abused and denied every opportunity that prevailed.

Womens roles in marriage were like those of slaves. They were severely
beaten and abused by their husbands. Their husbands would do anything they
liked to them. This was another form of excruciating oppression.

Religion has also played a key role in the marginalisation of women in our
country, for it had some negative repercussions on our children and women.]

November is the month of activism against violence against women and
children, and we must celebrate our achievements as the ANC. The government
has done a lot to improve the lives of our people, more especially for
women in our country. As I have indicated, our women have experienced
triple oppression. The poor women and children in South Africa have borne
the brunt of poverty and the pandemic disease of HIV.

Vhulwadze hovho vho vhangwa nga vhanna vhe vha si fune vhana vhavho. Zwa
zwino ndi tshi khou amba vhana vhashu vha khou tambula. A vha tshe na
vhumatshelo nga nthani ha heli dwadze tshifu. [This pandemic was caused by
men, who neglected their own children. As I am speaking, our children
continue to suffer. Their future is uncertain due to this deadly disease.]

Young women and children make up the group most at risk. Most of the
department’s efforts in this regard are concentrated on children infected
with and affected by HIV and Aids, and they may want to consider this
position.

Tshanda tsha Maelausumbwa - Tshanda tsha Muphuresidennde vho zwi vhea
zwavhudi hafha zwauri rothe kha ri vhe vhathu vhane vha funa vhana vhashu.
Kha ri vha thogomele. Ri songo tenda zwithu zwi tshi itea henefho nga
vhahura vhashu. Huna vhana vhashu vhane henefho tsini wa vha u tshi khou
tou zwi divha zwavhudi-vhudi zwauri havha mukalaha vha khou dzhia hoyo
nwana vha mu ita muhadzinga wa musadzi wavho. Kha ri ambe, kha ri vhige
milandu ya lushaka lo raloho zwauri avha mukalaha vha nga afha vho tou
dzhena fhasi kha u tshinyadza nwana wavho. (Translation of Tshivenda
paragraph follows.)

[Her Excellency the Deputy President has put it clear that, as parents, we
must love our kids. Let us therefore take care of them. Let us protect them
from any evil that our neighbours might want to do to them. There are
several instances of child abuse taking place in our vicinity and as such
they must be reported. Let us break the silence and not allow situations
where young girls are sexually molested by their grandfathers.]

This includes the children of our country, and we cannot say that South
Africa belongs to the children if we do not provide a safe and caring
environment for our children to grow and prosper in. All the social
challenges facing our children and women should be the topic of ongoing
discussions in families and communities from all walks of life.

Regarding the 2010 Soccer World Cup that is coming to our shores, as
individuals and families we cannot go to bed being conscious of the fact
that a child next door goes to sleep without a meal, goes to school in rags
as she has no school uniform, or of the fact that the child next door is an
orphan with no one in the community to take care of her and her siblings.
Similarly, we cannot stand idly by as children next door are abused by
their fathers and their brothers.

Musi ro lavhelesa kha Muhasho washu wa Mveledziso ya Matshilisano ri nga
zwi vhona zwauri u khou shumisana na Muhasho wa zwa Vhulamukanyi na
Mveledziso ya zwa Mulayotewa ine i khou toda u vhona uri vhana na
vhafumakadzi vha songo tambudziwa. Mulayo kha u dzhie vhukando hawo, u
sumbedza zwauri u na tsireledzo kha vhana na vhomme. (Translation of
Tshivenda paragraph follows.)

[As we look at the Department of Social Development, we find that it is
working in collaboration with the Department of Justice to ensure that the
abuse of women and children does not continue to haunt our society. Justice
must prevail, and the law must take its course in ensuring that women and
children are safe.]

Still driven by our commitment to achieving social justice and inspired by
the ideals set out in the Freedom Charter, we took on the challenge of
creating a better life for all South Africans. We believe that we have made
a difference in the lives of our women and our children. In another way, we
have to improve the delivery of poverty alleviation.

Zwa zwino ri tshi khou amba, kha muhasho washu hu na mbekanyamushumo dzo
vhewaho u maandafhadza vhafumakadzi kha sia la zwikili na uri hone-vho ri
songo ri musi ro vha thola vha vha vha tshi khou tambudzwa nga u newa
miholo mituku. Zwenezwo na zwone ndi tshipida tsha u vha tambudza. Kha vha
fhiwe miholo ine vha kona u tshila. (Translation of Venda paragraph
follows.)

[As we speak, we have in our department a special programme set to
capacitate and empower women with skills in order for them to be competent
enough in the job market. This will protect them against exploitation as
well as getting salaries that are below the breadline.]

Therefore this government has continued with the implementation of a range
of programmes aimed at securing a better life for women. These have
included improving access to potable water, sanitation, improving women’s
health, as well as a range of employment programmes aimed at benefiting
women.

Consistently our budget as Social Development has demonstrated its
commitment to improving the lives of our poorest women in South Africa.
However, the Minister of Social Development did not end there. On a
particularly August day when he was briefing Parliament, he launched the
“Ke Moja” drug awareness campaign, and further calling on civil society and
other structures of society to be involved in programmes and strategies as
we need to raise these issues even more vigorously in both rural and urban
areas, in the rich and the poor communities, in schools, in faith-based
organisations and in NGOs, together with CBOs.

With regard to the girl-child, the Freedom Charter contains a promise of a
democratic South Africa that belongs to all who live in it. We gave
expression to this promise in the Reconstruction and Development Programme.
It is because of our firm understanding and recognition that young people
are, in fact, tomorrow’s leaders that we have collaborated with the
National Youth Commission on various strategies.

The strategy, which will be finalised by the national consultative youth
conference later this year, recognises that girls are actors in their own
development. This strategy, with inputs from the National Youth Commission,
will form the basis of our contribution to the view of the global programme
of action on youth in 2006.

We have, in the meantime, begun to implement some of the key aspects of
this strategy through the national youth service programme, which in our
sector, will initially focus on training the girl-child. This training will
take place in all provinces.

Zwa zwino ndi tshi khou amba ri na thaidzo hangei mahayani ya vhana vhane
vha khou tambudziwa. Vhana vhane nga tshino tshifhinga mafhelo a vhege
manwe na manwe vha vha vha tshi khou bva vha tshi ri vha ya u nzhangama,
zwithu zwenezwi ri wana zwi tshi khou itwa nga vhanna, vho ramabindu na vha
dzithekhisi vhane vha vha hwala vha vha bvisa zwikoloni nga tshifhinga tsha
tshikolo. Ri khou ri hezwo zwithu kha zwi ime. Vhana vhashu kha ri vha
fune. Ndi dzimpho dze ra fhiwa nga Mudzimu.

Ndi vhone vhurangaphanda ha matshelo. Ri tutuwedze vhafumakadzi vhashu vha
vhe na nungo dza u ita zwinwe na zwinwe zwine vha zwi kona. Ri songo vha
thivhela musi vha tshi da na manwe maano. Kha ri vha fune havha vhana. Kha
ri tutuwedza vhafumakadzi vhashu zwauri vha dzhenelele kha zwithu zwothe
zwine zwa khou itea shangoni lashu. Ndi khou tenda zwauri ndi khou amba
mafhungo ane a khou dzhena dzindevheni dza vha tambudzi vhane vha vha
vhanna.

Kha ri ri tshithu nga matshilo a vhafumakadzi vhashu. Kha ri ri tshithu nga
vhumatshelo ha vhana vhashu, ri vhatsireledze ngauri ndi hone
vhurangaphanda hashu ha matshelo vhune ra do funa u di tongisa ngaho.
Havha vhana vhashu kha ri pfe li lone ifa lashu, li lone line ra divha
zwauri ndi lone pfumo lashu line ra do lwa ngalo swina le ra ri tambudza
vhutshilo hashu hothe, ndi tshi khou amba tshitalula nga tshenetsho
tshifhinga. Vho ri tambudzela vhafumakadzi na vhana. (Translation of Venda
paragraphs follows.)

[The problem of child abuse is very rife in rural areas. We also experience
a situation where young girls go out on the streets during weekends,
thinking that they are enjoying themselves. They do so in the company of
men who in the process continue to abuse them. Some of these are
businessmen and others taxi drivers who also ferry these girls to and from
their respective schools. This must stop. We must love our children as they
are gifts from God.

They are the leaders of tomorrow. Let us encourage our women to be
innovative. We must not discourage them when they come up with some helpful
inventions. Let us love our children and encourage our women to participate
in the shaping of our country. I believe I am not talking to deaf ears.

Let us do something about the lives of our women. Let us mind about the
future of our children. Let us protect them, for they are the leaders of
tomorrow of whom we have to be proud. These children are our heritage and a
spear to fight with in all our life battles. Apartheid has done grievous
harm to women and children.]

Enough is enough. Let’s love our children because they are our treasure.
Ndi a livhuwa. [I thank you.][Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, just before the next hon member addresses
us, I wish to take this opportunity to acknowledge a delegation on the
gallery of Rwandan parliamentarians who are visiting our Parliament. The
delegation has had numerous meetings with members, and has attended a
number of portfolio and select committee meetings. Hon members, we welcome
you to our Parliament and wish you a fruitful visit. [Applause.]

Mr M STEPHENS: Madam Deputy Speaker, violence is a disease of the mind.
When violence is directed at women, children, the aged and the disabled it
indicates the diseased mind corrupted to the ultimate limits of depravity.

The extremely high incidence of such violence in South Africa is a disgrace
to our society and does dishonour to all South Africans, especially men. Of
what inferior mettle are we then? Of what substandard value system are we
the products that so many among us resort to violence and rape that even
weak and vulnerable children are preyed on? It is a matter that shames many
of us very deeply.

Nevertheless, we were not overtaken by these events overnight. It is the
result of a history of a growing culture of violence that was allowed to go
unchecked.

Violence begets violence. Abuse begets abuse. The abused become abusers and
an escalating vortex of violence is created that sucks in people on the
periphery.

At its core lies a lack of positive social values. At its epicentre stands
men who completely lack any sense of self-esteem - men who lack skills of
self-expression; who vent their frustration with their impotence and their
anger at society on those who are vulnerable and unable to match their
physical power. If I am nothing, then those whom I can physically subject,
hurt and even snuff the life out of, must be even more worthless. Pity the
poor creature whose esteem lies in the hurt he can cause others.

This must be countered by the cultivation of a culture of respect. As
government, as educators, parents and neighbours, we have to demonstrate
self-respect, respect for the law, and respect for our environment, for
property and especially for the dignity of our fellow humans. Let us build
a society founded upon mutual respect and compassion. Let us be a
compassionate society.

Without underestimating the value of better policing, more prosecutions and
harsher sentences for perpetrators, the role of society is central in the
eradication of this disease. The cycle of violence can only be broken when
people are vigilant, when neighbours, friends and family see the telltale
signs of violence and abuse and then report it. In most cases, abusers are
protected by silence, by people’s unwillingness to become involved.

It is incumbent upon us as a society to recognise and eradicate the
disease. I’m not pleading for vigilantism, but I am saying to the question
whether I am my brother’s keeper, we must all answer an unequivocal yes.
Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the importance of the 16 Days of
Activism campaign cannot be overstated. This campaign that, amongst other
things, attempts to generate greater awareness of the negative impact of
violence on the development of women and children, is particularly relevant
to us in South Africa as we are currently struggling to find ways of
putting a stop to violence against women and children. One rape is a rape
too many. One abuse is an abuse too many.

Children look to adults for guidance and as role models. Through their
interactions with their role models, many children in South Africa are
learning that violence and abuse against women and children is acceptable
and part of everyday life and that it is just one of those things that
occurs many times. Many of these women will never fully recover from their
abuse and are forced to live their lives in constant fear. Women need to
have freedom from fear.

By teaching our children that abuse and violence are acceptable, we are
creating a society that not only condones violence, but also encourages it.
We will never fully progress and grow as a society if we continue with this
mentality. This vicious cycle has to be broken. For this to happen, real
men in South Africa need to stand up and take action. It needs to start in
this House. Of course, it must start in this very same House! Every male
needs to pledge his support. Not one, not four or five, but every man needs
to stand up and say no to violence.
The active involvement of men in stopping domestic violence and abuse
against women is needed if we are to beat this problem and free future
generations of women from being subjected to the same violent behaviour
that has become common practice in South Africa today. This will also go a
long way to changing the attitude of our children towards violence, because
children learn what they live.

It is well-known that children are the most vulnerable members of our
society and need our protection. But if we look at the current situation in
South Africa we are failing them miserably. We must, as a matter of
urgency, get together with all the relevant stakeholders - community
leaders and various organisations - to combat this problem. It is a time of
urgency and action. I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Nksz S N (Sylvia Nomatamsanga) SIGCAU: Sekela-Somlomo, siyamkhahlela
uSekela-Mphathiswa, ohloniphekileyo uGillwald, ngokuqala kwakhe eli phulo.
Maxa wambi kuthabatha umntu omnye ukwenza utshintsho. Masithembe ukuba
sisendleleni esisa empumelelweni ngeli phulo. Masiliqhube unyaka wonke,
hayi nje ngezi ntsuku zili-16 kuphela.

Njengoko besitshilo ngaphambili, le asiyo nto yabantu abangoomama kuphela,
koko yinto yoluntu luphela. Kufuneka sifikelele kwithuba lokwahlula
ezopolitiko kwezobuni. Kufuneka sikulwe siyimbumba ukuxhatshazwa kwabantu
namabhinqa. Singaqala ngokuxhasa ngokupheleleyo eli phulo seliqalwe
ngohloniphekileyo uSekela-Mphathiswa.

Malungu abekekileyo, masibe ngumfuziselo omhle kwisizwe ngokuzinikela
ngokupheleleyo edabini lokulwa ukuxhatshazwa nelophuhliso ngokubanzi.
Ndiyabulela, Sekela-Somlomo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa speech
follows.)

[Nksz S N (Sylvia Nomatamsanqa) SIGCAU: Deputy Speaker, we commend the
Deputy Minister, hon Gillwald, for initiating this campaign. Sometimes it
takes one person to bring about change. Let us hope that we are on the way
that leads us to success through this campaign. Let us continue with it for
the whole year, not only for sixteen days.

As I have previously said, this is not only for women, but it’s for all the
people. We need to reach a stage of differentiating between politics and
gender issues. We must be united in fighting violence against women. We can
start by fully supporting the campaign initiated by the Deputy Minister.

Hon members, let us be a good example to the nation by fully committing
ourselves  to the fight against violence and for broader development. Thank
you, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]]

Mr L W GREYLING: Hon Speaker, every year we have the 16 Days of Activism
campaign, yet the abuse of our women and children continues at intolerable
levels. It is an extremely sad indictment of our society that 39% of young
women between the ages of 12 and 17 claim that they have been forced to
have sex. This sexual abuse often involves extreme violence and leads to
women contracting HIV. It is the intersection of these three problems that
forces us to deal with this issue in a multisectoral way.

The ID believes that we certainly have adopted groundbreaking and
progressive legislation and policies that promote women’s rights and gender
equality. Their implementation has often, however, left much to be desired.
It is also heartbreaking for me to visit womens’ shelters that have been
set up by communities but do not receive any financial assistance from the
state. It is also shocking that, given the high levels of child sex abuse
the Sexual Offences Bill has not been given the priority it deserves in
Parliament.

Combating women and child abuse is a responsibility for all spheres of our
society. Government must provide effective and adequate post-trauma
facilities for young rape victims; educate the nation about HIV/Aids and
provide adequate health care services and medication. Communities must
speak out on abuse of any kind and, finally men must respect women and
their bodies and comply with the simple principle of only having sex with
mutual consent. All of this will serve as a basis for us to deal with the
triangular predicament that vulnerable young women in South Africa are
faced with today. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, many have questioned whether the 16 Days of
Activism is, in fact, the best way to address violence against women and
children. The experience of those who work with victims daily has led to
the perception that the hype has, in fact, escalated the problems and
brought little relief.

Money previously spent by government on expensive cocktail parties,
alcohol, food, VIPs, T-shirts, etc, which ultimately achieved nothing,
could have been better utilised. Before during and since last year’s 16
Days of Activism very little additional money has found its way into this
campaign to shoulder the severest load.

NGOs delivering services needed to protect vulnerable women and children
are drastically underfunded. Government relies on these service providers
to deliver on its statutory obligations but does not budget appropriately
for such services. In fact, government is not even aware what is actually
needed as it has ignored constant calls for an audit to be done.

Government grants have hijacked social workers in a sense as they have been
sucked into what has been referred to a “grant grinding machine”, while
social workers are buried under case loads dealing with foster care and
other grants, protection of vulnerable women and children and help for
women and children in crisis simply does not exist.

The attention attracted by the 16 Days of Activism campaign did, in fact,
encourage increased numbers of abused women and children to reach out for
help, and this should have been a good thing but they found no help from
departments at a time of the year, which is traditionally frantically busy
with so many on leave. Often departments are simply shut leaving victims
who speak out more at risk.

Unanswered questions such as, “What has been done with money collected
during previous years of this campaign?” raise concerns and leave people
sceptical. The ACDP calls on government to account for this money. If this
campaign does not result in increased resources in the hands of those who
are best placed to provide the services, all efforts will be in vain. Money
and time spent will be a shameful waste and vulnerable women and children
will remain unprotected and face even greater danger and hardship. Thank
you.

Dr C P MULDER: Agb Mevrou die Speaker, agb Adjunkpresident, geen politieke
bestel, hetsy goed of sleg, hetsy van die verlede of die hede, kan ooit
aangebied word as verskoning vir dade wat gepleeg word teenoor vrouens en
kinders nie. Niemand kan dít ooit gebruik as verskoning waarom daardie tipe
van dinge plaasvind en gebeur nie.

Feit is, dié tipe van goed wat gebeur, gebeur in die oorgrote meerderheid
van gevalle tussen ‘n man en sy vrou in die gesin tussen ‘n pa en sy
kinders, of ‘n man en iemand met wie hy saam is; en dit is die tipe goed
wat basies gebeur. Wat mans behoort te verstaan, is dit: enige man wat ‘n
vrou afknou of slaan, of te na kom, is nie ‘n man nie, hy’s ‘n lafaard.
Enige man wat ‘n kind afknou of seermaak, is nie ‘n pa of ‘n man nie, hy’s
‘n boelie en ‘n lafaard. Geen gemeenskap behoort dit te aanvaar nie.

In die finale instansie is dit nie die taak van die staat of van
departemente om hierdie saak reg te stel nie. Dis die taak van ieder en
elke gesin. ‘n Sterk gemeenskap, ‘n sterk volk, se basis kom uit sy gesin.
Gesonde gesinne is die antwoord.

Ons moet by onsself begin; die mans moet hul verantwoordelikheid aanvaar.
Die VF Plus ondersteun hierdie stelsel en die hele proses ten volle.
Dankie, Mevrou die Speaker. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Hon Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, no political
dispensation, whether good or bad, whether past or present, can ever be
offered as an excuse for committing acts against women and children; no one
can ever use this as an excuse  why those types of things occur and happen.

The fact is that these types of things mostly occur within the family
between a husband and his wife, between a father and his children, or a man
and his partner; and that is basically the type of thing that occurs. What
men should understand is this: any man who bullies, beats or offends a
woman is not a man, he is a coward. Any man who bullies or hurts a child,
is not a father or a man, he is a bully and a coward. No community ought to
accept this.

In the final analysis it is not the responsibility of the state or
departments to rectify this issue. It is the responsibility of each and
every family. Families form the cornerstone of a strong community and a
strong nation. Sound families are the answer.

We must start with ourselves; the men should accept their responsibility.
The FF Plus fully supports this system and the whole process. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. [Applause.]]

Mnu Z J KATI: Mgcinisihlalo, abaphathiswa neenkosi kunye nePalamente
iphela, indima yokuqala kukuba sithi silubulele kakhulu olu suku ngokuba
lungazange lufane lubekho nje, kodwa lwalwelwa. Unobangela wokuba sibe
sithetha ngamalungelo abantu namhlanje, kukuba la malungelo akezanga
ngetreyi, siwalwele. Ngolo hlobo ndifuna ukubonisa ukuba ukwakhiwa
kwemibutho enjengeUnited Nations kwenze ukuba wonke umntu abe nokukhuseleka
ezintshabeni. Siyazi ukuba, ngokokwethu esiNtwini, inkosikazi nomntwana
asibantu bebebulawa naxa kukho imfazwe. Nditsho sisilwa sisodwa, singalwi
nabanye abantu, asizange sayenza into enjengaleyo kangangokuba amadoda
amaninzi anjengooMakana. . . Ndikhumbula ukubanjwa kukaMakana eRhini.
Ukubanjwa kwakhe ubuza kwabangaphambili, oomantyi kunye namajoni ukuba
unobangela wokuba nina Bantu bamhlophe nibulale abantwana bethu yintoni na
sibe thina singayenzi loo nto, ukubonisa indlela umntu ontsundu amhloniphe
ngayo umntu obhinqileyo kwakunye nmntwana. Yiyo loo nto uphawula into
yokuba umntu obhinqileyo uhlonitshwe kakhulu ngokwesiNtu kuba kuthiwa
yigolide yesizwe. Ilizwe lilihle nje lihle ngomntu obhinqileyo ngoba uze
nayo yonke inzala. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Isizwe singapheli nje kungenxa yokuba
umntu obhinqileyo uze nomntwana. Ukuba kunokwenzeka ukuba kusondele inyoka
emntwaneni, umntu obhinqileyo angaxolela ukufela kuyo kunokuba abaleke.
[Uwelewele.]

Ke ngoko kubalulekile ukuba kubekho iintsuku ezizodwa zokuba kuqwalaselwe
umba nokuphathwa kakubi kwamakhosikazi. Kule mihla siva izinto zokuba
ooyise babantwana balala nabantwana babo. Ezo zinto zange zibekho
ngaphambili apha kule Afrika. Amadoda anjengooTambo nawayesiya kusibeka
ngaphaya kula mazwe aphesheya, ayesenza iindlela zokuba sikhuseleke
kwizinto ezazinokusivelela. Alifaka ilizwe eli lethu kwiUnited Nations, nto
leyo eyenza ukuba sibe ngabantu ababalulekileyo ukuze neemfuno zethu
zihlale zigadiwe.

Xa sithetha ngokuthi makuhanjwe kuyiwe eKliptown nasebantwini jikelele ukye
kusatyelwa iimfuno zabo, kwakufunwa ukukhangelwa ukuba bafuna ukuphathwa
njani na kweli lizwe. Yenzeka loo nto. Akukho ndawo singazange saya kuyo,
ezifama nakuzo zonke iindawo ngmolo nesicelo sikaMadlanduna owathi ufuna
amavolontiya angama-15 000 ukwenza loo msebenzi. Kwaphumelela ngolo hlobo
ukumiselwa koMqulu weNkulukeko eKliptown. Ngolo hlobo ndizama ukuthi loo
malungelo sawalwelayo apho, makagadwe akhuselwe ngabantu.

Kukho aba Bantu bangenambeko ke bazithethelela ngokuthi benziwe butywala xa
bethe bathetha into engekhoyo. Ayikho loo nto. Ndingumseli nam lo.
Ndingowotywala kodwa andizange ndithi into endiyenzielyo ndiyenziswe
butywala. Ngenxa yantoni? Utywala buyalunyukelwa ngumtu obuselayo. Akasele
nje ngokungathi ungena ediphini. [Kwahlekwa.] Ngaloo mazwi silumkisa abantu
sisithi mabazilumkele.

Ukutshay kufuneka bakulumkele nako kuba kunenkathazo. Izinto eziqhumayo
zenza ukuba umntu aye kwenza izinto ezingafanelekanga, uve umntu esithi:
Andazi ukuba ndimbulele njani ubani. Zezi ziqhumiso singazaziyo zivela
kwamanye amazwe. Abantu mabazame indlela yokuziphatha. Kubalulekile
ukuziphatha nokuzigada. Akukho nto imbi njengexelegu lomntu. [Uwelewele.]
Umntu olixelegu ade abe lixelegu nangentetho le yakhe akalunganga.
[Uwelewele.] Kufuneka sichule ukunyathela. Yiyo loo nto wathi u-ANC xa
egaya amavolontiya wathi makacoceke ngokuthetha, ngokunxiba, ngokusela -
angabonakali enxilile phakathi kwabantu. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Akazange athi
mabangasele abanti ntokuyo wathi mabalinganisele, umntu angaseli
ngokungathi ungena ediphini. Ngala mazwi, Mgcinisihlalo, ndizama ukuthi
masibagade oomama. Ndisitsho nje ndinomzukulwana oneminyaka emibini
odlwengulwe yindoda enamashumi amathathu eminyaka. Samsa kwiinkundla
zamatyala loo mfana saza isigwebo sakhe saba bubomi ejele. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Asikho tu isizathu sokuba umntu enze izinto ezingafanelekanga. Umntu
uyambona umntu anokuya kuye. Akanakuya nje naselusaneni. Ivela phi loo nto?
Zange ibe kho apha eMzantsi Afrika into enjalo, singazange siyive nale
yokuba umntu alale nomntwana wakhe. Noko iintlono mazibe kho, maqabane.
Umntu ukho ngeentloni. Mhla waphelelwa ziintloni buphelile kuwe ubuntu. Tu!

Siyahamba ngoku sibheka ebantwini. Masiye kubo sinyulu, sihlanjwe ngokutsha
ukuze sikwazi ukuthetha nabo. Abantu bayasifuna. Kufuneka sibangele
iminyango ngeminyango ezilalini. Masiye kubo sibonakale singamanene,
sinxibe kakuhle, singabantu ababonakalisa . . .

Mgcinisihlalo, akukho nto inte njengomntu okwazi ukuziphatha. Akukho nto
imbi njengomntu ongakwazi kuziphatha. Amakhosikazi ethu sibahloniphile.
Masibahloniphe nabantwana bethu, size sincokole nabo ngembali yeli lizwe
nokuba lize njani. Amakhosikazi alwile emfazweni. Akukho apho angangenanga
khona. Besinawo emhlathini izolo oku esilwa imfazwe. Musani ukubathatha
ngokungathi ngabantu nje. Ngala mazwi, ntlanganiso ebekekileyo ndithi,
phambili. Makungabuywa mva. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa
speech follows.)

[Mr Z J KATI: Chairperson, hon Ministers, traditional leaders and hon
members, I think that we should show appreciation for days like these,
which remind us that we fought many battles in order to commemorate them.
We can proudly talk about human rights today because we fought for them.
They were not brought and presented to us on a tray. By saying that, I am
trying to show you that organisations such as the United Nations were
established in order that all the people could be protected from their
enemies.

We know that, in our black culture, women and children were never killed in
a battle. Even in instances where there would be battles between ethnic
groups, they were spared. Heroes like Makana emphasised that . . I remember
when he got arrested in Grahamstown. During the trial proceedings, he asked
the magistrate and the soldiers who held him why they killed children when,
as black people, we never did that. That showed the respect with which a
black person in general, and a man in particular, treats a woman and a
child. You would have noticed that a woman is respected in the African
culture. The world is so beautiful because of women. The world can never
perish if a woman can still bear a child. If a snake should approach a
child, a woman would rather die fighting it off than to see her child being
bitten by it. [Interjections.]

It is important to have certain days set aside to look deeply into the
matters concerning the abuse of women. Nowadays we hear many stories about
fathers who sleep with their children. We never heard of such things in
Africa before now. Great leaders such as Oliver Tambo undertook safe trips
and secured a living in foreign countries to ensure our acceptance into the
United Nations, thereby ensuring our status in the world so that our needs
were also guaranteed to be met.

The instruction that we should go to Kliptown for public hearings was a way
to get us to listen to our people’s ideas and views about how they wanted
to be governed. That happened and it was successful. We went to people on
farms, as per Madlanduna’s instruction, because we wanted to reach the
target he had set us of finding 15 000 volunteers to assist us. That is
what made the launch of the Freedom Charter in Kliptown such a success. I
am therefore appealing to all of us to guard our rights, as we have fought
so hard for them.

Some people are disrespectful and will justify their silly actions by
saying that they were drunk when they committed them. I also drink alcohol,
but I have always restrained myself from misbehaving. Why is that? One
should exercise caution when indulging in alcohol. You should not behave as
if you were a cow being driven into a dip tank. [Laughter.] Those are words
of caution.

People need to be careful about their smoking habits too, as smoking is
harmful to their lives. Others use drugs and blame their influence for
their wrongful actions afterwards. You may often hear them say: “I do not
know how I got to kill that person.” People should learn to conduct
themselves well. A person who does not conduct himself or herself well is
not very likeable. It is very important to note that. [Interjections.] A
person who cannot check what he or she utters, does not appeal to others.
[Interjections.] We should all watch our step.

During the ANC campaign for volunteers, a command was given that they
should be presentable and that whatever came out of their mouths and what
they wore should be appropriate, and that no one should be seen drunk in
public.[Applause.] It was never said that people should not enjoy
themselves by indulging, but that they should be cautious. With these
words, hon Chairperson, I am trying to say that we should take care of the
womenfolk. I have a grandchild who is two years old and who was recently
raped by a 30-year-old man. That rapist received a life sentence.
[Applause.]

Nothing can ever justify committing a heinous crime such as the rape of an
innocent child. Anyone can identify a person who can be approached, and it
certainly can never be a baby. Where has that ever happened? That is new in
South Africa. It is just like it is new to some of us in this country to
hear stories about people sleeping with their children. A person was
created to shy away from shameful acts. If you don’t have shame, you cease
to be human.

We are now preparing to go to the people. Let us go to them as “cleansed”
people so that we can be able to talk to them. They need us. We should
conduct door-to-door campaigns in rural areas. We should look presentable
indicating that . . .

Chairperson, it is important for a person to be able to restrain himself
from misbehaving. Nothing is as bad a person who is not morally good. Let
us respect our mothers and women in general. Let us respect our children
and teach about the history of this country and how our democracy came
about. Women fought in the war to free this country. You can find them
everywhere. We fought battles with them in the bush. Do not undermine and
underestimate their capabilities. With those words, hon members, let me
encourage you and say, ”Forward!” We shall never go back. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Debate interrupted.

Business suspended at 14:53 and resumed at 15:37.


                                ANNOUNCEMENT


The SPEAKER: Hon members, we apologise for that rude disruption owing to
the power failure. The Secretary to Parliament is preparing a full report,
including a detailed report from the Department of Public Works in relation
to the state of the generators that are supposed to service Parliament
under such circumstances. We can understand a power failure that affects
the whole city. However, we are supposed to be serviced by generators, and
for some reason seemed not to have managed to do so. Initially it came on
but the second time around it simply didn’t happen with regard to the NA.

We have asked for a detailed report on those matters and indeed we will
table those reports to the House. We will also inform the nation because
they must be worried when they hear that the whole of Parliament has been
immobilised by a power failure. Hon members, the situation we are in is
that we are not even sure how long this will last. The debate we were in
the process of finalising has been disrupted and we would now like to put
in place a way of prioritising the business before us. In that regard, I
would like to recognise the hon the Chief Whip of the Majority Party to put
a motion.


          PRECEDENCE TO ORDERS AND MOTIONS FOLLOWING POWER FAILURE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MARJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we move that
precedence be given to Order No 2, to Motions No 2 and 3 and Orders . . .
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, we have got no problem with that, except that
we have no indication in front of us because the computers are off. You
wouldn’t mind explaining to us exactly what the issues are.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We move that precedence be
given to Order No 2, that is the Report of the PC on Justice dealing with
the remuneration of magistrates; to Motion No 2, which is the motion to
adopt the notice on the magistrates’ remuneration; Motion No 3 that deals
with the Sixteen Days of Activism; then Order No 29, which deals with an
Environmental Affairs and Tourism report on the proposed exclusion of
portion 63 of the farm Groenkloof from the Groenkloof National Park; and
then Orders No 31 and No 32 that deal with the confirmation of suspension
of two magistrates; and also that we give precedence to the Repeal of the
Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Bill. Those are the
amendments coming from the NCOP.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: I had a discussion with the Deputy President who has proposed
that should we not have adequate time this afternoon to finish the business
of the House, that she would be prepared to come back and deal with
questions tomorrow morning. Everything depends on the situation with
regards to the power failure.

 INTERIM REPORT OF PC ON JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON HEARINGS
  INTO THE IMPLICATIONS AND APPROVAL OF THE PROPOSED NEW SALARY SCALES FOR
                               THE MAGISTRACY

                       (Consideration of Report of PC)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move that the
report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 INTERIM REPORT OF PC ON JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON HEARINGS
  INTO THE IMPLICATIONS AND APPROVAL OF THE PROPOSED NEW SALARY SCALES FOR
                               THE MAGISTRACY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, before I move for
adoption, I just want to put to the House two very minor technical
amendments. I apologise sincerely to the other parties that there wasn’t
time to circulate as they are really typographical areas, and I will read
and go through them very slowly.

I move on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party the following
motion with amendments, namely:

   That the House –

   (1)      noting that the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
        Constitutional Development and the Select Committee on Security and
        Constitutional Affairs held joint hearings on 18 October 2005 to
        inter alia enquire into the details of the implications and the
        approval of the proposed new salary scales for the magistracy; and


   (2)      pending the finalisation of the recommendations emanating from
        the hearings and arising from the interim report of the Portfolio
        Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, resolves as
        follows:


        (a)      To rescind its previous decision of 7 September 2005,
             which approved the draft notice and schedule received in terms
             of Section 12(1)(a) of the Magistrates Act 90 of 1993, as
             amended by Section 3 of the Judicial Officers (Amendment of
             Conditions of Service) Act 28 of 2003;


        (b)      In terms of Section 12(3)(b)(i) of the Magistrates Act 90
             of 1993, approves the draft notice and schedule of the
             President tabled in Parliament on 7 September 2005;
        (c)      That the costs for the implementation of the motor vehicle
             allowances for senior magistrates and magistrates be allocated
             to the Justice Vote in terms of Section 213(2)(b) of the
             Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, read with
             Section 12(4) of the Magistrates Act 90 of 1993, and


        (d)      That the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
             Development table its final report in the National Assembly
             before the end of the year detailing the outcomes and
             recommendations in relation to legislative and procedural
             matters relating to the determination of salary levels for
             magistrates; the absence of a budgetary allocation to defray
             the proposed new motor vehicle allowances for senior
             magistrates and magistrates; the development of policy
             measures to deal with the implications arising from the
             extension of motor vehicles allowances to senior magistrates
             and magistrates and any other matter relevant to or emanating
             from the said hearings.

Motion, as amended, agreed to.

                          SIXTEEN DAYS OF ACTIVISM

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes that the Sixteen Days of Activism for No Violence against
        Women and Children campaign led by the Department of Correctional
        Services and including other government departments and many civil
        society partners, will be launched on 25 November lasting till 10
        December and is inclusive of three other internationally recognised
        commemorative days namely, World AIDS Day, International Day for
        the Disabled and International Human Rights Day and that the
        campaign strapline, ``Act Against Abuse'', is a call to action and
        therefore -


   (2)      calls on all South Africans to actively participate in bringing
        an end to this scourge affecting all levels of society and to
        remain vigilant to any acts that violate the rights of women and
        children to live in dignity.

Agreed to.

    PROPOSED EXCLUSION OF PORTION 89 (a portion of portion 63 of the farm
   Groenkloof 358 JR, in extent 4 484m2 from the Groenkloof National Park
   situated in the Administrative District of Pretoria, Gauteng Province)
                       (Consideration of Report of PC)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move:

That the report be adopted.

There was no debate.

Report accordingly adopted.

  PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MR I W O M MORAKE, A MAGISTRATE AT
  LICHTENBURG MAGISTRATE COURT; PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MR K
        SULLIMAN, AN ADDITIONAL MAGISTRATE AT DURBAN MAGISTRATE COURT

                      (Consideration of Reports of PC)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move:

That the reports be adopted.

There was no debate.

Reports adopted and provisional suspensions of Magistrate I W O M Morake
and Additional Magistrate K Sulliman accordingly confirmed by the House.

    REPEAL OF BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS BILL

                 (Consideration of Bill and Report thereon)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move:

   That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, passed.

            DEBATE ON SIXTEEN DAYS OF ACTIVISM: ACT AGAINST ABUSE

The SPEAKER: Hon members, we are trying to find the Ministers; remember
that this situation has affected other Houses as well. There are Ministers
we were expecting here to come and answer questions, but who are in the
other house, which has also just resumed like us. We are just trying to
locate everybody; that so that so we can quickly dispense with the
questions as well.

Hon members, in the order that they are on the Order Paper we would need
the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry who is here and we would then
need the Minister of Provincial and Local Government. We need to locate the
Minister. We come back to the Minister of Water Affairs, who is here.

The Minister of Education is in the NCOP; the Minister of Housing, we still
need to find him; the Minister of Home Affairs is here. I believe, hon
members, we can start with the Ministers who are here.

Hon members we now come to questions to the social services and governance
clusters of Ministers.

The SPEAKER: Yes, hon Dudley, are you rising on a point of order?

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, we are just concerned about the debate. Can we
not complete the debate, which was an important thing for today?

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: You indicated earlier,
Madam, that the Deputy President said that if we couldn’t complete this
afternoon she would be available tomorrow morning. It looks as though we
could complete this afternoon. Could we then invite the Deputy President to
rejoin us and let’s deal with her question?

The SPEAKER: We are doing exactly that, hon Gibson.

We had said that the debate has been disrupted because of the power
failure. And just in case we are unable to complete the debate, we adopted
a motion that is actually related to the debate. However, hon members are
expressing a strong view that we should complete the debate.

We were right in the middle of the debate. I don’t believe we are left with
a lot of time of the debate. So, we could complete the debate.

Ms M M  MDLALOSE:  Usuku  lucishe  lwaba  nzima  nokho.  Siyabonga-ke  nakhu
sesibuye safika lapho  sizokwazi  ukuqhubeka  khona.  [This  day  was  hard.
However, we are grateful to be back and we are going to continue.]

No violence, in whatever form, is acceptable in society. No violence should
be tolerated. No violence can yield or result in productive and progressive
life.

We need peace in our homes, communities, institutions and our nation. Life
is about safe, stable, peaceful and productive families resulting in
progressive communities as a foundation for a nation that can stand with
pride among the nations of the global community.

Khona kusengumqansa, kodwa siyisizwe esidinga ukwenza izinqumo zokwakha
nokuvikela imiphakathi yethu, abantwana kanye nabesifazane.
Asibathande, sibahloniphe, sibazise. Asifundise ikakhulukazi abantwana
babafana ukuthanda nokukwazi ukukhuluma uma kunezinkinga. Masazi ukuthi
lezi zinsuku akuzona ezesikhashana nje, ezempilo yonke. Asingakuhlonizi
ukuthi kulihlazo ukungahloniphi nokungakwazi ukuphatha kahle izimbali
zesintu. Lezi zinsuku mazibe yimpilo yethu ngaso sonke isikhathi.

Ngiyabonga. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[It is still a long way to go, but we are the  nation  that  needs  to  take
decisions to build and protect our communities, children and women.

Let us love, protect and help them. Let us teach them, especially  boys,  to
love and encourage them to talk if there are  problems.  Let  us  know  that
these days are not just for the time being, but that they are  the  rest  of
our lives. Let us not shy away from saying it’s  a  disgrace  to  disrespect
and not to treat our roses with respect. These days  must  be  part  of  our
lives forever.

Thank you.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker and hon members, the annual UN-endorsed 16
Days of Activism for no Violence Against Women and Children campaign is
meant to raise awareness against this bad practice.

There is almost no day that goes by without violence against women being
brought to the fore. It happens at the hands of most males regardless of
race.

A month ago in the Moses Kotane Municipality, in the sleepy Letlhakeng
village, a senseless man shot dead three women - his mother, his mother-in-
law and his wife - and his child and, in a cowardly act, fatally shot
himself. A week later in Madikwe a jealous lover stabbed a girlfriend and
another man, then drove a car to and fro over the sprawled body of the man
and thereafter committed suicide.

Such acts are callous and should be stopped. This type of cowardly
unruliness cannot be tolerated any longer.

Someone even had the temerity to approach the Constitutional Court in an
effort to fight a court order restraining him against his wife. He argued
that his individual human rights were being trampled upon. He wanted the
right to have access to the wife and molest her. This is insanity in the
superlative degree. The Constitutional Court wisely ruled against him,
thereby stating categorically that women should be loved, protected and
respected - no beast should be allowed to come near them.

We in the UCDP do not condone violence regardless of how it manifests
itself. There have been instances when women have killed their husbands,
and in most cases it was the case of even the proverbial worm turning.

It is for this reason that those men who sit down to take counsel and moral
advice from elders on their wedding day are told that: “If a dispute
arises, return our daughter as you found her - do not disfigure her - love
her.” The wedding song, “O mo tshware hantle, ke galase e ya thubega”, has
always and will always be true to and for the people who have respect for
their fellow human beings.

We pray for the strength of all South African males to rid themselves of
violence against the weaker, defenceless and vulnerable, fairer sex. I
thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Madam Speaker, South Africa is a cosmopolitan country with
people of diverse culture, religion and background.

From 25 November to 10 December 2005, our country will observe days of
activism as observed annually, internationally. The public will be
conscientised on acts of violence, rape, sexual assault and many other
forms of domestic violence meted out to women and children.

The public must be taught about human behaviour and values that are
distinct to all other creatures on earth. The adults must be reminded that
women make a nation and that today’s children are leaders and adults of
tomorrow, they must be nurtured correctly.
The SABC in these days must stop showing violent films on our television
screens and playing violent dramas on the radio. Children learn what they
see.

The PAC is advocating for harmony in these days of activism. I thank you,
Madam Speaker.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the MF strongly supports the 16 Days of
Activism against gender violence. The MF denounces all forms of abuse and
violence and applauds the efforts and initiatives of this campaign.

We find the initiatives of the white ribbon, website and sms campaign a
great means to encourage support for our fight against abuse and violence
against women and children, as well as for awareness.

Further, with the great need of funding these NGOs, among other
organisations, we find the sms campaign to be a great means to raising
funds for these institutions.

The public needs to be educated to fight against violence and abuse. They
need to be informed and encouraged of the protection and rights that the
law makes available to all.

We need to unite in the campaign against abuse and violence. We need to
return to our constituencies with our white ribbons and encourage not only
awareness but also interaction within our communities so that those victims
in our areas may reach out for help.

But these campaigns also need to be extended to our prisons where the
rehabilitation of offenders may be intensified through awareness.

Each human being, from his or her first breath of life enters this world
with a collection of rights that no one may impose on. This is secured by
our Bill of Rights harnessed as a chapter to our supreme law - the
Constitution. Violence and abuse is an imposition. It is a contravention of
our Constitution and shall not be tolerated.

The MF supports the 16 Days of Activism campaign and shall contribute to
its initiatives among our people. Our spiritual leader’s teaching is: Love
Ever, Hurt Never, Love All, Serve All! Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
[Applause.]

Ms N M MDAKA: Madam Speaker, hon members, as we observe the 16 Days of
Activism against gender violence, it is painful to note that somewhere in
our country, the continent and the world women continue to be at the
receiving end of the acts of violence and abuse. We cannot sit and be idle
and pretend that all is well. We need to strengthen and co-ordinate our
efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women by working in
partnership with all local, national and international network groups.

The UIF is concerned about the deafening silence surrounding media reports
implicating one of the senior figures in our political arena. We
nonetheless are looking forward to the day when the ruling party will take
South Africans into its confidence and furnish us with real facts about
such a serious allegation, which is damaging not only to the ruling party,
but also to our country’s image and its international standing and this
makes a mockery of our commitment to the 16 Days of Activism.

The UIF will work tirelessly with groups that seek to strengthen women’s
solidarity against any form of violence against women because together we
can and will make the difference. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon Deputy President, South
Africa is facing an onslaught against its children with roughly 17 000
reported rapes against girls each year. I say girls because under the
definition of rape boys cannot be raped and we have been waiting for over
six years for this definition to be expanded and still no progress has been
made.

Also an astonishing 293 children were murdered during the first three
months of last year, and that is three children per day on average in our
country.

A spate of child murders and abductions over the past few weeks has made it
clear that no South African child is safe. There is desperate need for some
constructive measures to put the power back in the hands of caring South
Africans to stop this scourge. The first few hours after a child has gone
missing are the most critical. The DA has developed a seven-point strategic
plan to find abducted children before they are harmed. And we sincerely
hope that the government will receive these constructive policies in the
light they are intended.

Firstly, the DA proposes linking into the massive network of over 20
million cellphone users to instantly transmit information about a missing
child. Those who agree to participate will, after the abduction,
immediately be sent an SMS containing details of the missing child.

Secondly, we propose a voluntary partnership between the police and
broadcasters so that as soon as the radio station receives an alert from
the police it would immediately broadcast all available information about
the abduction. Thirdly, we propose that in large shopping centers and
retail stores procedures should be put in place to immediately alert
customers and staff when a child is reported missing, and that all exits
are closed off. This has worked extremely well in the USA where it is
called Code Adam.

Fourthly, the DA proposes compulsory inclusion of fingerprints on birth
certificates after the age of one year and that the national fingerprint
database be established for children. If any child on record is abducted no
time will be wasted in getting the necessary information sent out. Fifthly,
the DA proposes using messages on chips and sweet bags, as well as cool
drink cans to raise awareness of both children and parents about safety and
what children should do if they find themselves in a particular and
uncomfortable situation.

Sixthly, the DA proposes making it obligatory for the police to publish a
poster four times per year giving information and pictures about missing
children, which will be displayed in all public buildings. Seventhly, we
would also display information on electronic billboards at airports.

This has been a great success in America where one in six children, who
have been found, has been found through the posters. And finally national
Missing Children’s Day is recognised on the 25th of May in the USA and
Canada. South Africa should use this day as an annual reminder to all South
Africans to renew their efforts to reunite missing children with their
families. I thank you very much. [Applause.]
Mrs Z A KOTA: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers, comrades,
colleagues and honoured guests, we cannot discuss this debate without
looking at the Millennium Development Goals, the MDGs. South Africa is one
of the 23 countries that has given their progress report on the MDGs. South
Africa is also part of the 10 countries, which have presented a
comprehensive plan in the implementation of these MDGs.

Urhulumente we-ANC ubakhele abantu izindlu, ingakumbi abantu
abahluphekileyo. Ukusukela kunyaka we 1994 ukuza kuthi ga ngoku kwakhiwa
izindlu ezingaphezulu kwesigidi seerandi. Abona bantu baxhamleyo kwezo
zindlu ngoomama. Zikwakhona nezindlu ezakhiwa ngoomama, bezakha nge-PHP.
Siyayazi ke ukuba lo rhulumente unceda abantu, kwaye oomama ubakhathalele.
ISebe leZezindlu linike isabelo esingange 10% kumaphondo ukuba anike oomama
ukuze bakwazi ukwakha iinkampani zokwakha izindlu ngokwabo. UMphathiswa
uLindiwe uye wasinyusa wasisa kuma 30%, ukwenzela ukuba oomama babe
neenkampani, bazakhele izindlu ngokwabo. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Lo ngumsebenzi karhulumente obonakalayo, nesibonayo ngawo siyi-ANC ukuba lo
ngurhulumente okhathalayo. Xa ndijonge lo mba wanamhlanje ndifuna ukuthi
chapha kwinto eyenziwe yi-ANC Women’s League namhlanje. Lo mbutho
wembokotho apha kwiphondo leNtshona Koloni ubuno mthandazo obe ubizelwe
phaya e-Methodist Church e-Green Market Square namhlanje. Siza kukhumbula
ke ukuba iMethodist Church le zezo cawe esasikuzo ngexesha lomzabalazo.
Yiyo lo nto nanamhlanje ke besiye kwaphaya. Lo mhla, ibiyimini apho
sihambisana nento ethethwa nguMongameli yokokuba . . . 365 days of the year
should be days of violence against women and children. [Zonke, zingama 365
iintsuku zonyaka kufuneka zibe zintsuku zokulwa nobundlobongela obuthi
bujoliswe kwabasethyini nabantwana.]

Kwaye namhlanje imbangi yokuba siye phaya okokuqala, kukukhumbula ukuba
ngomso umbulali ka-Rasuge uvela enkundleni yamatyala. Yiyo loo nto besinalo
msebenzi besinawo namhlanje. Sifuna ukubuza kuThixo ukuba amathambo
kaRasuge aphi na. Singamakholwa kaloku. Siyayazi ukuba nguye owaziyo ukuba
aphi na lo mathambo. Yiyo lo nto namhlanje besiyo kwenza esisikhumbuzo siyi-
ANC Women’s League. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
Okwesibini, sithe masenze lo msebenzi singulo mbutho ngoba apha, kweli
leNtshona Koloni kukwelinye lamaphondo ahamba phambili ekulahlekeni
kwabantwana, kuba bavele bathi shwaka singabazi apho bakhoyo.

Yiyo loo nto senze esi sikhumbuzo senze esi sikhumbuzo sokuba siyazi into
yokuba olu suku lwanamhlanje lusuku lokuqhakamishela nabazali babo bantwana
esingazi ukuba beyekutshona kwezi phi na iindawo. Sifuna ukukhumbuza ke
amalungu ale Palamente ukuba lo mbandela ka Rasuge wawusele ukhutshiwe nase
zinkundleni zamatyala. Imbangi yokuba umbulali abe uvela enkundleni ngomso
kungenxa yomkhankaso we ANC Womens League’. Yiyo eyaphakamayo yathi
makafunwe uRasuge ukuba uphi na. Yiyo loo nto xa besikula nkonzo besikuyo
besifuna ukuba sibulele nakuSekela Mongameli siyalazi igalelo lakhe kulo
mkhankaso wokwenza ukuba umbulali kaRasuge abe usetolongweni namhlanje.

Sifuna ke ukuthi sibulele kuMongameli we-ANC Women’s League ngoba siyayazi
ukuba besingenekwenza lo msebenzi singakhokelwanga nguwe wena Mphathiswa
weZekhaya, Qabane uNosiviwe. [Kuyaqhwatywa.] Into eyenzeke kulo mthandazo
yile yokuba abantu baye basikhumbuza ukuba njengokuba la maqobokazana alo
mbutho esebenza kangaka eye nakwi-picketing phaya kwinkundla ephakamileyo
namhlanje. Sifuna ukuba loo makhaya anomvandedwa ayazi into yokuba
akawodwanga, ukhona umbutho okhathalayo ngabantu, umbutho we-ANC.

Kwaye lo manxeba bawavayo ngawamzuzwana. Ukuba bayasebenzisana nalo mbutho
basebenzisana nabantu. loo manxeba ayakuphululwa ngophezulu. Into
ibithethwa phaya kula mthandazo ngumfundisi wase Wesile obevula laa nkozo,
yinto yokuba, unekhandlela phaya elinocingo, elinameva. Uthi xa ethetha
ngala meva zingxingongo abantu abakuzo emhlabeni, kodwa elikhandlela
likhanyisayo lithemba. Uthi eli khandlela likhona ngalo lonke ixesha kula
nkonzo ngoba bafuna ukuba abantu bayazi ukuba kwiingxaki abakuzo ithemba
likhona kophezulu.

Sifuna ukuthi ke nanje ngokuba siyazi ukuba abantwana bee-Cape flats
abasafumaneki asibazi apho bakhoyo. Singumbutho we ANC women’s league
kwakunye nombutho okhathalelwe ngabantu we-ANC sithi sizakuthi gqolo,
sikhumbuza abantu into yokuba masibakhuphe aba bantu baphakathi kwethu,
esingazi nokuba bafuna ukwenza ntoni na ngoba aba bantwana beduka nje
likhona unyawo lwemfene. Bakhona abantu abasebenzisana neqela lemigulukudu
ukuba bathathe abantwana phakathi kwethu. Enye into eyenzekileyo umfundi
waseGugulethu kwaGontsana waduka naye eye kumsitho wabebanga leshumi,
okanye iMatric ball, akazange wabuya. Sifuna ukuqonda ukuba amathambo alo
mntana wakwa Gontsana aphi na? Uyawazi uThixo kodwa ukuba siyasebenzisana
abenzi bobubi bazakusuka phakathi kwethu. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC-led government has built houses for the poor people of this
country. Since 1994 the government has built houses estimated at millions
of rands. People who benefited mostly are women. There are houses built by
women themselves under the PHP. We know that this government cares for
women. The Department of Housing allocated 10% to provincial governments
for women to establish their building contractors. Hon Lindiwe Sisulu
raised the amount to 30%. These actions are testimony to the fact that the
ANC-led government is the government that cares about its people.

When I look at today’s debate, I want to draw your attention to what the
ANC Women’s League has done today. This league held a prayer service at the
Methodist Church in Green Market Square. We will remember the Methodist
Church as one of the churches that supported the fight for the liberation
of the people. The theme of the prayer service was in line with what the
President has said, . . . that 365 days of the year should be days of non-
violence against women and children.

Firstly, the reason for the prayer was that we wanted to ask God about the
whereabouts of the body of Frances Rasuge, as the case resumes tomorrow. We
believe in God. We know that He is the one who knows the whereabouts of her
body. The ANC Women’s League joined the prayer in memory of Frances Rasuge.
[Applause.]

Secondly, the ANC Women’s League joined because Western Cape province is
one of the provinces where a number of children go missing. We wanted to
forge ties with the parents of the missing children. Although the Rasuge
murder case was closed in the justice court, the ANC Women’s League
appealed for it to be re-opened. It is the ANC Women’s League that said the
case must be reconsidered.

On the day of the prayer service we wanted to convey our gratitude to the
Deputy President for her contribution and efforts to put Rasuge’s murderer
in prison.

We want to express our gratitude to the President of the ANC Women’s
League, the Minister of Home Affairs, Comrade Nosiviwe Nqakula for the
success of the campaign. We would not have succeeded without your support.
[Applause.]

Women from the league who were part of the prayer service went for
picketing at the High Court as well. The ANC offers a shoulder to cry on
for those families that are in misery, to show that it cares about them. We
want to say that the pain they experience is temporary, because God is our
hope.

A minister from the Methodist Church made mention of the fact that he has a
candle with a wire and thorns. He said these thorns symbolised the
difficulties that we meet on earth and the candle is a symbol of hope. He
said that the candle in his church signifies peoples’ difficulties and
reminds them that God is our hope.

We know that there are still children missing on the Cape Flats. The ANC-
led government and ANC Women’s league are committed to eradicating
criminals from our communities. We are not sure of the plans of the
criminals, but their acts make us suspicious.

There is the recent incident of a learner named Gontsana, from Gugulethu,
who attended a matriculation ball and never came back. We want to know
where the child’s body is. God knows where his body is. If we work
together, we will eradicated the criminal acts in our communities. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy
President and colleagues, it is incredibly gratifying to hear that the
parties across the floor or rather on both parts of the floor, barring one
or two really unconstructive inputs, have agreed that we all have a huge
job to do. The hon Mulder made a very good point that, if families and
individuals do not accept responsibility for caring for one another then
the way forward looks very difficult.

We have, as government, put in place legislative frameworks, not to mention
issues like the Domestic Violence Act, equality courts, sexual offences
courts, Thuthuzela Centres that we referred to. We have also put together
integrated models of service delivery. And we are acutely aware of the need
to expand service delivery in this area, but this has to be done on a
sustainable basis.

I was very encouraged by the uniform sentiments of the House that we need
to make families stronger and more resilient to crime and that governments’
holistic effort is an attempt to do this. We also would like to understand
that this campaign is not an end in itself, but just one element of
government’s integrated campaign to raise awareness and to work towards the
change in behaviour and attitudes.

The practical measures proposed by the hon Waters, I think, are very
constructive, and could make for a very good way forward. I think we need
to consider those. I do think that Ms Dudley was extremely reckless and ill
informed. To resort to cynicism the way she did is an abandonment of this
country’s women. Not to have the grace to acknowledge progress that has
been made, is purely cowardly. We are acutely aware of the service
deficiencies that still exist and we will drive to make them improve. Every
single year this government spends increasing amounts of resources on this
problem.

We have an excellent track record in this regard. To accuse one of our
campaign partners of not accounting for the money that was raised is both
inaccurate and completely fallacious. Would you please refer to the
Foundation for Human Hights’ website, the auditor’s reports for the last
three years appear on that website. We have also informed all the people
that have contributed to this process. I think you owe the Foundation an
apology.

We also need to understand what we do with this campaign. In order to
acknowledge our social partners and the NGOs that work with us, we use this
campaign to raise funds for NGOs. Those funds are put into the Foundation
for Human Rights and what the Foundation also does is meet those funds and
sometimes doubles the funds, which they did last year and ring-fences those
for NGOs working with victims of violence. So I really think that this is
an acknowledgement of the incredibly important role that our campaign
contributes and recognises the role that NGOs deliver.

I believe also that it is acknowledgement that we cannot do this alone. We
need to do things that span across the spectrum, and that we need work
through partnerships with faith-based organisations. You will be delighted
to hear that this year the faith-based organisations in the National
Religious Leaders Forum have agreed upon one unified message of positive
values that will underpin this organisation. [Applause.]

The big challenge that faces us is the many constituencies we have to speak
to in this discussion and engagement. We have to speak in all the official
languages and that in itself is an issue. But we have undertaken to work
with traditional leaders who have been incredibly responsive and developed
a four-phased plan on violence as it pertains to the various aspects of
life; children and women being two very important areas. They will announce
the plan, which has been workshopped with the NPA. They will take ownership
of it. The Department of Arts and Culture has agreed to translate the plan
into all the languages. And the traditional leaders have taken
responsibility for popularising this plan in the coming year.

The challenge for us all is how to turn this into a 365-day event. The
point is this: We need to unify across race, class and gender; across
political, urban and rural divides, the good people of this country. While
97% of perpetrators are men not 97% of men are perpetrators. On the
contrary, most of the men in this country are good men. But we know what
happens when good men stand idly by doing nothing. We need to make
alliances. We need men to use their peer pressure on one another for change
that makes an effective difference in the lives of their children.
Somebody also in this debate pointed out the incredible role that is played
by how children learn from their parents. They learn these behaviours from
their parents. We are responsible and as individual parents we have to take
responsibility of inculcating these new values. The hon Kota made an
excellent input acknowledging that if we look at the Millennium Development
Goals we must understand something about this country and why this campaign
is everybody’s business. For development to take place and for it to be
appropriate and effective we need it to do that in an environment that is
free of violence. The elimination of violence in our homes and in
workplaces and our schools is critical to this programme. You can support
this programme in various ways.

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Women’s
League on their efforts that they have made in showing and demonstrating
their care of this issue by the measures indicated by the hon Kota.
[Applause.] This is just indicative of the many other NGOs really put their
lives on the line doing core work for government; day in and day out. They
appear as volunteers and are unpaid. We cannot do this alone. There are
many elements. Please support the campaign. Remember on the 25th to SMS “16
days” to the short code number 31616. This will again raise funds for NGOs,
if the hon Dudley will allow, to the Foundation, which has a very
transparent pledging process. It then goes back to the very people that
support this in civil society.

You can also sign a pledge to act against violence in the home, in the
workplace, at schools, and in the community. Please pledge your signature
to those; they are freely available. They have been circulated, I think,
today to Parliament. You will see them in your boxes. Free mail them back
to us, they will go onto a wall of solidarity at the SABC. You will be able
to find out every morning how these are collected. Last year we printed a
million and we got 480 000; a nearly 50% response is almost unheard of in
these kinds of things. Let us try for more. Let us try and beat the 50%
mark and get closer to 70%. I think that would be a real measure of South
Africans’ commitment. Please wear your white ribbons. You all received
white ribbons from us today. Only wear them if you aspire to the campaign’s
pledge to act against the violence. Don’t bother if you don’t.

This is an important message. It shows people that you are committed to the
victims and survivors of violence and to their recovery. I would also just
like to mention that there are many ways you can support us. And if you
want to see how many partners we have, just do a Google search on “16 days
in South Africa”, under the South African category. You will find over a
150 companies that have come to the table; not to mention foundations and
other valuable partners. There are so many aspects to this campaign. Please
feel free to contact my office, and get onto the website. The Women’s Net
website is also very inclusive of all the information; over 400 events have
been fed into the system with a highly rural bias and www.southafrica.info
has also lots of very good information. Thank you very much everyone for
your support. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY:





THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT



          Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa


22.   Mr L Zitha (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (a) What are the key elements of the Accelerated and Shared Growth
      Initiative for South Africa and (b) to what extent will it assist in
      meeting the 2014 objectives?                 N2331E


The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, hon members, the answer to this
question is that the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative is made
necessary by the need to ensure that growth in our economy is both
accelerated and shared. The approach is being taken in an accelerated and
shared manner. The growth initiative for South Africa is, firstly, to
identify those binding constraints, which, if removed, would improve the
performance of the South African economy.

following: the relative volatility of the currency; the cost and efficiency
of the national logistics system; capacity of our infrastructure, and the
bottlenecks experienced; the shortage of suitably skilled labour at
suitable cost; the disjointed special settlement patterns, which contribute
also to labour costs; the lack of sector development strategies; barriers
to entry and competition in some sectors of the economy; the deficiency in
the state organisation capacity and strategic thrusts with great impact at
local government level, in relation to service delivery; the regulatory
obstacles to growth, and employment that has a particular impact on SMMEs.

The accelerated and shared growth research and discussion that is now under
way seeks to address practical and substantial strategies to respond to
these issues. It is not anticipated that there will be significant changes
in policy, but what we have found that we will need to do is that there
should be significant improvement in monitoring and evaluation of policy
implementation by all members of the executive and the Presidency; tighter
co-ordination and integration of agreed programmes and interventions
bringing in government, state-owned enterprises, private sector and civil
society in a partnership; and focus on outcomes and timely interventions;
emphasis and choice of interventions must respond to shared growth because
we have discovered that in the past 11 years, notwithstanding the growth
that we’ve seen in the economy, it has not been shared enough.

Therefore this must ensure that the overall government programme of action,
as we know it, continues. But, in addition to this, we lift up those
initiatives that are able to respond to labour absorption, to poverty
alleviation and to growth in a sustainable manner. In order for us to
ensure that the initiatives we are picking on will do this, a modelling
exercise is under way to check on the initiatives that we’ve already
identified.

If the binding constraints can be effectively addressed it is expected that
the growth rate and the unemployment rate will rise to the point that the
objectives of halving poverty and unemployment would be achieved by 2014.
Our process of consultation with stakeholders is under way, and we are
seriously looking at the contributions that are being made by stakeholders.

Thus far, on the part of government, we have identified the following
critical interventions: infrastructure development in an amount of R320
billion in the current MTEF has already been allocated for that purpose;
human resource development, which has emerged as the biggest threat to any
growth prospect and initiative; interventions directed at the second
economy, especially targeting SMMEs, and this will include social
infrastructure, expanded public works and jobs for unemployed graduates;
provincial initiatives that have been identified by the provinces, which
are identifying specific projects in those areas where we have either
difficulty in generating economic activity, and/or we have opportunities
that we have up to now not taken full advantage of; the macro economy,
which includes striving for a competitive and a stable currency; service
delivery and governance, especially at local government level but
throughout the government system, and ensuring that delivery and the
closing of the skills gap go hand in hand with ensuring sustainable service
delivery; and, lastly, sector development, and the sectors have been
identified and we’ve singled out those sectors that will give us
sustainable jobs in the shortest possible time and these are, in
particular, tourism and business process outsourcing.

These are immediate priorities because we have also been working closely
with the business sector, and a comprehensive business plan has been
developed in that regard.

We are also looking at other sectors, which will be given attention in the
middle of next year, as those sectors that we are accelerating. These
include agriculture and agroprocessing; biofuel specifically is a new
sector that government will be paying particular attention to; mineral
beneficiation; cultural industries, and more work is also being done on the
chemicals and forestry sectors. I thank you.

Mr L ZITA: Madam Speaker, I’d like to thank the Deputy President for such
an enlightening reply. As ANC cadres, and I dare say the country at large,
the news that the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative is going to be
overseen by her was met with jubilant anticipation.

Hon Minister, your record as Minister of Minerals and Energy was a
historical marker that opened a new chapter in the battle for economic
transformation in our country. Over the past seven years a number of fora,
including summits, have been held with business and labour to elicit their
participation in partnership in the development of the country. What in
your opinion, Madam Deputy President, are the lessons that have been drawn,
and in what way will those lessons inform the present initiative? Are you
convinced, Madam, that South African business in particular is willing to
move an extra mile to achieve the objective of six per cent GDP growth?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: To begin with, hon member, some of the initiatives,
when you see the details – that’s what we’re looking at – we have already
agreed on with the private sector in order for us to implement more
effectively, to co-ordinate much better, and to monitor much better.

So, monitoring and co-ordination have emerged as very important
interventions in this regard. These include, though, some of the
unimplemented agreements, for instance, from the Jobs Summit and the follow-
up summits.

I am convinced that the private sector has concerns and would like to
contribute to growth, but we cannot be complacent. The fact that there is
concern and leadership within the private sector has expressed interest in
co-ordinating with us, does not automatically mean that we’ll get the co-
operation. It also means that we must make sure that the initiatives
undertaken by the private sector dovetail to the extent that they include
those undertaken by government, and where those initiatives are frustrated
by any of the actions that government may be responsible for, we remove
those obstacles.

So, the answer is, yes, hon member, I think there is commitment from
business but, you know, we need to monitor, we need to follow up, we need
to nudge and sometimes even pinch.

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy President, corruption is a
serious threat to the sustained economic growth of this country. There are
some very serious allegations made against some officials and councillors,
which is governed by the ANC – Buffalo City, Mangaung and further
Ventersdorp. [Interjections.]

My question to the hon Deputy President is: What is the ANC going to do to
root out fraudsters and crooks?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: In the study, which was not done by us as government,
on binding constraints, that did not emerge as one of the binding
constraints. However, that does not mean that we are not concerned and
we’re not going to do anything about it. That is why, right now, some
councillors have been suspended, and that there’s a whole lot of action,
for instance, that was taken by the Minister of Foreign Affairs. To the
extent that, if you should know of cases that have gone uninvestigated, you
should come forward with that information.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, the ACDP believes that
state capacity is the single most important factor constraining greater
economic growth, and resulting in capital underspending by the state. An
insufficient investment in human resources and a lack of skills will, as
you pointed out, negatively impact upon achieving a six per cent economic
growth rate.

One of the key aspects not targeted sufficiently with Gear was the
educational sphere. This resulted in a shortage of matriculants with higher
grade maths and science, with a knock-on effect on tertiary institutions.
This, together with the brain drain, resulted in a shortage of
professionals such as engineers, project managers and technicians.

Hon Deputy President, will your initiative deal with this problem and; if
so, what are your details regarding maths and science leading to the
shortage of professionals, as I pointed out?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, yes, I agree with you, hon member, the
issue of capacity to spend and the skills that we need in order for us to
be able to spend efficiently and properly have also been identified as a
big threat, not just to this initiative, but also to the many other things
that we may want to do in this economy. That is why we have singled out
human resources as a major component of this and, in fact, it is the one
that we are going to implement first, because it has to come first.

We have collaborated, again, with the private sector, as well as with
labour. Particular in this case, the national business initiative from the
private sector is the one representing the private sector in this
initiative.

We have identified the need to fast-track those skills that we need
immediately in relation to these interventions, such as infrastructure –
the specific sectors you are talking about – as well as delivery of
services.

In relation to this, we have roughly 18 months of intense initiatives,
which would include recruiting, training and deployment of the people in
those areas, but also a process of seconding people that we can get out of
retirement and from other areas to play that role. In terms of what we need
for the private sector, and some of the capital projects, the DBSA is
kindly co-ordinating that, so that it can evaluate the credentials of the
people who are offering help. When we are ready with the details we will
take you into our confidence about what we have.

Secondly, we are looking at artisanal skills; the second tier skills; and
the work that is being done through further education and training
institutions. Again, we will be seeking in the short term to respond to the
initial major projects, but also to make sure that they’re sustainable and
that in the long term we are able to use those to assist those students
with lower marks in maths and science; to upgrade them so that they are
able to perform better when they are in these institutions.

Of course, there is an intensive programme that the Minister of Education
is busy with, which is looking at the quality of education at high school
and primary school, as well as looking at early childhood development. So
there is a comprehensive plan, and I think at the appropriate time the
Minister should also be able to give you details.

Prince N E ZULU: Madam Speaker, thank you, Deputy President, for your lucid
answers, but we all have experienced some difficulties. Service delivery
issues have been very difficult over the past 10 years. The question may be
posed, just to give us more clarity. How we are going to turn around these
difficult scenarios we have experienced in the past to success stories in
order to meet the 2014 challenges, given the present status of our
municipalities?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I would start by saying, hon member, that we see
these interventions as short, medium and long term, and long term in this
context is 2014, and this is in addition to overall government work that we
need to do in an ongoing manner.

Short term, as I say, within the next two years we want to see tangible
improvements; in four years we want to see very significant improvement,
especially in the area of delivery, and what is different now is the amount
of detail we have about where the challenge lies. We actually have
information and detail, literally about every municipality, the level of
skills in those municipalities, the details regarding the books of those
municipalities, as well as the service delivery challenges that
municipalities are facing.

What the DBSA is therefore going to do, assisted by Treasury, the
Department of Water Affairs, DME, and the others that are aligned to
service delivery, is to ensure that we do not have a broad brush response,
but a particular response in relation to every municipality. Because, we
also know that the challenges that are there . . . Can somebody manage the
Chihuahua for me, please? [Laughter.]

We need to make sure with regard to every municipality that we actually
have a response that fits the demands of that municipality. I think this is
what is different. We have enough information we are much more thorough.
Some of the challenges that we also face are that when we delegate people
to work and to mentor, we will need to make sure that there are people to
be mentored . . . [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, on a point of order. I think it has been
ruled on a number of occasions that calling members dogs and referring to
them as animals is unparliamentary, and the hon Deputy President referred
to the Leader of the Opposition as a Chihuahua, and that is a dog and it is
unparliamentary, and I ask you to request her to withdraw the reference.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon members. I will come to the issue of the
unparliamentary part of any statement made by an hon member However, I
don’t understand how you get to the conclusion that she was referring to a
specific member of the House. [Interjections.] Why would the hon member
decide that it was a reference to the hon the Leader of the Opposition?
That is the question on my mind.

However, I would like to ask the hon Deputy President to just withdraw any
reference to a Chihuahua because, indeed, any reference to animals in
relation to members of Parliament is unparliamentary. Madam Deputy
President, could you please withdraw the word “Chihuahua”?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I withdraw, Madam Speaker.

  Government’s response to Report of the Independent Inquiry Committee into
                  the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme

23.   The Leader of the Opposition (DA) asked the Deputy President:



      (1)   Whether the Government has formulated a response to the Report
           of the Independent Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-
           for-Food Programme, particularly in respect of the sections
           relating to the involvement of the Presidency, the Department of
           Foreign Affairs and specific South African companies (names
           furnished); if not, why not; if so, what action will the
           Government take against firms falling under their jurisdiction
           in this regard, as urged to by UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan;




      (2)   whether relations between the Government and the Arab Ba’ath
           Socialist Party influenced South Africa’s diplomacy towards the
           Iraqi government of Saddam Hussein; if so, how;

      (3)   whether certain persons (names furnished) or any other person
           consulted with the Presidency regarding their visit to Baghdad,
           Iraq, in December 2000 either before or after their visit; if
           not, when did the Presidency first become aware of such visit;


      (4)   whether the President or anyone in the Presidency was informed
           that the President’s name was used in his capacity as President
           of the Republic to give the impression that a certain person
           (name furnished) was acting on his behalf; if not, what action
           did the Presidency take when it became aware of this; if so,
           what are the relevant details?
           N2329E


The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, the answer to this question is, as
follows: The government has not yet formulated a response to the report of
the independent inquiry committee into the Iraq-UN Oil-for-Food Programme.
We have instructed the Minister of Justice to examine the whole report and
give advice on the steps that our government should take.

Whilst we await that response from the Minister of Justice, we wish to
state that South Africa’s foreign policy is based on South Africa’s
national interest and international law, and we reject any insinuation that
such policy can be auctioned for private-commercial purposes. The
Presidency was also, as far as we know, never informed about anybody who
has claimed to be the President’s adviser.

Hon members, with regard to the other parts of the question, as you are
aware, the South African government conducts its international relations
with other governments and not with political parties. Such interactions
are guided by our foreign policy objectives, which are well-known and well
considered. As such, the government has no relations with the Arab Ba’ath
Socialist Party.

The answer to the next question is that the Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Mr Aziz Pahad, officially visited Iraq a number of times between
November 1999 and 2003, and I must just add that we were requested by the
UN to help there, which was one of the reasons that Mr Aziz Pahad had to go
there frequently.

During the visit in November 1999, the Deputy Minister was accompanied by a
business delegation, which met separately with the Iraqi business community
on trade-related issues. A member of the Department of Trade and Industry
was also present on that occasion.

Let me also state that business people, or any other individuals, do not
necessarily require government’s permission when conducting their business
with any other party of their choice, as long as this is done within the
confines of the law. I thank you.
The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker to the Deputy President, I put
it to you, Deputy President, that the foot dragging and the filibustering
of this government on the Oil-for-Food report, which is now more than three
weeks old, and South Africa is in the very strange position of being one of
the very few countries that has companies implicated in that report and
which has had no response, official or otherwise, except to say it is still
being read – three weeks later.

But I put it to you, Deputy President, that the reason that nothing is
being done by the government is that the major South African company in the
dock, in respect of Oil-for-Food, is none other than Imvume, the same
company implicated in Oilgate, and the same company, which when you pierce
the corporate veil, is nothing other than a fundraising front for the ANC
for election purposes. [Interjections.] That is the reality, Madam Deputy
President.

Madam Deputy President does not understand why it makes so threadbare
government’s claim to be fighting corruption, but what you do to the Jacob
Zuma brigade in the streets is to give lie to the suggestion that there is
a selective targeting of certain people in respect of corruption, and an
amnesty offered de facto otherwise to others because of their connectivity
to you, the President and the ANC hierarchy. [Interjections.]

I suggest, Madam Deputy President, that that is the reason why nothing is
being done about Oil-for-Food. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, I decline to answer.

Mr T M MASUTHA: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for
the hon Leader of the Opposition to make such disparaging allegations
against a company, which will not have the opportunity to respond to such
allegations? [Interjections.]

HON MEMBERS: Read the report!

The SPEAKER: What is unparliamentary is to attack another hon member of the
House, except within the Rules of the House.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, could the hon Leader
of the Opposition have the courage of his convictions to make such an
allegation outside this House? [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Chief Whip, you can pursue that with the hon Leader of the
Opposition. [Interjections.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, I don’t want to talk about Chihuahuas, but
please help me so that I can ask my question. [Laughter.]

Madam Deputy President, I think we all realise the seriousness of the
situation in the sense that South Africa’s international credibility is at
stake. It is a report of the UN, and surely we must react responsibly.

Countries like Jordan and Australia, as far as I know, were also mentioned
in the report, and they have already appointed independent committees of
inquiry to investigate the companies mentioned, and whether there was any
government involvement. I think that is the right route to take, because in
the end such an inquiry will have findings that will be credible abroad.

We welcome the steps that have been taken up to now, namely that the
Department of Justice will investigate allegations. We think it is an
important first step, but the question is: Is it still viable, because
surely in the end we need a credible, independent committee of inquiry? If
some government department makes a finding that everybody is innocent, or
whatever, surely that finding will not have the same credibility as the
same finding made by an independent committee from the outside.

Is it still possible that we can go in that direction for our international
credibility? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, I think that the investigation that is
taking place now has not determined what course of action will be followed.
I must also indicate, hon member, that the report that everybody has read,
and is talking about, is a condensed version of, I think, seven lever arch
file reports and connected reports that the team in the Department of
Justice has to go through.

They have also brought in international experts to help them and to guide
them if they have to take the kind of action that you have talked about. If
the law has been broken, we, or any member of the public, are at liberty to
take the necessary action. So, that does not in any way stop members of the
public from taking further action. It might emerge that there are lots of
contradictions in this report, but we will not get into that, because as
long as the law has been broken, we will not be interested in whether there
is a contradiction or not. We will follow it up.

I must also add that the UN itself, following this, has not even taken a UN
resolution. They have just issued a press release. I am not saying that
that makes the matter less pressing, but I am just saying that there is not
just one way of looking at this issue. I would like to assure the hon
member that we do intend to act on it. [Applause.][Interjections.]

Mr M J BHENGU: Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy President . . . [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! An hon member has the floor.

Mr M J BHENGU: Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy President, we believe it is
important that Parliament has to ascertain whether the report of the
independent inquiry committee into the UN Oil-for-Food Programme is
factual. We have also gathered from the media that legal action may be
taken by Imvume. Therefore we, as the IFP, would like to know whether
action would be taken against South African companies, which have used the
relationship of South African leaders with Iraq, to obtain oil allocations
under the Oil-for-Food Programme, if allegations are proven to be correct?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, I restate: If the law has been broken,
let the law take its course. I also want to add that one of the issues that
the Department of Justice is actually trying to look at is exactly which
law was broken in terms of South African law, so that when they make their
move, if and when they do, they do not end up making accusations that they
cannot pursue effectively in law. So, that is one of the reasons that they
have brought in international experts. So that they cannot look at both
local and only international criminal laws, but also at the international
situation.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy President, through the Chair,
you indicated in your response that the Presidency was unaware of the
linking of the President’s name to any of the actions or companies
concerned. Could I read just one excerpt of the report? It reads:

   Mr Sandi Majali was allocated two million barrels of oil. The contract of
   approval explicitly states: Mr Sandi Majali, adviser to the President of
   South Africa. The perception that Mr Majali was a representative of the
   ANC and President Mbeki was further reflected in a letter from Mr
   Motlanthe that Mr Majali had the ANC’s full approval and blessing.


Surely, Madam Deputy President, you see that there is a huge conflict of
interests between ANC politicians investigating
ANC funders who apparently, possibly, broke the UN’s Security Council
resolutions on the Oil-for-Food Programme? Isn’t that a conflict of
interests? Surely, as Deputy President, what you have to do is to remove
any suggestion or appearance that there is a conflict of interests involved
in this matter. [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, I think somewhere in that statement
that you have read you spoke about perceptions. There are many people who
claim to be people’s advisers, including you. There are even people who
claim to be your advisers, and I laugh at some them, because I say: No, you
can’t advise Tony, you are too dumb to advise a smart gentleman like Tony.
So, people talk about these things when they want business.
[Interjections.]

Business people take chances, and they don’t always go and ask the
permission of the person whose name they are going to drop when it suits
them. The Presidency was never asked about Mr Majali posing as an adviser.
That is the way it is.

Secondly, about the conflict of interests, you know that the ANC, and most
of the people in South Africa supports the ANC, so in every pool of people
that you bring together, the ANC will always be in the majority.
[Applause.] You are asking us to find an artificial situation if you want
us to find non-ANC people, that is an igcuntswana [minority] of people in
the overall scheme of things. So, you will always find that.

We do not want the ANC to dominate this investigation as the ANC. We want
the government officials who are the ones who are working on this to deal
with it, and I am sure there will be an opportunity for Parliament to also
debate and look into this report. Thank you. [Applause.]


        Government plans for industrial development and job creation


24.   Prince N E Zulu (IFP) asked the Deputy President:



      (1)   Whether the Government has any plans to utilise taxes for
          industrial development in order to stimulate job creation; if
          not, why not; if so, what plans;




      (2)   whether the projected 6% growth will have the capacity to halve
          unemployment by 2014; if not, why not; if so, what are the
          relevant details;




     (3)    whether a review of some governmental regulations will improve
          the business environment and increase industrial competition; if
          not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?


     (4)    whether she will make a statement on the matter?   N2049E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: The answer to this question is that the general
approach of government is . . . [Interjections.]

Thula nawe, Johnny. Quiet, Johnny.][Laughter.]]

The general approach of government is to ensure that company and personal
income tax and other taxes are low enough to encourage investments.

As a general rule, tax incentives should be used with great care, as such
incentives might have unintended consequences, resulting in an unfair
playing field, with a loss in tax revenue and no or very limited long-term
benefits for the country and the economy.

However, there is a sector-specific taxation regime, for instance, for the
gold mining sector, and its intention is to find the right balance between
the incentive to invest and a fair return to the government.

Another measure that government introduced to encourage job creation in the
country was to provide indemnity to those individuals and businesses that
had invested their money outside the country, outside the law.

Amongst government’s aims in this stance was to ensure that the money comes
back to the country, and is used to invest in job creation. There is one
taxation provision specifically designed to encourage the employment of the
unemployed. This tax incentive is provided to employers under the Income
Tax Act, section 12(h), in the form of an annualised deduction of between
R17 500 and R25 000 when a learnership agreement is signed, and a further
annualised deduction of R25 000 when the learner successfully completes the
learnership.

There are several investment incentive programmes, such as the Small,
Medium Enterprise Development Programme, which do not use the tax mechanism
directly.

It is government’s wish to have halved unemployment before 2014. That is
the reason we are working tirelessly to ensure that government departments
have in place and in their programmes some measures to attain these goals.

Recently, the Industrial Development Corporation announced a R1 billion
financial package aimed at supporting SMMEs. Of this fund R600 million will
be targeted at SMMEs, preferably those in poor provinces, townships and
rural areas. The interest rate charges will be prime minus five per cent,
and average cost per jobs will be R150 000 per annum. The maximum amount to
be given per entrepreneur is R25 million. Also, R200 million is set aside
for pro-franchise scheme. It will target poor provinces, and will exclude
Gauteng and the Western Cape . . . oops. [Laughter.] The target is to
create ten jobs per franchise.

For horticulture R100 million is set aside, and the other R100 million is
set aside for forestry, targeting communities with land next to established
forests.

A recent study undertaken by the Development Policy Research Unit at the
University of Cape Town indicated that the rate of employment growth has,
for the period between 1995 and 2004, been approximately 76% of the rate of
GDP growth.

This means that the environment that the government has created is
conducive to the creation of employment, and therefore the achievement of
our 2014 targets. Thank you.

Prince N E ZULU: Chairperson . . .

 . . . ngiyathokoza kakhulu mhlonishwa Phini likaMongameli, ikakhulukazi
kuleya ncazelo yentela . . . [ . . . I am very much pleased hon Deputy
President, mostly because of that explanation on tax . . . ]

 . . . thank you very much.

My question now is about expectations, raised hopes by government’s
pronouncement on six per cent growth and halving unemployment by 2014. You
have explained this already, but do we really have a quick-fix mechanism
that will make these hopes and expectations become reality?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, there is no quick fix. Between now and
2014, it gives us a period of almost 10 years. That would not be a quick
fix, but the needs are urgent. So, to the extent that we can shorten
implementation and get results on some of the initiatives, we will do that,
but I agree with you. There isn’t a quick fix. It will be incremental.

Mr C M LOWE: Hon Deputy President, everybody in South Africa agrees with
you and wants to reach a six per cent growth rate. The problem is that two
years on from the Growth and Development Summit, we still are behind that
figure. I think we have reached something like 4,5% or possibly 4%. We are
lagging behind. We have a lot of ground to make up.

Other major obstacles include the failure of sector education and training
authorities and the Skills Development Act to really make an impact on the
skills crisis. As you know already, only yesterday, in the NCOP, you were
quite correctly expressing concern over the fact that unless we tackle that
skills crisis, we are going to undo all the good work of the last 11 years.

The Governor of the Reserve Bank is on record as agreeing with the DA. He
has expressed concern at our rigid labour laws.

My question to the Deputy President is this: We agree there is no quick
fix, but in simple terms, can you tell us and South Africa what you are
doing, what you will be doing and what steps you will be taking to ensure
that we reach that magical 6% projected growth rate, and find that the
skills levy is made up, and our jobs crisis goes away? [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: To begin with, hon member, there is a view in South
Africa that our percentage is growing at a rate that is above the 4-4,5%
that has been officially pronounced. So, perhaps the vision is not that
ambitious after all. Our own international advisers, as you know, felt that
6% was modest, because they thought that this economy has potential to grow
even beyond that.

Obviously, we will not chop and change every day. We will try and stay
within this. We would like to interrogate the information in order to
ensure whether we are at 4,5% or whether we are achieving more already.

You wanted to know exactly what is happening. We are going to build the
infrastructure, because it is a binding constraint affecting growth. We are
going to do something about harbours and ports, rail, information
communications technology and the cost of telephony. That is in our
business plan, and we have put aside money for us in order to achieve that.

We are going to target, as far as SMMEs are concerned, those segments of
the small and medium enterprises that can give us large numbers of new
enterprises. Our estimation is that we need to facilitate growth for those
who must move between being micro and small businesses. This is where the
majority of the people are who are enterprising but historically
disadvantaged in large numbers. Most of them are looking for money between
R10 000 and R1 million. There is quite a big group looking for money
between R10 000 and R250 000. In the market, there isn’t an appropriate
mechanism to intervene with those people because even with our own Khula,
the credit guarantee doesn’t go far enough.

So, we want to develop a dedicated strategy, working together with the
financial services charter implementing parties to develop products just
for that category of people, but also work smarter and better with business
partners – again, in order to address that segment of entrepreneurs.

We are not saying that we are neglecting the medium-sized businesses,
because they are also important, but once you reach the medium-sized mark,
you have a bit of leverage to represent yourself when you deal with
financiers.

Mr S N SWART: Hon Deputy President, the revenue authorities are to be
commended for collecting R21 billion more than last year’s projected
target. Indications are, however, that corporate tax rates will not be
decreased.

The ACDP is aware of the debate in this regard, and the Minister of
Finance’s view that business would not respond to tax cuts by investing and
employing more people. Do you share his scepticism?

You also indicated the use of incentives through tax reductions for
business to invest in productive capacities in certain areas - I think you
referred to the mining areas - do you not agree that tax relief would have
been a good start in view of the tax over-run? Economists hold that the
best way to keep up the good mood in the economy is to lower corporate
taxes. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I think that there is no one answer to the problem
that you are raising. I think that the tax approach is the easy and the
quick one, but it doesn’t necessarily give us the best returns. I think
that the Minister of Finance has actually studied the situation, and it’s
based on a track record in the economy of the last few years.

We have not seen, with the many opportunities, including the tax cuts we
have had at different intervals in the last few years, our private sector
rushing to invest in the productive sector.

I think that what you are saying is not a fact, but it is just one of the
measures that one can look at. It is not as if we are not doing other
things, in any case.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (C-S Botha): There is one more slot. The hon Vezi.

Prof B TUROK: Chair, I had my hand up, right from the beginning. It seems
you didn’t see me. Could I please have this particular slot?
[Interjections.]

I had my hand up right from the beginning. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Turok, I regret that we go
according to the monitor, and your name does not appear on my monitor.

I have gone strictly according to that, so I have to acknowledge the hon
Vezi.

Mr T E VEZI: Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam Deputy President, in view of the
existence of the skills mismatch in our country, don’t you think it is high
time we had a national skills audit in the country, if we haven’t done that
already? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: A skills audit is an ongoing task that is done within
government by one of the science councils that reports to the Minister of
Science and Technology. It is not as accurate as one would like it to be,
but it is a point of departure.

In the initiative that I was taking about, we are going to be looking at
fast-tracking the skills that we need in the short term, we are also going
to be updating that skills audit. However, in the medium to long term, we
would like to establish a sustainable, dependent, reliable mechanism to
always track the demand and supply of skills in the economy.

Something that we are now calling a joint human resource council together
with the other stakeholders – the private sector and so on – would be
established in order to look at the skills so that we are able, at every
given moment, to be in a position to say that we need so many dentists in
South Africa, and the ones that are in training are so many in this
province, and therefore we will be able to fix so many teeth a month. That
is the medium to long-term strategy that we are going to be adopting.

What we hope to achieve is a situation where the issue of always saying
that we do not have skills in South Africa will be a conversation of the
past. What we will be talking about is: This is what we are doing; this is
where we are struggling; this is where we are fast-tracking; this is where
we think that, in the short term, we need to import, and this is how we are
mentoring.

We are working quite hard on a comprehensive response to the issue of
skills. That is why I said that the issue of skills is the one that is
superior to everything that we are doing in relation to growth and,
frankly, failure is not an option, as far as that one is concerned. Thank
you.


                 Government measures for graduate employment


25.   Ms N P Khunou (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      What measures are the Government putting in place to address the
      challenge of graduates who are struggling to find employment?
                                                         N2330E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, the answer is that there are several
factors that cause current rates of graduate unemployment. These have been
well documented by studies from the University of Cape Town and the HSRC,
amongst others. Research suggests that non-responsive academic programmes
and poor preparation for the world of work reduce graduates’ chances of
securing early employment.

It should also not be forgotten that the process of transforming the
institutions of higher learning started relatively late, leading to
continued shortages of important skills, particular amongst black people.

Response from the government currently is, as follows: Through, amongst
others, the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative and initiatives that have
been undertaken by Umsobomvu, the Department of Education, the Department
of Labour have identified sectors that would absorb unemployed graduates
quicker in partnership with the relevant role-players. As I have said
earlier, those sectors that are growth sectors such as tourism, business
process outsourcing, community development, which is also part of the
Expanded Public Works Programme; the financial services, project
management, agriculture and agroprocessing; child and youth care, probation
services, minerals beneficiation, are amongst the sectors where we are
targeting specific opportunities for unemployed graduates; as well as in
the water and sanitation sectors.

Umsobomvu has collated data on the profile of unemployed graduates,
including their qualifications and we intend to work with that data and
improve it so that we can make it available to all those who would want to
help. We are grateful that we have engaged with one company, which has
offered to assist us to improve this data, as well as to make it easily
accessible, both to the employers and to other institutions that seek to
help. Again, in due course we will be able to announce a detailed plan
about how we are responding to the issue of unemployed graduates.

The Minister of Education has also engaged the private sector to work with
the Department of Education on ensuring that FETs produce relevant
graduates from within the FET system that will also enable the private
sector to make a contribution the kind of curriculum that is desirable to
make sure that we produce the graduates that we want. Topmost in my mind is
making sure that we first deal with the backlog of those graduates that are
already out in the street and of course, we also ensure that not only do we
look for jobs for them, but also those that need re-engineering and those
that are about to come out. We can work with institutions to make sure that
they are more ready for the world of work.

Ms N P KHUNOU: Thank you, Deputy President, for your informative answer.
With regards to an initial analysis on the nature of skills that are
obtained within the register of graduates, what was the outcome of such
analysis, with reference to matching the existing qualifications of the
unemployed graduates compared to skills required by our growing economy? I
have heard about the role that Umsobomvu has played but I just want to find
out, what role has Umsobomvu, together with the FET colleges and the
private sector, played in addressing these challenges? Specific reference
should be made to remedial actions on the reported skills mismatch and the
possible training of graduates.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: The overwhelming number of graduates that are
unemployed have got degrees in the Arts. You still find graduates with
science degrees, even engineers, who are unemployed. Part of the challenge
is that they are discriminated against because they do not have experience.
Learnerships are in part supposed to respond to that, but our own efforts
in co-ordination with the Departments of Education and Labour are meant to
assist these young graduates to get a starting chance.

For some of the infrastructure projects we would be placing these graduates
with a mentor. Eskom has already started doing this where one actually
works with a mentor, so that one could get this experience. We have found
that in the work currently under way of refurbishing and mothballing power
stations, when you bring back retired engineers who used to build the old
power stations that we are busy refurbishing now, they come with a lot of
passion, because they are sentimental about having been responsible for
building these stations and would like to see them succeed. When you put
young people around them, who are also just as keen to learn and get a fair
chance, it is very exciting to see what is actually happening there.

We intend to ensure that with this large expenditure that we had on
infrastructure, we will do that matchmaking. It is the same thing that we
intend to do as far as municipalities are concerned. As far as some of
those scarce skills, the intense and quite meticulous process of placing
them with mentors is taking place. But in the business process outsource
area, for instance, the training is much shorter, the turnaround time that
would enable us to place the students in a work environment is reasonable.
We are discussing with an ICT company that has come forward to assist and
absorb, and have agreed that not only will they be training young people
for their call centres, because they also have to train them in languages.
They have established that South Africans are very adaptable when it comes
to languages. I am told that it is easy to teach Afrikaans-speaking people
a Germanic language such as the Norwegian language.

The intention there is that as you train people for whatever service, for
the banking sector, you are also training a pool of people with different
languages for the tourism sector. They are quite happy to do so, though
many of them would be training people for the banking sector in particular.
We would want South Africa to position herself to compete with India when
it comes to the BPO type of jobs; not because we have the numbers and the
levels of education that India has, but because our niche is our capacity
to speak different languages and to adapt our accents.

Mr W D SPIES: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, during question time two
months ago in September, the question was asked about South African skilled
people who are jobless at the moment owing to different aspects of
government policy. At that stage you gave the assurance that you would look
at the names of people, if we were able to give you those names. The FF
Plus actually accepted that challenge and we launched a website a month ago
on which we gave the opportunity to people to record their skills and to
record their CVs. Up to date we have received more than 500 CVs of highly
effective, highly skilled people who are desperate at the moment and who
are looking for jobs. They desperately ask for help. I’ve got the CD here
and I am willing to give it to you. Are you prepared and can you give us
the assurance that these people will be looked at and given preference over
Cubans and Indians?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: You can cross the floor, hon member, and come and
give me the CD now. Thank you very much for having undertaken that
initiative. Yes, we will look at those people. The reason why we have asked
the DBSA to manage this is because we want it to be done very efficiently.
They will take those CVs, they will interview the people and look at them
and at the type of people that they want. They will check the
qualifications, the CVs and the experience so that there are checks and
balances. The people that we attract and the qualifications and experience
that they say that they have is actually what we need. I will gladly accept
the CD. Please cross the floor. [Laughter.]

Mr G G BOINAMO: Deputy President, what is the government doing to ensure
that the inability of unemployed graduates to repay their study loans to
the national study financial aid scheme does not eventually undermine that
scheme and thus make it more difficult for poor students to study at
university?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Am I allowed to seek help from the Minister because
she has been working on that and she didn’t have time to brief me?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Certainly, I am going to help you and
she is going to help you, as well.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Chairperson. The hon member would
probably be aware from briefings where I know he has been present that, in
the first few years of this scheme, there had been difficulties with
respect to repayment of loans and that the actuarial studies that had been
done to assist the scheme management had indicated that we might not reach
the kinds of targets that we had intended to reach with respect to
repayment.

However, the hon member would also be aware once the legislation was passed
that, in fact, through the link between Nasfas and the revenue office and
their database, we have been able to track employed graduates very well and
therefore he would know as a member of the Portfolio Committee on Education
that there has been a vast improvement in the collection rates to the
degree that over R200 million of repaid funds was added this year to the
amount provided by government for the scheme. That is a fairly significant
proportion of repayment. [Applause.]

The challenge does stand, as you indicate, of ensuring that more
opportunities, as the Deputy President has said, for employment are
available to young people, and the very areas she has so very eloquently
set out clearly indicate the steps government is taking. [Applause.]

Mr G G BOINAMO: Madam, I am not completely satisfied with the answer. I
asked a question about poor students who cannot pay but the Minister has
not touched on it. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I am very surprised because as I said, I have
seen this member present at briefing meetings. He knows that if you are not
employed, you cannot pay back. You only begin paying once you are earning
an annual salary of R26 300. Before you reach that level of paid
employment, you don’t have to pay back your loan.

The HOUSE CHAIPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): That is the final question. Thank you,
hon Deputy President. Hon members, we are informed by the Office of the
Leader of Government Business that both the Minister and the Deputy
Minister for Provincial and Local Government have had to leave to attend to
an urgent matter. The Minister of Housing was also not able to remain for
her questions and I have accepted her apology. We are arranging with the
Ministers concerned that the replies be submitted in writing. We now
proceed with Question 137.

MINISTERS:


             Progress made with delivery of water and sanitation


137.  Ms C C September  (ANC)  asked  the  Minister  of  Water  Affairs  and
      Forestry:



      (1)   Whether any progress has been made in meeting the targets set by
          the President in his state of the nation address; if not, why
          not; if so, what progress;


      (2)   whether her department anticipate any challenges to meet its
          obligations in this regard; if not, why not; if so, what plans
          are in place to deliver water and sanitation within the time-
          frame set?                                    N2392E

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, the answer to the
question is: Yes, substantial progress has been made. Since 1994, the
backlog on basic water supply has been halved and there has been a 40%
improvement in access to basic sanitation.

With regard to basic water supply; four million households, which
represented 41% of the population, did not have access to the
reconstruction and development programme defined basic supply. The March
2005 figure is two million households.

In 1994, a total of 5,8 million households did not have access to basic
sanitation. In March 2005 this was reduced to a total of about 3,91 million
households.

With regard to the second part of the question yes, there are challenges,
which we must address and those are being addressed, as we speak, to
achieve the set targets. These will include the following: securing
additional funding to achieve the targets on time and based on minimum
scenarios, the present level of funding available must increase
dramatically.

The Minister of Finance indicated in the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement that there will be an increase in the spending on basic services
over the MTF period. He said, I quote him:


   Over the next years additional spending of R46 billion in provinces is
   intended to reinforce key social and economic functions. Further spending
   of R2 billion will allow municipalities to substantially improve
   community infrastructure to expand the provision of free basic services
   like water, sanitation and electricity.

Secondly, there is a serious challenge to improve implementation capacity.
I am sure that members will realise that under Project Consolidate we have
been raising this problem of limited capacity within municipalities.

In line with the statements made by Minister Fraser-Moleketi, as we debate
here today, the Minister in the Presidency is in India and I had the honour
of being approached to act for him. He is engaged in finding means of co-
operating even beyond the borders of our country to find the necessary
skills and capacity for implementation. Of course, we commend the hon
member who has taken it upon himself to be involved in the mobilisation of
those people who have skills. [Time Expired.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, I want to thank the Minister. My follow-up
deals with the following. The roll-out of infrastructure has been
acknowledged to be quite an impediment to implementing the water services
and of course the water resources too.

As you stated, over the MTEF period, monies have been set aside for
infrastructure. How would the establishment of a national water resource
infrastructure agency address the needs so that the targets that have been
set aside could be met?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I want to thank
the hon member. Much as the infrastructure agency and the meeting of the
targets are not necessarily directly related; they are, however, not
mutually exclusive. The main thinking behind the establishment of an agency
is that the agency will be able to raise funds from the bond markets. In
other words, the funding will not come from the fiscus so that government
will have funds that could be used for water supply and other basic
services.

If the responsibility of raising funds for this required infrastructure is
shifted to an agency, government will then be able to do other things that
it would not be able to do if it were to fund the infrastructure
development from the fiscus only.

Some of these projects will have a direct impact on the targets. If you
look at the construction of dams, for example, in an area where water is
much further from the communities, and the water source is the river, you
have to find a way of ensuring that you store that water and reticulate it
so that it can reach the communities and that would be the direct impact
that such infrastructure development would have on the targets. But some of
these projects would not necessarily have a direct impact.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Chairperson, in her reply the hon Minister acknowledged the
problem in attaining the targets set for your department due to lack of
implementation by local government and we thank you for that.

Has the Minister considered the transfer of officials from the Department
of Water Affairs and Forestry to help in local government structures, which
are battling to implement the targets? If the Minister is considering doing
that, does it mean she is taking personal responsibility for implementing
these targets within these said timeframes?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I think taking
responsibility is a collective responsibility given that the function of
the delivery of basic services is the function of the provincial
development at local government.

So, it is not necessarily the Department of Water Affairs, despite the fact
that we are the sector leader and we have the responsibility. We are part
of that collective working together with the provincial and local
governments.

The issue that you are raising about the transfer of personnel, yes, we are
in the process of doing that and yes, it is a very slow process because you
are dealing with human beings whom you have to resettle from where they are
located in other areas.

More often than not, those areas are the far-flung areas of our country and
people become very reluctant to move from the areas of comfort to those
areas that are far-flung. So, that is the problem that we have here. We are
dealing with human beings and we have to respect their rights and go softly
in terms of handling this very complicated matter.


    Provision of potable water and sanitation by district municipalities


130.  Mr M W  Sibuyana  (IFP)  asked  the  Minister  of  Water  Affairs  and
      Forestry:



      (1)   Whether any funds have been made available to district
           municipalities and agencies for the provision of potable water
           and sanitation; if not, why not; if so, what amount(s) have been
           made available;




      (2)   whether her department has any mechanisms in place to ensure
           that the funds are utilised for their intended purpose; if not,
           why not; if so, what mechanisms;


      (3)   whether there are any performance incentives for the agencies
          and municipalities in this regard; if not, why not; if so, what
          are the relevant details?                N1881E

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I think I am
earning my small salary today. The answer to the first part of the
question: Except for R139 million, which is to be phased out this financial
year, no funds are made available by the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry for the physical provisioning of potable water and sanitation to
district municipalities and agencies.

Funds for water supply and sanitation infrastructure are made available
through the municipal infrastructure grant programme, administered by the
Department of Provincial and Local Government.

The funds allocated to district and other municipalities are annually
published in the Division of Revenue Act. The figures in respect of the
municipal infrastructure grant allocations are, as follows: In terms of the
financial year 2005-06, R2 958 million has been allocated to municipalities
for water supply and sanitation services of which R200 million is for
bucket eradication; and for 2006-07, R3 204 million has been earmarked to
municipalities for water supply and sanitation services, of which R400
million is for bucket eradication. For the financial year 2007-08, R3 661
million has been earmarked to municipalities for water supply and
sanitation services, of which R600 million is for bucket eradication, and
for the 2008-09 financial year, R3 524 has been earmarked for water supply
and sanitation services.

But these figures exclude the equitable share allocation, which is a non-
conditional fund. As funds are directly transferred to municipalities via
the National Treasury and the Department of Provincial and Local
Government, our department has no direct control to ensure that funds are
utilised for the intended purpose.

However, we have a monitoring role that we have to play as a sector leader,
or as a sector department, to ensure that there is delivery of the services
in line with the allocation that goes to those municipalities. My
department is a key role-player as far as that is concerned, although we
don’t have total control on ensuring adherence to conditions, but it is an
area that we are working on, as we have just approved for consultation a
strategy to regulate and monitor the municipalities and their performance.

Furthermore, the department has initiated a pro-active planning and
engagement process, via water services development planning, as well as
viability studies. [Time expired.]

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Madam Chair, hon Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry,
in view of what we saw on our oversight visit, the failures of the
municipalities and where some of the officials are suspended, is the
department still willing to distribute funds to such municipalities? If so,
what yardstick is the department going to use in order to see to it that
funds are not used in a manner that is not intended by the department?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, Project
Consolidate has exposed us to experiences of the kind that you have
referred to, but I am sure the hon member will appreciate that it is mainly
the Department for Provincial and Local Government that is responsible, and
legally so, to deal with offences by either politicians or officials within
municipalities as they occur. It is the Department for Provincial and Local
Government that is legally able to deal with such matters.

However, we are not necessarily looking at punitive measures. We are
looking at giving support, but also at helping in terms of strengthening
the capacity of those municipalities, because there is no way that we can
withdraw the funding just because something is not going right in
municipalities.

What we need to do, as government, is that we need to ensure that these
services are taken to the people and that we deliver them at a faster pace.
We will deal with whatever problem exists and whatever obstacle there is
will be removed so that we move faster in terms of delivering services to
our people.

We have a constitutional obligation to ensure that all South Africans have
access to basic services. So, we have a responsibility to carry that out. I
thank you.

Ms N E GCWABAZA: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank the Minister. Minister,
what assistance has the department been able to render to municipalities
through Project Consolidate to enable them to deliver the much-needed
service of water and sanitation at local level?

Secondly, how will the Intergovernmental Act assist Dwaf to have a co-
operative relationship with municipalities? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chair, the assistance that we
would be able to give is that of helping with the planning, especially the
planning for the delivery of water services. We actually look at what we
are able to do immediately, as the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry, within the context of our own responsibilities. So we looked at
whether those municipalities have planned for water services, because in
some municipalities you will find that there is even a problem with regard
to the planning. So we have been helping as far as that is concerned.

Otherwise, we work within the arrangement of the interministerial
committee, which brings together the Minister for Provincial and Local
Government, the Minister of Minerals and Energy and all of those Ministries
that deal with basic services. But, as we speak, we are very much involved
in writing a strategy that will help us deliver the basic services at a
faster pace. So, that is how we have helped the situation in the
municipalities.

Mev D VAN DER WALT: Agb Voorsitter, Minister, ek gaan my vraag in Afrikaans
vra. Ons weet almal dat dosyne plaaslike besture swak geadministreer word.
Die meeste beskik nie oor die nodige, bekwame, opgeleide en hardwerkende
personeel nie. Wetende dat dit die geval is, wentel u tog baie van die
funksies van u departement af na plaaslike besture.

Die sukses van u departement en uself hang dus af van die mate van
dienslewering deur die munisipaliteite. Watter stappe gaan u doen om te
sorg dat ons mense die nodige, skoon, lopende water en sanitasie ontvang in
elke munisipaliteit in die land, en gaan u verantwoordelikheid aanvaar waar
dinge moontlik skeef sou loop? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, Minister, I shall put the question in Afrikaans. We all
know that dozens of local authorities are poorly administered. Many do not
have the necessary competent, trained and diligent personnel at their
disposal. Knowing that that is the case, you still devolve many of the
functions of your department to these local authorities.

Your success and that of your department therefore depends  upon the degree
of service delivery by these municipalities. What steps will you take to
ensure that the people receive the necessary clean running water and
sanitation in each municipality throughout the country, and would you
accept responsibility should things go wrong?]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chair, let me correct that. I
did not choose to devolve this responsibility to municipalities.
Municipalities are water services authorities. They are given the power to
take up those functions by the Constitution. But as a sector leader I have
a responsibility to monitor their performance in the delivery of those
functions.

As I said earlier on, we have just launched three strategies to give
support to municipalities, to monitor them and to regulate them. As we
speak, they are out for public consultation. So, that is where we come in
as the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry. But again, this must be
understood in the context of the arrangement of Cabinet where we work as
clusters. So, the overlap between my department and the Department for
Provincial and Local Government is well taken care of in the context of the
cluster system that exists within Cabinet.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, I want to thank the hon Minister. Minister,
when you were addressing residents at the special sitting of the NCOP in
Nkowankowa outside Tzaneen, about two weeks ago, you were reported to have
told residents that only R40 million of the R1,2 billion that have been
made available for the provision of water and sanitation for the
communities was spent. This translates to only three per cent of the
allocated amount. The reason for this underspending was said to be a lack
of capacity in local authorities to deliver to the people of the province.

What, specifically, is government doing to strengthen capacity in local
authorities, and also, what is government doing to ensure that municipal
managers are competent enough to spend the money that is made available?

Secondly, what strategy is government going to use to ensure that
municipalities have technical people to ensure that water that is given to
people is of good quality and is monitored periodically?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): You are entitled to one question.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chair, let me firstly correct
the hon member by saying that the amount spent is five per cent of what was
allocated. They were allocated R508 million, of which they were only able
to spend R40 million. But we have an undertaking from the MEC for local
government that most of the funding has already been committed, especially
to those areas that are more stressed, because, as we speak, Limpopo is
being hit hard by drought. So, the MEC is handling the matter, and we are
hopeful that by the end of the financial year the expenditure would have
increased.

But it is a matter that is of concern to me as it is an indication that we
need to be closely monitoring the expenditure and the delivery of services
in all municipalities. It is not a problem only in Limpopo, there are also
other areas where there is the problem of capacity as far as expending the
funds allocated to those municipalities. So, it is one of the areas of
concern of government. It is an indication of a problem of capacity in
relation to the managing of finances. Again, government is looking at that,
in spite of the strategy of looking at capacity in local government.

With regard to the monitoring of the quality of water, that function is,
unfortunately, supposed to be the function of local government. But we have
begun to put together a strategy - a drinking water quality management
strategy. We have put that together so that we can be able to monitor
municipalities as they take responsibility to ensure that our water is
quality water.

However, in the interim, given that we cannot delay this matter until we
have completed writing the strategy, more clusters are reporting to us that
they monitor their regions, and then they report to us on a monthly basis.
[Time expired.]


     Investigation into allegations in media regarding school in Gauteng


142.  Mr R S Ntuli (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:



      (1)   Whether, in light of the allegations made in the media
           concerning a certain school in Gauteng (details furnished), she
           or her department will conduct an investigation into the
           allegations; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details;


      (2)   whether she or her department will take any steps against the
           school in this regard; if not, why not; if so, what steps?
                                                                    N2397E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: The reply to the question is, as follows: With
respect to the first one: No, my department will not investigate the
school, but it is unlikely, if the allegations are correct, that those
learners will pass the senior certificate examination.

Despite the fact that the school concerned is an independent institution,
our examination regulations prescribe rules of good practice to be followed
by all institutions writing the senior certificate examinations.

The Gauteng Provincial Examination Irregularity Committee handles all
allegations of irregularities that occur in that province and is doing so
with respect to the school. I will receive a comprehensive report of any
examination irregularities prior to the final declaration and approval of
matric results.

With respect to the second part, any alleged irregularities will be dealt
with in terms of chapter 12 of the regulations for the conduct,
administration and management of assessment in the senior certificate
examinations. I thank you.

Mr R S NTULI: Madam Chairperson, the allegations of learners and teachers
who falsify the continuous assessment portfolios of their learners - which
has been proven to have occurred - has devalued the critical importance of
the continuous assessment system as an enabling instrument for continuous
evaluation.

What lessons can be learned from this painful experience or allegations as,
certainly, these will have - as we have indicated - unpleasant consequences
for the school in particular if proven to be so? How can we use this
experience to strengthen our strategic monitoring of these independent
schools in order to protect the integrity of our assessment and examination
system? Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, since the allegations
aren’t spelled out in the question, I have no idea whether this is a follow-
up or not. Do you wish to respond?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Yes.

Chairperson, I think one of the things I hope we will learn as public
representatives is that an allegation is merely that- an allegation. Only
when it is proven to be correct and true is it then dealt with as a
substantive matter. And I think we seem to almost act on a basis that an
allegation is true.

So, I don’t believe that allegations devalue our system of education. I
believe that actions that are detrimental to the honesty and integrity that
should accompany the management of the school, which is reported in the
newspaper and article that you provided to me, is something that certainly
I would want to see upheld. I don’t think the continuous assessment system
process is devalued by these allegations. I think schools must use
continuous assessment; it is something that is used throughout the world in
all education systems.

How should we use the experience? Certainly, we must strengthen our
monitoring, not just over independent schools but of public schools as
well. I think the whole evaluation and monitoring of the education system
is an area in which we still need much more effort.

Mr G G BOINAMO: Neither the DA, the ANC nor parents condone a situation
such as the one at Little Rock Christian Academy where teaching and
learning were not occurring throughout the year, and the problem was
detected when learners were writing end of year exams, and the revelation
was done by the media.

Why didn’t the area manager and the subject advisers notice this problem
earlier in the year? How do we know that the same is not occurring in other
schools and what is the Minister doing in order to ensure that this does
not recur? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Well, again, I stand a little puzzled. How do I
ensure that something that has not been proven to have occurred does not
reoccur? It would be ridiculous if something hasn’t happened. How do I
ensure it doesn’t happen? No, hon Semple, you may move your lips as much as
you want, but if something has not occurred, you can’t undo it.

However, in order to be kind to the hon member, let me say exactly what I
have said: The evaluation and monitoring of schools and the practices must
continue to be something that we strengthen. I don’t know why the area
manager didn’t report the matter. I don’t know whether the matter occurred,
but as I have said, the Gauteng department of education is already
investigating, and once irregularities have been proven, the report will be
provided to me. But, I will only get the report if there is substance to
what is reported. [Interjections.]


                           Employment of teachers


132.  Dr S E M Pheko (PAC) asked the Minister of Education:
      (1)   With reference to a media report (details furnished) that there
           are 32 886 vacancies for teachers, why are so many teachers (48
           000) employed temporarily;


      (2)   whether she is taking any steps in this regard; if not, why not;
           if so, what steps?
           N2307E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Chairperson, allow me to begin by
saying that I have been asked this question in the form of a written reply
a number of times. I have answered on all occasions.

The answer I have given is that, with the exception of relief teachers,
teachers on probation, and teachers filling a gap during an appointment
process, the repeated employment of temporary teachers on a long-term basis
is, in my view, an unfair labour practice. I have stated this in my reply,
which is published in the 2 November’s written replies to the NCOP, and in
my response to written questions by members of the NA.

With regard to the second part, we have taken steps to speed up the
permanent appointment of teachers. Firstly, I have urged provinces to
advertise all vacant posts, and that they should do this more frequently in
a year; at least once a quarter. I have taken that step.

Secondly, the appointment of excess educators into matching vacancies will
now be possible without going through the lengthy process of advertising,
selection and appointment. This process had been a barrier to the
appointment of teachers occupying temporary posts.

Thirdly, in future, a head of department will be able to convert the
temporary appointment of an educator in a substantive vacant post into a
permanent appointment, which had not been possible in terms of our law.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasise that the advertising, selection
and appointment of educators is, in our current system, is a complex and
lengthy process involving not only the employer, but also the school
governing body and other institutions. However, let me repeat, there is no
justification for the continued use of the term “temporary” in a situation
where a teacher serves in a province for over 10 years or longer.

I believe this is unjustified and this practice must be resolved, as
speedily as we can, by the various departments of education.

Mr N T GODI: Thank you, Comrade Minister. I want to concur with you in
terms of the unfairness of the practice where a person serves as a
permanent temporary teacher. On the number of occasions that I have come
across it, it has had a negative effect in terms of the way in which these
teachers are treated at schools. They have a constant fear of losing their
jobs at the end of the year, and the constant renewal of their temporary
status at the beginning of each year.

Unfortunately or fortunately, Minister, you have taken care of the three
possible follow-ups that I have had. I think your answer was adequate.
Thanks.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon Godi, that wasn’t the opportunity for a speech,
it was an opportunity for a question. [Laughter.]

Ms M J J MATSOMELA: Thank you, Chair; thank you, Minister. The Minister’s
response regarding the recruitment and appointment of teachers is
enlightening us all to a host of complexities involved in keeping our
schools adequately staffed, to ensure quality education to all our
children.

Related to this, and at the core of the question, lies the issue of
preparing teachers appropriately to educate our children. Could the
Minister enlighten the House about any initiatives that the Department of
Education has taken, to deal with the issue of teacher education, to ensure
that there is a properly trained body of teachers from which to populate
school staff rooms in the future? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. Before I directly
respond to the member’s question, I would just like to clarify something
for the edification of members. I think that we should all accept that Dr
Pheko’s question really applies to the issue of frequency and duration of
appointment of a person in what is constantly termed a temporary capacity.
It is not the term “temporary” that we are complaining about, because we
will always have temporary teachers.

If someone goes on accouchement leave or study leave, a person would
replace him or her temporarily. But the practice in many provinces where we
have had frequent, repeated appointments of individuals as temporary
educators for, as I said, 10 or more years; that is what we are complaining
about.

Let’s not assume that the use of a temporary teacher should be stopped in
its entirety, because it is always a useful thing to have in an education
system. I just thought it is important that we are not rejecting that term,
rather the way it has manifested itself but in our system.

With respect to what we are doing with the preparation of teachers,
clearly, one of the things we must do and have begun to do is to improve
the training of educators. Members would have seen in the past few months
that we have made better use, for example, of some of our university
education faculties for the preparation of the National Curriculum
Statement, with respect to Grade 10, in 2006. We have also used non-
governmental organisations; teachers with experience and so on. There has
been a better process of training in many provinces.

But the first prize would be to have a framework for continuous in-service
development of educators, while they are already in the profession. We
don’t yet have a scheme and framework for this, and we are working on it as
part of the outcome of the ministerial committee on teacher education.
Thank you.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Thank you, Chairperson. I applaud the hon Minister’s
response concerning temporary teachers. I am very glad that after 11 years
the penny has dropped with the government; that many of these people have
been treated very unfairly.

Given the fact that there are some 48 000 temporary teachers, many of whom
might have been appointed into posts - quite apart from a moral claim that
they have had to those benefits - would the hon Minister agree with me that
many of them might well have a civil claim for damages suffered by them
because of a loss of medical and pension benefits, which they would
otherwise have had if they had been appointed?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: No, I would not believe that they have a claim
of the kind suggested. I was wondering why an hon member of the legal
profession would want to ask poor old me, a question on education, and now
I see the legal bent.

Hon member, I think one of the things we must recognise is that when a
person is appointed as a temporary teacher, they are appointed on a
contract. This is a legal instrument that they attach themselves to. So,
while we recognise the unfair practice, let us not create the impression
that had not been due administrative procedures followed. It was followed.

My keen interest is, as I said, to ensure that we have an efficient, fair
and just provision of educators within our system of education, and that
the use of temporary teachers happens in every system of education
throughout the world, for the purposes that I outlined earlier and not the
kind of situation we have had for some time.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Thank you, Chairperson. This time I can attempt a
question, because it is education. Hon Minister, now that you have just
answered a question with a legal bent, there are cases involving, what we
call “displaced” teachers. Their cases take some time to be resolved,
something which exacerbates the problem of temporary teachers.

Wouldn’t you perhaps think of investigating all provinces, looking into
such cases where schools will have displaced teachers, in fact, they are
not even known where they are, but they are still earning a salary? What
would you think could be done in solving such a problem?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I am afraid, Chairperson, “displaced” is a new
term to me. I am not aware of such a category of teachers. However, with
respect to persons who might be earning a salary or receiving funds from
the education purse and who shouldn’t be, a number of processes have been
put in place.

You would be aware, for example, in Limpopo and the Eastern Cape we have
direct payment through cheque, to employees of the department, in an
attempt to arrest the fraudulent practises of ghost educators. I think one
of the things we also need to acknowledge, which I haven’t referred to, is
the fact that we are also dealing with the messy residue of the past.

It is not easy to deal with all of these things quickly. So, it is not just
a case of failure on the . . . I don’t know; hon members are going to do
constituency work and many people will be asking them about temporary
educators, and I hope that the hon member will be able to respond when he
is asked this question in his constituency.

Hon Mpontshane and Chairperson, to conclude, certainly, we are improving
our efficiency. You would have seen the publication of vacant posts by
Limpopo, the advertising of thousands of posts by the Eastern Cape. So, we
are moving to address all these things, which are complex matters, related
to a whole range of issues that I couldn’t go into here. Thank you.

          Errors in documents issued by Department of Home Affairs

131.  Ms S Rajbally (MF) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:



      (1)   What are the statistics of errors made by her department between
           2000 and 2005 in respect of identity documents, passports and
           visas;


      (2)   whether any measures are being introduced to reduce mistakes on
           these documents; if not, why not; if so, what measures?
                                                        N2286E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, mistakes or errors in documents
issued by the Department of Home Affairs are only brought to the attention
of the Department of Home Affairs when applicants present their documents
for rectification or correction. In other words, the department will only
be aware of such errors upon inquiries by clients. Upon receipt of such
enquiries the department immediately conducts an investigation on the
validity of the claim and depending on the findings of the investigation,
decides on the appropriate action to be taken. The department does not
therefore classify or categorise such information according to the year of
occurrence, because such classification is immaterial or irrelevant when
considering rectifications or corrections of such mistakes.

The answer to question 2 is, yes. As members are aware, during April 2005
we have launched Lokisa Ditokomane Campaign in the Limpopo province,
calling on members of the public to come forward for rectification of
mistakes committed during application or processing of their documents,
such as date of birth, spelling mistakes, fraud in respect of death or any
other status. After considering a variety of factors in circumstances under
which such errors were committed, we then decided that such rectifications
would be effected at no cost for the applicants. This campaign was a follow-
up, complementing the earlier campaign launched in August 2004 on “Check
your marital status”. According to our records, we are satisfied that this
campaign has been a resounding success.

To date we can report that at least 138 500 clients have responded
positively to our call since the launch of the campaign. We have thus far
managed to finalise 71 777 enquiries and the remainder is work in progress.
I have therefore decided in the light of the significance of the campaign
and the public response to extend it to the end of December 2005. We have
also requested the department to increase our staff capacity to ensure the
speedy finalisation of the outstanding cases.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, hon Minister, I want to place on record the close
co-operation and assistance that my constituency office got from your
respective offices with regard to clarifying these documents. There was a
very serious case that came to us where a wrong document was given to
someone and this person, for two years and nine months, withdrew pension
although not qualified to do so. That has been rectified and that person is
going to pay it back. Can you please tell us whether your campaign will go
to all nine provinces in order to ascertain these kinds of problems that
are experienced?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Yes, it is a nationwide campaign. It is a
national campaign. However, initially it took off very slowly. I guess it
was a problem of communication from our side. I think right now it is
taking off very well, because of the response we are getting from the
public. The other problem which we have had in some of the provinces is, as
I said, the problem of capacity from our staff to respond to some of the
queries, which came from the public.

Mnu S S VUNDISA: Masihlalo, umbuzo oya phaya kuMphathiswa, okokuqala
siyawuxhasa siyi-ANC umsebenzi wakhe omhle awenzileyo wokulungisa ezi
ncwadi, umbozo wona uthi . . . (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mr S S VUNDISA: Madam Chairperson, I have a direct question to the hon
Minister. However, I would first like to express our support, as the ANC,
for his sterling work with regards to the co-ordination of this
documentation. The question is . . . ]

Can the Minister share with the House some of the key challenges and
problems, experienced during the Lokisa Ditokomane Campaign?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: The biggest challenge we faced and which is a
problem that belongs to the Department of Social Development is the
challenge of people who are coming forward to query their own age, mainly
because people would like to increase their age as a result of the age
restriction, which prevents them from getting their pension grant.

You find some of the people really literally trying to persuade you to
increase their age, rather than reduce it. These days you don’t reduce
people’s age but rather advocate for it to be increased. However, a number
of people wouldn’t want to be made to feel older than they are. People came
forward to say that they were old and that is our major challenge. I am
sure public representatives are familiar with this problem. We do have a
way of verifying this and that has been the biggest challenge for the
Department of Home Affairs. A number of people have left the offices of the
department disappointed.

In some cases it has been very easy to deal with their problems and we were
able to give them assistance and support. In some cases, such as the 25
000, we were not able to help people. It is in situations where people
really expect us to literally change their dates of birth. In fact, what
people forget is that we have records. We are the custodians of the
Population Register of the country, so we are able to go back to the
records and actually discover that people’s age is being changed for
purposes of benefiting from the pension grants.

Ms S V KALYAN: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, the Auditor-General
yesterday referred to the Department of Home Affairs as South Africa’s
``sickest’’ department. Home Affairs employees have over the past three
years taken a 162 648 days of sick leave and the cost to the department is
R36,1 million, while the cost in respect of service delivery to the public
at large is incalculable. Clearly, the high percentage of sick leave is a
major contributory factor to the shockingly poor service at many home
affairs offices. How much longer must the public wait for an improved
service from your department? What are you going to do to cure your
department of the label of being an ailing and sick department?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, you may wish to respond
but it is not a supplementary question.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: That is a new question. I am sure being the
psychiatrist you are, you could actually render advice on how I should
remedy that situation. [Interjections.]

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Chair. Hon Minister, you referred to certain
errors made during the “Check your marriage campaign” and as members of the
portfolio committee we are aware that many women were not even aware that
there had been those marriages committed fraudulently, in order for people
to obtain permits to come to South Africa. That was a great success. Is it
the intention of the department to continue to see whether there are any
other errors in such marriages during further campaigns in this regard?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: My view is that we should continuously engage
in encouraging our people to come forward and check their status, without
really engaging in campaigns all the time. We do still find young people
who discover every day, particularly young men now, that they are married
to young women whom they have never met. I think it is the responsibility
of all of us as South Africans to continuously and, in the same way that we
check our HIV-status, and consciously check and verify our own marital
status – not only for the purposes of checking whether we are not married
to people we have never met, but also to check whether your status is
correctly recorded. You may actually discover at a time when one of the
partners is deceased, that in fact the status is not correctly reflected.

This is what has happened in other cases, particularly elderly people in
the former TBVC states. They found themselves in situations where an
elderly person died and family came forward to get a death certificate and
they suddenly discovered that their parents were not recorded as married
partners. And at that point, we then have to start by registering the
parents as married partners and then provide you with a death certificate.

It is important for South Africans to consistently come and verify their
status and also the status of our own parents, because of the systems that
we have had in the past. It may be that in the process of transferring the
Population Register to the computerised system, HANIS, it could have been
that some information was left out.


                 Job creation in Working for Water Programme


140.  Ms M M Gumede (ANC) asked the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:

      What steps does her department intend taking to create work in the
      Working for Water Programme, together with exit plans, in the Northern
      Cape and KwaZulu-Natal?                      N2395E

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Deputy Chair, the answer to the
question is: The threat of invasive species to life and livelihoods in
KwaZulu-Natal has been shown to be far greater than was originally feared.
Through the commitment of the Premier and his Cabinet in that province, the
Working for Water Programme has entered into a very significant partnership
with the KwaZulu-Natal provincial department of Agriculture and
Environmental Affairs. This has seen a collective increase in the budget
for work in the province from a current level of R44 million per annum, to
R128 million and increasing to R160 million in the 2007-08 financial year.

This partnership, called KZN Working for Water, will see a massive increase
in the fight against invasive alien plants, with all the associated
benefits for employment and empowerment in the region.

The programme will focus on the full spectrum of invasive alien species,
but a very strong focus will be on disproportionate threats posed by
invasive alien plants. This is a triumph of co-operative governance, which
also has important links with the Working on Fire and the Working for
Wetland programmes in the region.

The situation in the Northern Cape is a matter for deep concern. The
invasions by the Prosopis species, in particular, are a massive threat to
water security, biological diversity, agriculture and job security in the
region, especially given that the Northern Cape happens to be the driest
province in our country. This we know will be significantly compounded by
the climate change, where increases in carbon dioxide levels will
exacerbate the problems caused by these invasions. The planning is being
done to ascertain the response that is necessary for the region.

As with all invasives, the creation of jobs in combating invasives is only
part of the equation. In the end, the far bigger impact on employment will
be the jobs lost if the invasive plants are not kept under control. The
current budget for invasive work in the Northern Cape is R19 million.

An exit strategy is being modified in the Working for Water Programme. A
key to this will be the provisions in the regulations that are being
developed for both the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act
and the Conservation of Agricultural Resources Act. Thank you, Madam Chair.
[Time expired.]

Mnu D V MABUYAKHULU: Mangibonge mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe ngempendulo yakho
ehluba udlubu ekhasini. Ezinye zalezi zithombo zokufika zanda ngokukhulu
ukushesha lokhu, zivale noma yisiphi isikhala lapho abantu basemaphandleni
abahluphekayo bedlisa khona imfuyo yabo ngakho bafuna ukuthi bazibulale-ke
lezi zihlahla zokufika. Ngabe mhlonishwa uma beza kuwe noma eMnyangweni
wakho sebezihlanganisile ngaphansi komgomo kahulumeni kaVukuzenzele
bezofuna amathuluzi okusebenza nomuthi wokuzibulala, bangasizakala yini?
(Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr D V MABUYAKHULU: Thank you, hon Minister, for your informative
response. Some of these foreign seeds self-pollinate rapidly and spread,
thereby minimising the grazing land where the rural poor people keep their
animals, which is why they want to destroy these foreign trees. Hon
Minister, will the people get assistance if they come together and approach
your Department, in terms of the government programme called “Vukuzenzele”,
to apply for tools and chemicals to destroy these trees?]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Madam Chair. . .
Njengoko siyazi ukuba le nkqubo ye ‘working for water’ yinkqubo yokususa
indlala. Singabajonga abantu abaneenzame ezilolo hlobo, kodwa kufuneka
basebenze phantsi kwemigaqo yenkqubo le iyonke nje kuzwelonke. Siyazama
kwakhona ukuyilungisa le nkqubo ukuze abantu bethu bakwazi ukuxhamla nabo
bayenze ngokwabo isebenze.

Siyayazi njengokuba sithetha nje abantu abaninzi bayasebenza nje phantsi
kwayo. Ngoko ke amalinge anje ngalawo ke uwaxelayo Mabuyakhulu obekekileyo,
singawajonga ukwenzela into yokokuba abantu bethu baphume endlaleni. Nathi
sileli sebe lamanzi nezamahlathi sifuna libonakale igalelo lokuncedisa
abantu baphume endlaleni. Ndiyabulela. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[As we know, the Working for Water campaign is aimed at poverty reduction.
We could find out about people who are already involved in such efforts,
but they would have to be incorporated into the national programme. The
programme is currently under review in order that our people should benefit
from it, and that would prove its effectiveness.

It is a known fact that there are people from the communities who are
already involved with the programme. We welcome your suggestions, hon
Mabuyakhulu, and we will look into them as we hope that they would be able
to lift our people out of poverty. The Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry wants to ensure that its contribution towards alleviating poverty
becomes effective. Thank you.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, hon Minister for your
reply. I wish you knew the answer for the original question for the other
seven provinces, but the Minister probably doesn’t have that information
with her right now. What I would like to ask is: What role does the Working
for Water Programme play in the Expanded Public Works Programme and in
achieving its key objectives, namely the creation of one million temporary
jobs between 2004 and 2009, and in providing training for participants that
would enable them to gain meaningful employment after the programme?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: The programme is for poverty
alleviation. Therefore, we are trying to create jobs in that context –it
being a poverty alleviation programme. It is a two-pronged programme. While
creating jobs, we are also looking at empowering the people that are
working in the projects for managerial skills, administrative skills and
all of such skills so that when they leave the project they are able to
embark on other economic activities that would help them.

However, in terms of the programme contributing to job creation, we are
looking at a strategy that will help us improve the capacity of the
programme to create jobs. Presently, there is a strategy that we are
putting together. The initial indication from the research is that the
programme has great potential, especially on the by-products to create
jobs. For instance, the study that we have conducted has indicated that if
we were to be able to establish a factory for the beneficiation of these by-
products in the Eastern Cape, we could be able to create about 20 000 jobs.
We are looking at that. We are taking it very seriously. We think that it
has great potential. We are pursuing that as the Department of Water
Affairs and Forestry.

We could come back and report on the strategy. I do have a draft copy of
that strategy, but we are still working on it. Thank you, Madam Deputy
Chair.


         Improvement of primary school literacy and numeracy levels


143.  Adv A H Gaum (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:

      What steps does she or her department intend taking to improve South
      Africa’s primary school literacy and numeracy levels as highlighted in
      a certain report (details furnished)?        N2398E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Deputy Chairperson, again, I have had quite an
avalanche of questions about this particular report and as I have said in
my responses to those questions, I haven’t as yet received the final grade
6 systemic evaluation report. There are a number of things that I think we
need to pay attention to, with respect to systemic evaluation.

Firstly, systemic evaluation data assesses the performance of the system as
a whole rather than the performance of individual pupils, teachers or
schools. Secondly, improving the performance of learners in reading and
maths is one of the key priorities of my Ministry.

The Department of Education has already designed programmes to improve
performance in these areas. One such programme entails providing each
primary school in our country with at least 100 fiction books for the
foundation phase of schooling. This will be attached to a reading strategy
to ensure that these books are indeed read by our children and that they
learn to read. We are also implementing a writing project in a number of
selected schools and strengthening teacher training programmes with regard
to literacy and numeracy teaching.

Thirdly, this particular study is the first study ever conducted in our
country about the state of learner performance at grade 6. It is thus a
baseline study. The reason for this kind of study, as baseline, will be
known to many members in this House.

Quality assurance in our schools has been contaminated by the authoritarian
and heavy-handed nature of apartheid education, and in particular the
legacy of suspicion attached to the inspectorate that kept tabs on what was
taught in our schools. In fact, hatred of the inspectorate system led to
its collapse in the 1990s and thus no other quality assurance system was
put in its place. Despite our admirable drive and achievements in terms of
equity in education, our schools generally remain unaccountable for the
learning performance of their pupils – apart from the matric exam.

Systemic evaluation is therefore the beginning of a way to find a new
method of accountability and quality assurance. I am glad that we are now
beginning to have some data on quality and outcomes, and it is my intention
to systematically identify practical remedies that will address the gaps
that are suggested in anecdotal reports on this study.

Adv A H GAUM: Chair, I’d like to thank the hon Minister for the
comprehensive answer and for the fact that the government had the courage
to undertake a national evaluation of learner performance. I am
particularly impressed also that one of the key areas of focus was
apparently the language of learning and teaching.

In an article in City Press, 9 October 2005, Caiphus Kgosana refers to
research by Cathleen Heugh of the HSRC. She found that children for whom
English is a second or even a third language are being forced to learn in
this language, long before they become proficient to do so, and that
children need between six and eight years to learn a second language before
they can use it as a medium of instruction.

It is also well known that the best way to master a second language is
through and by means of the mother tongue. Given the reality that mother
tongue education is, although not the sole component as the Minister also
referred to yesterday, an important component towards improved literacy and
numeracy, will the comprehensive response referred to in the Minister’s
answer perhaps also include recommendations on the national extension of
mother tongue education beyond grade 3 and, if so, what are the details?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, again, I should thank the hon
member. It is a very important question and of course Cathleen Heugh and
her colleagues, among whom is Neville Alexander, are respected language
educationists in our country and do, I think, through their work, raise a
number of important points that we must pay attention to.

I have stressed the need for us to improve the use of mother tongue in
teaching children, particularly, I believe, at the early stages of
learning. This has been policy in our country but the fact that policy
exists doesn’t mean that policy is implemented properly. One of the things
that we have not really assessed is the language ability of educators in
the language that they have to teach in that. Therefore, I do think that
part of the teacher development strategy should be to develop a closer
affinity and understanding of the relationship between language and
learning in South Africa. We have tended to neglect this aspect and it is
something that we have to attend to.

I believe we must promote better use of mother tongue education. I do
believe you would have a great difficulty saying that all our schools
should suddenly become single-medium mother tongue schools. I think many
parents wouldn’t want that approach but better use of the mother tongue and
greater access to all the languages of South Africa is something that I
hope we will achieve in our education system.

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Hon Dudley, I regret that our time
allocated for questions has actually expired. Outstanding replies received
will be printed in Hansard and proceedings will now be suspended for the
supper break.

Business suspended at 18:26 and resumed at19:00.

   DEBATE ON INTERNATIONAL DAY OF TOLERANCE: TOLERANCE A KEY TO BUILDING A
                               CARING SOCIETY

Mr G SOLOMON: Chairperson, alarmed by the current rise in acts of
intolerance, violence, terrorism, xenophobia, aggressive nationalism,
racism, anti-Semitism, exclusion, marginalisation and discrimination
directed at national, ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,
refugees, migrant workers, immigrants and vulnerable groups within society,
as well as acts of violence and intimidation committed against individuals
exercising their freedom of opinion and expression always threaten the
consolidation of peace and democracy, both nationally and internationally,
and are obstacles to development.

Unesco resolves to remind member states to develop and encourage respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction to
race, gender, language, national origin or disability, and to combat
intolerance not only as a cherished principle, but also a necessity for
peace and economic and social advancement of all peoples.

All this happened in 1996, the year of the adoption of our democratic
Constitution. Therefore it is with a sense of national pride, today, on the
International Day of Tolerance, that we celebrate the wisdom and foresight
of the founding fathers of the ANC, who, four decades before the Unesco
resolution, created a document at the Congress of the People at Kliptown,
near Johannesburg, containing in principle everything envisaged by the
Unesco resolution; that is the Freedom Charter. A document destined to
change the course of history; changing South Africa from an intolerant
society, caused by apartheid, to a peaceful, democratic society.

Our country, at the time, was in the grip of the worst intolerance towards
people other than white. A situation frequently likened to a powder keg,
ready to explode at any time. It was only the culture of tolerance in our
African society that saved the day.

A major theme of South African history is the intolerant and violent action
amongst people of diverse origins, languages, technologies, knowledge
systems, ideologies and social systems meeting on South African soil. The
society was characterised by forced removals, dispossession and wars, and a
very high level of intolerance. The worst part of this history is the
creation of a system of government with institutions serving as instruments
of domination, with an extremely high element of coercion resulting in the
richly stratified society based on race and class.

The documented history of our country became concerned with achievements of
one race – the dominant white race – and their relations with one another.
The experiences of others were dealt with as peoples who constituted
problems for the white race and the capitalist class. Hence we had a native
problem, a coloured problem and an Indian problem in South Africa.

Communication between these other communities, whether communities of
religion, class, language or race, or a combination of these was
conditioned by the assumptions and prejudices of these individual
communities, escalating in tolerance, even amongst these communities.

The founding fathers of the ANC, with the conscious intention of changing
the course of history, created a vision to be kept alive for future
generations. A vision borne out of a culture that Xhosa people call
izithethe, namely the collective memory of those who have laid the
foundations of ages past, present and yet to come. It is the message of
faith, of hope and of glory. It is an expectation of this kind that
resounds in the words of the Freedom Charter:

   We, the people of South Africa, declare for all our country and the world
   to know that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white,
   and that no government can justly claim authority unless it is based on
   the will of all the people.

This is on a pamphlet; it is a revolutionary document, the Freedom Charter.
   That our people have been robbed of their birthright to land, liberty and
   peace by a form of government founded on injustice and inequality;


   that our country will never be prosperous or free until our people live
   in brotherhood [or sisterhood], enjoying equal rights and opportunities;


   that only a democratic state, based on the will of all the people, can
   secure to all the birthright without distinction of colour, race, sex or
   belief;


   and therefore, we the people of South Africa, black and white together
   equals, countrymen and brothers [and sisters] adopt this Freedom Charter;


   and we pledge ourselves to strive together, sparing neither strength nor
   courage, until the democratic changes here set out have been won.


In February 1990, when former President Nelson Mandela and the ANC
leadership walked their first steps to freedom, from a very tough past to
an even tougher future, the first message was a message of reaffirmation of
the most important principle of the Freedom Charter, namely a call for
unity of all South Africans, tolerance, reconciliation and nation-building.
After all, this freedom was won by all freedom-loving South Africans,
pulling together, drawing on a complexity of different traditions, cultures
and religions to sustain a revolution that has endured for centuries.

The challenge that faced the ANC, and is still facing us today, is the
building of a caring, democratic and equitable society through partnerships
between the state and civil society. Through the course of our history, our
society consisted of a mosaic of different races, cultures and languages.
This is the reality we have to accept and have to tolerate.

In this respect we shall continue to differ. These differences will not
disappear if we are ever to unite in a single nation with a national pride.
The differences must be accommodated within our growing unity and our
growing unity must be shaped in a manner that allows for these differences.

I wish to be very clear in my understanding of the concept of tolerance. It
is not a concession to the Other, who is different. It is respect,
acceptance and appreciation of the rich diversity of our country’s cultures
and forms of expressions, and ways of being human. It is fostered by
knowledge - particularly of the Other - openness, communication and freedom
of thought, conscience and belief.

Tolerance is harmony in difference. It is not only a moral duty; it is the
political and legal requirement. Understood and accepted in this way,
tolerance will be a virtue that makes peace possible in this country,
contributing to the replacement of the culture of war by a culture of
peace. Tolerance is the responsibility that upholds human rights, democracy
and the rule of law.

The critical question to ask ourselves is:, After 10 years of freedom and
democracy, are we making sufficient progress allowing society to not become
intolerant with their government? My answer is yes, we have made phenomenal
progress, politically, creating the necessary political structures to build
a progressive, developmental, caring state. However, some of the economic
realities, including the stark poverty, lack of basic needs and the income
and wealth disparities between the first and second economy remain a major
challenge to us. [Interjections.]

It is in this respect of our reality, the economic one, that we have the
potential to breed intolerance. If we can address this properly we will
certainly succeed in creating the progressive, caring society that we want.
The way forward, I believe, would be in building the tolerant and caring
society by, firstly, speeding up service delivery of basic needs; secondly,
to gain the confidence and trust of our people while showing signs of
intolerance with the slow pace of delivery of basic needs.

According to the HSRC almost 80% of people in South Africa trust the
religious communities and their institutions. This is not because of the
God-option, it is that in the case of the highest total of all institutions
surveyed, they have the largest developed networks spreading into all
corners of South Africa. Firstly, they have the following principles and
values, which are commonly shared by most religious traditions and accepted
by all - genuine democrats in our country - who believe in a just and an
equitable society that protects the rights of the weak, the poor and the
marginalised. [Interjections.]

Secondly, they are caring and are reaching out to uplift support and
improve the quality of life for all South Africans, as well as visitors
living amongst us, and are tolerant of differences. Thirdly, they support
our Constitution, the Parliament and our political structures, guarding
against the misuse of power. Fourthly, they are a moral and honest society
that opposes fraud, corruption and a culture of enrichment.

This perception is highlighted by Dr Zola Skweyiya, a champion of the
caring society concept, Minister of Social Development and community
development, and I quote: “The government values the contribution and role
the religious sector has played in the past in bringing education, medical
services and support to neglected areas, as well as the struggle against
apartheid. Now we face a new struggle,” he says.

We must build effective partnerships between state, the religious sector
and other institutions of civil society to launch a national campaign to
create a caring society in South Africa. The religious communities are
known for their networks, reaching rural parts of South Africa.

Thank you very much. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr R COETZEE: Thank you, Chairperson, in response to the previous speaker,
the question isn’t whether South Africa is more tolerant than it was under
apartheid, the question is whether South Africa today is more tolerant than
it was 10 years ago under President Mandela. [Interjections.] The answer is
no. The second question is: Are we more tolerant today than we will be in
10 years time? And I fear that the answer to that question is yes.

Tolerance is one of those values originally associated with liberalism and
consequently also with liberal democracy to which lip service is routinely
and almost universally paid. [Interjections.]  But like many liberal
values, which have gained a general acceptance, there is very often a stark
divergence between theory and practice. That is because tolerance is easy
most of the time, because most of the time the views and practises of
others do not offend or threaten, but the value of tolerance cannot simply
be measured when others are easy to tolerate, but rather when they are hard
to stomach. And when are they hard to stomach? When they offend, when they
insult and above all when they threaten to deprive us of our position and
our power.

In the same way a commitment to democracy is not proven when you win
elections, but rather when you lose them. Which is one reason why the ANC’s
commitment to democracy is not yet a given. One of the most persistent
themes in Martin Meredith’s latest book, The State of Africa, is the quite
complete lack of any real acceptance or attachment of tolerance in Africa
since independence. The intolerance of descent and difference in
postcolonial Africa is perhaps best exemplified by the Liberian Charles
Taylor’s astonishing and quite unforgettable election slogan: “I killed
your Ma, I killed your Pa, but you will vote for me.” He won.

What about our country? Some of the most intolerant behaviour in South
Africa takes place right here in the NA. No lesser somebody than the
Chairperson of the ANC’s caucus has stood at this very podium and accused
the Leader of the Opposition of treason, because his analysis differs from
hers. [Interjection.] Sorry, on a point of order, Chairperson, somebody
said they still accuse the Leader of the Opposition . . .

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE LARGEST MINORITY PARTY: On a point of order,
Chairperson, the hon Mrs Mentor has just said she still accuses the Leader
of the Opposition of treason.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Order please. We are just
listening to the order.

CHIEF WHIP OF THE LARGEST MINORITY PARTY: I ask you to rule that this is
unparliamentary and that she should withdraw that comment or withdraw from
the House.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, I am not sure, I did not
hear you saying it, but it is alleged that you said so. So, if indeed you
did, could you withdraw that? If you did.

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Go back to Zimbabwe!

Ms M P MENTOR: Chairperson, I still hold my view that, if you call people
to . . . [Interjections.]

CHIEF WHIP OF THE LARGEST MINORITY PARTY: Chairperson, on a point of order,
this hon member must withdraw her comment and she mustn’t now make a speech
confirming that she still holds those views about the Leader of the
Opposition.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Yes, thank you very much. Hon Ms
Mentor, can you just either withdraw . . .

Ms M P MENTOR: . . . or walk out. {Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): No, just withdraw the statement.

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Go back to Zimbabwe! Walk out . . .

Ms M P MENTOR: I still share the same view that I expressed months ago.
Now, you tell me what to do. [Interjections.]

Mr R COETZEE: She withdrew it months ago.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, are you prepared to
withdraw the statement as heard by other people, or not? [Interjections.]
Can you just withdraw the statement please?

Ms M P MENTOR: I won’t withdraw, Chairperson. [Interjections.] I am sorry,
I would rather walk out. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Well, hon member, you have decided
to walk out and so, do as you said you would do. [Interjections.] Order,
hon members! We are continuing with the debate. Can you come to order then?
There are members who are not coming to order, so I am just calling them to
order and they are not listening, so can you please proceed.

Mr R COETZEE: Chairperson, I will. I am not sure I need to proceed. I think
the debate is over. I think the Chairperson of the ANC caucus has concluded
the debate. I think we agree that the ANC has a fundamental lack of
tolerance. [Applause.]

But it’s not just her. Because one of the stupidest outbursts heard in this
House since 1994 was actually made by the ANC’s Chief Whip who suggested
that the entire DA should be tried for crimes against humanity. Black
members of the DA’s caucus are routinely denigrated by ANC members, because
they dare to differ from the ANC’s truth and it is a disgrace! It is time
somebody told you that. [Interjections.]

The transition from an intolerant attitude to intolerant behaviour is not a
difficult one. The ANC leadership in this House should consider carefully
the implications of its intolerance. It’s not a joke; it’s not a game. It’s
a democracy and it’s a country that deserves a tolerant leadership.
[Interjections.]

Which brings me to the state of the ANC at the present time, because this
is also relevant. The civil war that is raging inside the ruling party
right now is a direct consequence of intolerance. [Interjections.] Codified
in its 1997 congress under the name of democratic centralism. I have no
doubt that the South African people can understand why so many in the
ruling party have had enough of Mr Mbeki’s authoritarian dissent-crushing
style, but what people cannot understand is how this has led to support for
Jacob Zuma. The ANC is always banging on about the depth of its leadership.
Well, can’t you do better than him?

I think it’s fair to say that tolerance is not a given in our society or
our politics and yet a caring society, such as the one that the President
once spoke about in this House, depends above all on the respect for the
intrinsic value of people, a belief that every individual should be given
the right and the space to be themselves. The law can provide us with the
right, but only tolerance can provide us with the space. And tolerance
requires courage and humility and practice. Let the practice begin!
[Applause.]

Mr M B SKOSANA: Thank you, Chairperson. The US maintain that the decision
to jettison the Monroe Doctrine of isolationism was motivated by a national
desire to advance international peace, democracy and the free market.

The European colonial powers maintained that their industrial and social
revolutions, which resulted in the wide scramble to colonise and subjugate
the people of less developed countries was intended to promote
international development through socialisation of wealth.

The former Soviet Union’s exportation of social and economic revolutions
are said to have been undertaken for the freedom of the poor and oppressed
people of the world. Resistance to these forms of expansionism caused
severe diplomatic and economic sanctions and at times military intolerance.
Rightly or wrongly, this is not my argument.

Those countries who acquiesced opened their nations to the mercy of brutal
international economic and ideological market forces, spawning a series a
resource, ethnic and religious wars or conflicts, if you like, around the
world. The failure of some of the postcolonial African nation states to
deal effectively with the negative legacies of the colonial boundaries and
administrations continues the violent expressions of intolerance, despite
interventions by the OAU and now the AU to bring about regional and
continental peace and stability.

Three years ago during his visit to South Africa, the former Chancellor of
the Federal Republic of Germany, Gerhard Schröder, remarked about the
legacy of our own political and economic intolerance as South Africans. He
said he sees two different sides of the same street. And perhaps for South
Africans to maybe want to build a caring society these occasions should
also give South Africans the opportunity to make a hard and remedial
reflection on the source of our brand of growing political, racial and
social intolerance. Not only between black and white, but also between
black and black.

As it is, it is starting to render our African humanitarian interventions
suspect and it is indeed putting unbearable strain on the centre of our own
society. I thank you.

Ms N C NKABINDE: Chairperson and hon members, if tolerance is indeed the
key to building a caring society we must be deeply concerned about the
state of not only our own society, but also of the entire global village.

South Africa still suffers from instances of intolerance on racial,
religious or sexual grounds, but luckily this seems to be less and less
frequent. However, the intolerance towards immigrants and incidents of
xenophobia seems to be increasing. This is something we need to guard
against.

Equality and tolerance under democracy is unequivocal and there should
never be any exception to that. On the international scene the picture is
far more disturbing. The continuing campaign that equates Islam and people
with Middle-Eastern traits with terrorism continues unabated. It has lead,
for instance, to the fatal police shooting of an innocent young Brazilian
man in London.

Intolerance driven by fear is dangerous and the current climate provides
all too easy justifications for unwarranted intolerance. The spectre of
narrow-minded right-wing nationalism and its extremist backlash among
hectic minorities in Europe poses fresh questions about how nations
determine their identities without resorting to intolerance and ethnic fear
mongering. It is truly disturbing to watch the dream of tolerance burning
in the streets of Paris . . . [Time expired.][Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chair, the ACDP believes that the components and
ingredients that make this key to building a caring society called
tolerance must be durable so that what we are trying to build will also be
durable. As it is not every available material that can be used to build a
strong enough structure, likewise it is not every kind of behaviour and
attitude that will be conducive to building a caring society.

There are principles that stood the test of time that must always be before
us as we attempt to rebuild our societies into caring ones. I say rebuild,
because we used to have caring societies in this nation when the word
tolerance was not politicised. When we had caring societies, love and
respect for God, self and one’s neighbour were pillars of our society. That
was the time when Africans believed that every child is my child, I can
therefore help nurture them and correct them if necessary. It was a time
when the public could separate right from wrong and good from evil.

We believe, in order to build a truly caring society we must help restore
respect for God and for one another and promote tested values and
principles that will make our building a success story. I thank you.

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Hon Chairperson, in 1993 the UN General Assembly
proclaimed the year 1995 the Year of Tolerance. On the 16th November 1995,
185 Unesco member states adopted a declaration of principles and a follow-
up plan of action, thereby committing themselves to promoting tolerance and
nonviolence through programmes and institutions in the field of education,
science, culture and communication.

In the Declaration of Principles on Tolerance, article 1 mentions the
meaning of tolerance. Under this article tolerance refers to is respect,
acceptance and appreciation of the rich diversity of our world’s culture,
our forms of expression and ways of being human. It is fostered by
knowledge, openness, communication and freedom of thought, conscience and
belief. Tolerance is harmony in differences. It is not only a moral duty,
but it is also a political and legal requirement. Tolerance, the virtue
that makes peace possible, contributes to the replacement of the culture of
war by the culture of peace.

We can take pride in ourselves as South Africans. We have come through a
terrible history of apartheid; a history of intolerance. We have made the
transition from apartheid to a democratic state and we will go down in
history as making the transition via peaceful means instead of means of
war. This transition speaks loudly in our history books. Wherever I travel
I meet people from all over the country and overseas, and they ask me: “How
was it possible in South Africa that the transition was made without war,
without total bloodshed?”

How was this possible? It is only possible through the ANC taking the lead.
It is only possible because the ANC had a commitment to a peaceful
transition. [Applause.] The ANC understands tolerance. We can see that in
our Constitution, in the Bill of Rights, in the Chapter 9 institutions,
such as the SA Human Rights Commission. Our aim for tolerance shows in the
celebration of 50 years of the Freedom Charter and also in the campaign to
act against abuse - 16 Days of Activism.

The fact that we had had a Truth and Reconciliation Commission shows the
ANC and government’s commitment to tolerance. This created a safe place for
victims of apartheid to talk things out, a place for people to come for
amnesty, a place for people to come for forgiveness.

There must always be an awareness amongst South Africans, amongst all South
Africans who can be honest with themselves and say about the apartheid
system: Never again! That is why we must continue to celebrate and remember
this International Day of Tolerance. We must continue to remember our long
and difficult history as we celebrate this day.

Part of the significance of this article about the meaning of tolerance is
that it is consistent with respect for human rights. The practice of
tolerance does not mean toleration of social injustice or abandonment or
weakening of one’s convictions. It means that one is free to adhere to
one’s own convictions and accept that others adhere to theirs. It means
accepting the fact that human beings, naturally diverse in their
appearance, situations, speech, behaviour and values, have the right to
live in peace and be as they are. It means that one’s views are not to be
imposed on others.

I can call on members of this House to go out into their constituencies and
make people aware of the call of tolerance. Tolerance starts at home.
Parents must teach their children tolerance. Parents must teach their
children to be tolerant of people who are different. Parents should teach
their children that they should respect others. We cannot make this the
responsibility of the educators or the government.

Lastly, and because this is the last day of session for this year, and
because we are never here on the 3rd of December - the International Day of
Disabled Persons fall on the 3rd of December - I’d like to say that we
should prepare ourselves for tolerance. It’s mentioned in the Unesco
document that respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
should be without distinction as to race, gender, language, national
origin, religion or disability. We in the ANC government recognise the
rights of people with disabilities, and when we talk about tolerance we
must remember that there should be no discrimination against people with
disabilities.

Because I still have some time I’d like to just read from an e-mail that
I’ve received from the Millennium Project of Parliament:


   Imagine South Africa without blacks. Imagine South Africa without whites.
   Imagine South Africa without Coloureds, Indians or Chinese. Imagine, if
   every single South African was just like you . . . Imagine South Africa
   without children or the elderly, without men or women, without gay or
   straight people, without married or single people. Imagine, if every
   single South African was just like you . . . Imagine South Africa without
   Christians or Muslims, without Hindus or Jews, without traditionalists or
   atheists. Imagine, if every single South African was just like you . . .
   Imagine South Africa without Afrikaans or IsiXhosa, without IsiZulu or
   Xam, without Tsonga – or all the languages of the world.


Here I would just like to add, imagine if there were no people with
disabilities.


   Now, imagine, if every single South African was just like you . . . It
   wouldn’t be South Africa.


[Applause.]
We must appreciate our diversity. I thank you.

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, comrades and hon members, the PAC concurs that
there can be no superior call than the call for tolerance. Tolerance is a
correct strategic perspective, for it engenders understanding, co-operation
and coexistence of competing perspectives.

The fruits of intolerance are there for all to see, both in history and in
the present. The genesis of intolerance is paternalism and holier-than-thou
attitudes, which in state relations is a product of imperialist
inclinations and practises. These have led to wars of aggression and
strangulation, and manipulation of weaker states.

In our times and age the fountain of intolerance is the western capitalist
powers led by the United States of America. These forces cannot tolerate
any thought or action different from their perspective. They want
regimentation and enforced uniformity on pain of retribution for supposed
deviants. They want to create the world in their own image.

This perspective of lack of tolerance must be rejected. As we call for
tolerance we are challenged as Parliament and as a country to pledge our
solidarity with the victims of intolerance.

In this particular instance the PAC would like to raise the painful case of
Cuba: A small island with big-hearted, tenacious people and an
internationalist outlook. Cuba is a victim of economic, commercial and
financial blockade imposed by the USA. It is the longest and cruellest of
its kind, implemented and added to by 10 US administrations since the
implementation of revolutionary Cuba. Its intentions, as gleaned from the
classified documents, were “ . . . causing starvation, desperation and the
overthrow of the government. . . .”[Interjections.]

The PAC is also worried about the US attitude and threats against Venezuela
for no other reason than that President Hugo Chavez has dared to implement
policies inconsistent with the Washington consensus.

We also hope that as Bolivia go to the polls on the 18th of December this
year, which polls by all indications are most likely to be won by the
popular Evo Morales and his Movement to Socialism, its popular choice will
not only be tolerated, but accepted as reflecting the democratic will of
the people of Bolivia.

South Africa has a role to play in international solidarity, promoting
peace, coexistence, mutual understanding and tolerance. We have learned
from dialectics that you are neither eternally right nor eternally wrong.
May the intolerant study dialectics. There is a lesson for humanity.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, Article 1 defines tolerance as respect,
acceptance and appreciation of the rich diversity of our world’s culture,
our form of expression and ways of being human. It is fostered by
knowledge, openness, communication and freedom of thought, conscience and
belief. Tolerance is harmony in difference. It is not only a moral duty; it
is also a political and legal requirement. The virtue that makes peace
possible contributes to the replacement of the culture of war by a culture
of peace.

The MF strongly supports this. South Africa is proudly home to a diverse
people. We have gladly managed to survive in this diversity. The MF calls
the world to celebrate diversity. We denounce all forms of violence and
war. We really would like to see world peace. We would love to achieve
peace in the Middle East, and we find tolerance to be a great means to
attaining it. Tolerance needs to be extended beyond war situations and
needs to be incorporated in our daily lives.

The MF calls for tolerance to be a value inculcated in all to ensure
harmony, peace and a better life for all. Next year, 2006, will be the 30th
year after losing our children in 1976. That was tolerance. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Mr M DIKO: Chairperson, hon members, the UIF believes that building
tolerance and trust in our diverse community cannot be done overnight,
given our country’s history of centuries of colonialism and decades of
apartheid that created a fertile ground for a number of intolerances that
are still a daily feature of our country.

The UIF has noted with sadness the continued encouragement of this
intolerance for political gains by some political parties. The
International Day of Tolerance gives us the time and the platform to
reflect critically on this question in an effort to find ways and means
with which we can contribute to the fight against the elimination of any
form of intolerance.

The UIF commends the South African government and the AU for taking the
lead in helping conflict-ridden African states to resolve their problems
peacefully. How we wish this could be taken to this House! We hope that the
USA will also learn how to do things peacefully. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mev D VAN DER WALT: Agb Voorsitter en kollegas, die konsep van
verdraagsaamheid, die vermoë om te aanvaar dat andere se gebruike en gelowe
kan verskil van my eie, is die hoeksteen van enige demokrasie, maar veral
in so ‘n diverse demokrasie soos in ons land. Terwyl die ANC-regering nie
altyd verdraagsaam optree ten opsigte van die regte van minderheidsgroepe
en die opinies van opposisiepartye nie, kan Suid-Afrikaners tog trots wees
op ‘n handves van menseregte wat ondersteun word deur die begrip van
verdraagsaamheid.

Ek wil dit vandag aan u stel dat ‘n sorgsame en demokratiese samelewing
baie meer nodig het as net die inprenting van ‘n idee van ‘n kultuur van
verdraagsaamheid teenoor jou naaste. ‘n Samelewing wat werklik omgee, kan
slegs bereik word as ons onverdraagsaam optree teenoor die euwels wat die
maatskaplike samestelling van ons samelewing ondermyn.

Indien die ANC-regering werklik ernstig is om die doelwit van
verdraagsaamheid onder alle Suid-Afrikaners te bereik, sal hy nou moet
bewys dat hy die regte balans kan handhaaf deur, onder andere, daadwerklik
op te tree teen groepe wat steeds haatspraak, soos “Kill the Boer, kill the
farmer”, en ander rassistiese slagspreuke gebruik. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die
ewigdurende aanval op die Afrikaanse taal moet gestaak word. Die taal moet
eerder gebruik word as voorbeeld vir die opheffing en bevordering van al
ons ander inheemse tale, en daar moet nie net altyd van Afrikaans weggeneem
word nie.

Die diskriminerende optrede van die verandering van slegs Afrikaanse
plekname moet ook gestaak word. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die subtiele dog
doelbewuste ontwapening van sekere groepe is ongrondwetlik.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Die Zimbabwe-styl om boere op ‘n Vrydagmidag oor onbenullighede in hegtenis
te neem en vanweë die onbeskikbaarheid van ‘n aanklaer tot Maandagoggend
aan te hou net om geen formele klag te formuleer nie, mag nie langer
toegelaat word nie.
Ek wil graag afsluit met die Afrikaanse verwerking van Nkosi sikilel’
iAfrika deur H A Fagan in 1946:


   Ek kyk en sien die skare voor my staan
   Zoeloe en Kosa, Soeto en Sjangaan
   en ek, ‘n Blanke - vele volkre, ja -
   almal verenigd om Gods seën te vra
   op net een tuiste, net een vaderland,
   want die Alwyse het ons saam geplant
   en saam laat wortel in Suid-Afrika.
   Nkosi Sikilel’ iAfrika -
   Seën, Heer, dié land wat vele volkre dra.

Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Hon Chairperson and colleagues, the concept of
tolerance, the ability to accept that the customs and beliefs of other
people might differ from our own, is the cornerstone of any democracy, but
even more so in a democracy as diverse as that of our country. While the
ANC government does not always act tolerantly with regard to the rights of
minority groups and the opinions of opposition parties, South Africa can
nevertheless be proud of a bill of rights which is underpinned by the
concept of tolerance.

I want to put it to you today that a caring and democratic society requires
much more than merely instilling the idea of a culture of tolerance towards
one’s fellow man. A society which really cares can only be realised if we
act intolerantly with regard to the evils undermining the social
composition of our society.

If the ANC government is really serious about attaining the objective of
tolerance amongst all South Africans, it will now have to prove that it can
maintain the correct balance by, inter alia, acting decisively against
groups who are still using hate speech, such as “Kill the Boer, kill the
farmer” and other racist slogans. [Interjections.] The perpetual attack on
the Afrikaans language must be stopped. The language should rather be used
as an example for the upliftment and promotion of all our other indigenous
languages, and Afrikaans should not always be diminished.

An end should also be made to the discriminatory action of changing only
Afrikaans place names. [Interjections.] The subtle yet purposeful disarming
of certain groups is unconstitutional.

The Zimbabwean style of arresting farmers on a Friday afternoon because of
trivialities and detaining them until Monday morning simply as a result of
the unavailability of a prosecutor, and then not to formulate a formal
charge, should no longer be allowed.

I would like to conclude with the Afrikaans adaptation of Nkosi sikelel’
iAfrika by H A Fagan in 1946:

   Ek kyk en sien die skare voor my staan
   Zoeloe en Kosa, Soeto en Sjangaan
   en ek, ‘n Blanke - vele volkre, ja -
   almal verenigd om Gods seën te vra
   op net een tuiste, net een vaderland,
   want die Alwyse het ons saam geplant
   en saam laat wortel in Suid-Afrika.
   Nkosi sikilel’ iAfrika -
   Seën, Heer, dié land wat vele volkre dra.

Thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms O R KASIENYANE: Modulasetulo, maloko a Palamente . . . [Chairperson, hon
members . . . ]

 . . . it was disturbing to hear what hon Coetzee was saying, him being one
of the architects of the DA campaign of fighting back. It is disturbing to
say that we are not tolerant. [Interjections.] I want to say to him that we
are tolerant.

We are not going to listen to your accusations against us. We are going to
teach you what being tolerant means. Our parents tolerated your parents for
decades. [Applause.] Our parents, as domestic workers, tolerated your
parents as far as your upbringing was concerned. [Applause.]

The transition to the new South Africa has seen our people earning dignity
and respect, and faith for our country’s supreme law, the Constitution -
that has taught you a lot. This means that a basic core of unity,
nonracialism and tolerance forms the foundation of this beloved nation,
South Africa. [Interjections.]

The most significant cornerstone of continuing to build the winning nation
is the recognition that our people come first in all government services to
ensure that our freedom is not just an ideal based on paper. We adopted the
principle of tolerating our citizens.

In this regard our government introduced Batho Pele, putting people first.
The most critical element of this fundamental guiding document is
highlighted in the issue of how we tolerate members of the public when we
provide them with services. [Interjections.] We cannot sit here today as
public figures and ask the community to tolerate unemployment, nondelivery
of service and homelessness when we do not have enough policy intervention
to fight these social ills. [Interjections.] The hon member is not going to
disturb me. He must just learn to understand what tolerance means. How do
we teach tolerance to the unemployed youth, to those who lose their shacks
every day through fires? If you would just listen. We are talking about
people who are homeless, who lost their homes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O BAPELA): Will the hon Kasienyane just pause a
minute? Can we take our seats?

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, on a point of
order: Is it in order, during a debate on the International Day of
Tolerance, for the DA benches to behave in such an intolerant manner?
[Interjections.] I am being serious. Virtually every ANC speaker . . .
[Interjections.] . . . who has spoken here today has been has been howled
at to such an extent that we found it difficult to listen to them. We have
listened to them with respect. We ask them to show the same.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, order! It is true that
while speakers were speaking here, there were quite a lot of interruptions
and interjections. Then they started increasing, and I just want to request
members to respect the speakers on the podium. Yes, it can be done in the
lively way of Parliament, but can we just refrain from interjections that
turn into running commentaries.

Ms O R KASIENYANE: Chairperson, they cannot listen, because they do not
want to hear how intolerant they are; how our people are suffering because
of that. [Interjections.]

Do we stand here today and justify all these ills or do we pledge today to
implement more effective policies to assist our communities in fighting
poverty? We have not yet succeeded in removing stigmas. We stigmatise
people living with HIV, and we stigmatise people with disabilities. How can
we build a caring society when we still call people names? You still call
our people names. We call people like that, bomalalaphaepe [people who
sleep on the street]; those who do not have an alternative place to stay.
How can we call ourselves a caring society?

The Batho Pele policy remains government’s single most important campaign
to achieve the necessary transformation of the hearts and minds of public
servants and to put the citizens at the centre of planning operations. That
is what we mean by tolerance. It means that every person who works in the
Public Service should be proud to be a servant of the people and relish the
challenge of providing improved services to all. Batho Pele is the soul of
the Public Service and the heartbeat of the nation that will help us rise
above the legacies of the past and drive us forward with courage and pride.

Modulasetulo, re bua ka itshokelano. Fa re kgona go itshokelana, re
dirisana mmogo le go uthuta poelano, re ka dira tse kgolo kgotsa ra fitlha
kwa re neng re sa gopole gore re ka fitlha. Re bone mo malobeng, ka nako ya
moporesidente wa pele, rre Mandela, ka nako ya dipuisano tsa Codesa,
mekgatlho ya dipolotiki e ne e sa kgone go itshokelana jaaka ba ba ka fa
molemeng ba. Baeteledipele ba bangwe mme e bile ba sa kgone, ba sa batle go
ithuta botlhale gotswa go ba bangwe, ba ba tshwanang le rona, bona fa
motlotlegi rre Mandela a re ruta go itshokelana, nnete ke gore fa re belela
kwa morago re bona gore ke nnete, mmetla-kgola ya borwa o e betla a e
lebisitse wa gaabo, jaaka rre Mandela.

Rre Mandela o ne a dira jalo gore gompieno re bo re kopane re le
boeteledipele, re le mekgatlho ya dipolotiki, re dira mmogo e bile re
laolwa ke mokgatlho wa ANC. Re boelana, e seng jaaka ba ba ka fa moleng. Re
lekile go itshokelana go tswa masuleng le dingalo tsa dingangele tsa go
tshwana le bona ba, maburu.

Re dutse jaana, gongwe re utlwa re utlwana, re itshokelana, mme fa re
tswela kwa ntle, go tshwana le bona, re dirisa ditšhono tse di sa siamang
go sotla le go senya ba bangwe. Itshokelano ya sepolotiki kgotsa yona -
political tolerance - ga eyo mo go bona ba.

Re na le Molaotheo o o re rutang go le gontsi ka poelano le itshokelano.
Molaotheo o, o tlotlomadiwa ke dinaga disele, e bile di eletsa go ka nna le
ona. Le fa gontse jalo, re santse re le maphata jaaka tsona. Makgoa le
batho bantsho, re sa palelwa ke go itshokelana, go kopana re aga naga ya
rona, re tlogela kgethololo e e santseng e rena mo merafeng e mengwe jaaka
bona ba. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, our debate is about tolerance. If we can tolerate  each
other, work together and learn to reconcile, we can achieve great things or
reach milestones we never thought we could accomplish. In the era of the
first president, Mr Mandela, we learned that political parties did not
tolerate one another as the opposition party is doing now. Some political
leaders could not learn from other parties and become tolerant, like we did
as the hon Mandela taught us. It was against this background that it was
clear that he wanted to be exemplary.

Mr Mandela wanted to unite us as political parties and leaders today; to
work together under the leadership of the ANC. He wanted us to reconcile
not what the opposition party is doing. We should reconcile regardless of
our historical suffering under the white regime.

We are now gathered here, with one common purpose - to tolerate one another
not be like them by using wrong channels of communication and ridiculing
others. They do not have political tolerance.

Our constitution teaches us about tolerance and reconciliation. Our
constitution is appreciated by other countries who even wants to learn from
it. However, there are still differences between us. Blacks and whites
still cannot tolerate one another; or unite in building our country and
forget about racism, which is still practiced by other races such as this
one.]

Therefore, tolerance goes beyond the topic. It lays down the rules of
social behaviour. Building tolerance and trust in diverse communities is
not done overnight. It takes time and commitment. Building tolerance
requires access and education. Intolerance is often rooted in ignorance and
fear of the unknown, of the Other, of other cultures, religions and
nations. Intolerance is also closely linked to an exaggerated sense of self-
worth and pride, notions taught and learned at an early stage. Therefore we
need to place greater emphasis on educating our children about tolerance in
the coming years, as my colleague has mentioned, and about human rights and
fundamental freedom. That is why we say in Setswana . . .
 . . . lore lo ojwa lo sa le metsi. [ . . . the tree must be bent while is
still young.] My colleague has already said that we need to teach our
children.

As a new century begins, we believe that each society needs to ask itself
certain questions. Is it sufficiently inclusive? Is it nondiscriminatory?
Are its norms and behaviour based on the principles enshrined in the
universal declaration of human rights? Racism, racial discriminatation,
xenophobia and all kinds of related intolerance have not disappeared
because you exist. [Interjections.] We recognise that they persist in the
new century and that their persistence is rooted in fear; fear of what is
different, fear of others, fear of loss of personal security. While we
recognise that human fear in itself is part of the human race, we maintain,
however, that its consequences are eradicable. Yes, they are eradicable.

This year, South Africans from all walks of life celebrated the 50th
anniversary of the Freedom Charter, the blueprint that ensures that our
country belongs to all who live in it, black and white.
[Interjections.][Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O BAPELA): The hon member had a minute added to
her time because of the interjections. She may conclude.

Ms O R KASIENYANE: The basic core of this important guiding document is the
promotion of tolerance and the building of a peaceful, non-racial and non-
sexist society. For too long the human race had treated diversity as a
weakness to be eliminated rather than the befitting gift of multiplicity,
ideas and creativity that is brought forth by diversity. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.


                    REPORTS OF THE JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE


Mr S L DITHEBE: Thank you, Chairperson. By resolution of Parliament in
2003, the Joint Budget Committee was constituted to give effect to several
aspects of Parliament’s oversight responsibilities regarding the public
finances. To undertake this task, the Joint Budget Committee adopted a
vision, a mission and core goals for the strategic plan period, 2005–07.

In terms of the terms of reference governing the Joint Budget Committee, it
is obliged, among other things, to report on its function from time to
time, as is necessary, and submit a final report not later than the end of
the next budget cycle in Parliament.

This provision is fulfilled through the consideration of the report of the
Joint Budget Committee on national and provincial expenditure from April
2004 to March 2005. Similarly, quarterly reports were dealt with by the
committee in keeping with its mandate. It is my submission that a careful
reading and analysis of the committee’s reports reveal a constructive role
that it has played, and continues to play in holding the executive
accountable.

In the same breath, I want to express my appreciation for the sensitivity
with which various departments have responded to the concerns of the Joint
Budget Committee in practice with underspending and other deviations. Most
importantly, this interaction ensures delivery and value for money.

In conclusion, I would like to welcome the Department of Communications’
commitment to remedy its negative spending patterns, with specific
reference to an overspending of over R700 million. The following
recommendations are therefore submitted for adoption by the House:

The Joint Budget Committee needs to work with the Portfolio Committee on
Communications to monitor the Department of Communications, in terms of its
strategic plans. The committee further needs to follow up on the
nonallocation of funds to the ICT function, which is crucial for the
functioning of the department itself. Last, but not least, the Joint Budget
Committee also needs to further keep track on the monthly and quarterly
expenditure patterns of the department. Once again, it is this
representative body of the people that continues to enrich the process of
consultation and democracy itself.

I commend these reports for adoption by Parliament, inclusive of course, of
the strategic plan of the Joint Budget Committee. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY: Chairperson, we move that the
reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.


                REPORTS OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE OF FINANCE


Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Chairperson, members of the House, colleagues and
comrades, yes, this is Orders 10, 11 and 12; that is National Treasury,
also the SA Revenue Service, and the Statistics South Africa.

I know it has been a long day, but this won’t take much longer. What we are
looking at here, and commending to you to adopt, is the report on Budget
Vote No 8 of National Treasury, the committee’s report, and not the Vote
itself. As you will recall, you already voted for the budget.

What this is, and I do suggest that you read this, is in the ATC of Monday,
23 May 2005. It highlights, once again, from a committee, which is a
multiparty committee, and commends National Treasury for its continued
sound performance and the management of the government’s finances and the
economy.

Of course it raises one or two reservations, namely the filling of senior
posts. As we all know, the issue of state-owned enterprises came up, as did
its assets and liabilities. National Treasury has now adopted a phase and
implementation approach to the accrual system.

The issue on Sars, what is there to say? We commend them again for
increasing revenue flows, which incidentally is not through luck, but is
the direct impacting consequence of efficient, effective and creative
management systems in place.

With respect to Statistics SA, I want to preface the comments of the
committee on the Budget Vote of this committee report by indicating very
clearly that we were concerned with quality controlling credibility. We
were concerned then with management issues, but we were also cognisant of
the fact that Statistics SA has a monumental challenge on its hands, to
transform the configuration of how statistics are done in the country.

Nevertheless, the committee did call on the statistician-general, to
urgently address management concerns. At this point, and perhaps just
before I conclude recommending for the adoption of these three reports,
certainly, the committee would like to wish the hon Minister a speedy
recovery.

The Portfolio Committee of Finance would like to commend to this House for
adoption from the committee reports, the National Treasury Vote No 8, which
was done on 20 May, the Strategic Plan of the SA Revenue Service, also on
20 May, and the committee’s report on the Budget Vote for Statistics SA,
also on 20 May.

We commend this to you, for a speedy adoption. Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, we move that the
reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.




             REPORTS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON AUDITOR-GENERAL


There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, we move that the reports be
adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE

Dr S C CWELE: Chairperson, the annual reports of the committee are tabled
every year, but I am not sure how many members ever come across copies of
these reports. I wonder how many members ever read these reports. We urge
members to read these members because the committee, as you know, is given
a mandate by this Parliament to sit behind closed doors, and play an active
oversight of our intelligent services.

Today we won’t bore you with the details, but we will move that we are
aware that there’s another annual report coming in few weeks, and that
would be debated in this House in full when we come back next year. I would
like to raise a few issues, which tend to be a common thread in all our
annual reports.

The first one is the extent to which government departments and
institutions implement minimum information security standard policy, which
was adopted by this government in 1997. In this respect, even the members
of Parliament who hold very crucial information, leave their computers on
at night, and they don’t lock their offices.

The officials of government and institutions do the same. Yet the
government adopted a policy that we should observe these minimum security
standards in order to protect our national interests. I would urge, in
particular, the chairpersons of portfolio committees to check to what
extent the government departments and institutions they oversee, actually
implement this policy.

The other problem that existed at the time of this report, was the problem
that was raised by the taxation of the sources of intelligence. At a
particular time, I know, the National Treasury has tried to resolve the
issue with the relevant departments. The problem was, who is actually
supposed to pay the tax? Is it the sources of Intelligence Service or the
actual Intelligence Service who is supposed to pay the tax? What about the
exposure of that cover? Those were the critical issues that were being
negotiated with National Treasury by the Intelligence Service at that time.

Lastly, the intelligence oversight is relevantly new in the whole world.
Even in the developed worlds they only started oversight of the
intelligence services around 1994. So, there is a lot of learning and
sharing of information. Some of the reports talk about the international
conference on intelligence oversight, where we share experiences with the
countries that have exercised this oversight.

The report also mentioned that next year South Africa will be the first
country to host such a conference in Africa. We have taken steps to invite
more African countries to participate, so that this doesn’t become just a
club for the western countries or the rich countries that do have
oversight.

With those few comments, we will come in full force next year, and we will
make sure that each and every member of this House gets the report; so that
it doesn’t become just a report for journalists, but also a report for the
people of South Africa. I move that we adopt this report, Chairperson. I
thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we move that the
report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SPORT AND RECREATION –
             STUDY TOUR TO FRANCE; NORTHERN CAPE OVERSIGHT VISIT

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon members, comrades, ladies
and gentlemen, with greatest humility, I present the portfolio committee
report on the study tour visit to the Northern Cape and to France.

In the Northern Cape, conditions still remain the same. The biggest
challenge is poverty, the distance, and also the vast nonviability of
agricultural conditions in places could be where these facilities could be
established.

One thing that is generally accepted in the Northern Cape is the amount of
work that has been done by government around building a sports facility
programme. This programme has built sporting facilities, when no one could
ever think that those kinds of places really deserve facilities. But they
still continue experiencing the same challenges that we are facing.

The municipal infrastructure grant imposes a challenge to small
municipalities, because they do not have enough capacity to deal with the
documentations around how to access the municipal infrastructure grant. The
issue of the life-long maintenance of these facilities by those small
municipalities in that rural area remains a problem.

The committee has also realised that the question of the two nations
remains in the Northern Cape, where there is an abundance of resources
which other people cannot access, and where there is virtually no
resources, nobody could that access; those conditions persist. Therefore,
the recommendation that we have made is that we must open up these
facilities so that all people must be able to access them. We must be able
to assist the municipal infrastructure grant so that it can put basic
facilities for the people in the Northern Cape.

With regard to the visit to France, it is part of the oversight and also
the experience of this portfolio committee to go to countries that have
been given an honour to host this important event of the World Cup.

South Africa has been honoured to host the 2010 World Cup. We therefore
went to France to see how they managed this big task that was given to
their country. In 1998 France hosted the World Cup, and they were saying to
us that the biggest problem facing them was how people would be able to
understand that there would be no access to stadiums because ticket sales
had already been concluded in France by the family of FIFA, those that
would be able to access those tickets, and the amount of money that was
paid for those tickets.

Therefore members of Parliament played a very critical role in making sure
that in their constituencies which they serve, they must be able to
sensitise the Minister and the Cabinet committee that were in charge of
sports in putting up the facilities for the people. So they must not worry
too much to go the stadium. But they must be able to have those screens,
because the competition for those tickets will be fierce.

For France to be able to win the World Cup, they had built a team for eight
years, and that was their objective: They wanted to win the World Cup. They
managed to win it.

The question of security was one thing that we felt was very good and we
were pleased to see it happened in France. The France de Tour stadium,
which has capacity for 150 000 people, can be evacuated in five minutes if
any incidences of violence or injuries should occur. In five minutes, 150
000 people are evacuated in the manner in which it was designed, and it is
safety conscious. We marvelled at this, because there are so many things
assisting these people to evacuate that stadium swiftly.

After 1998 FIFA started to put in place very strong measures, as we were
told, around the World Cup. The message that they sent to us was, that if
the World Cup brings a lot of money, that money would be shared among the
people of France, but if there is a deficit, the government pays the bill
and the people do not do anything to that extent.

Therefore, we must be careful, again, of erecting stadiums that will
finally be white elephants, which at the end of the World Cup will be
demolished. One thing that was very important to them, when they were
telling us, is that this Cabinet committee, from time to time, was
informing Parliament on the events that were taking place around the
challenges and the games that they had to host the World Cup.

We therefore recommended that the Cabinet committees in Parliament should
be able to report to this Parliament around this very big task that they
have so, that all of us can share the experience on how this World Cup is
going to be managed in this country. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we move that the
report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AFFAIRS AND
 FORESTRY – OVERSIGHT VISIT TO KWAZULU-NATAL, MPUMALANGA, NORTHERN CAPE AND
                                EASTERN CAPE

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we move that the
report be adopted.

There was no debate.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORTS OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS –
    AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEES (ACPAC) 8th BIENNIAL
   CONFERENCE, 2005; STUDY TOUR TO CANADIAN OFFICE OF AUDITOR-GENERAL AND
                   STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS.

There was no debate.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we move that the reports be
adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
    CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT – ANNUAL REPORT AND STRATEGIC PLAN OF THE
            DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we move that the
report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.


  CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR – INTERNATIONAL
  LABOUR CONFERENCE; BRIEFING BY SECTOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING AUTHORITIES


Mr L D MADUMA: Hon Speaker, the Portfolio Committee on Labour appreciates
the decision of Parliament to send three members, including one from the
opposition party, to the ILO conference. This delegation was led by the
chairperson of the committee and accompanied by the committee’s secretary.

Its attendance to this important labour forum gave it an extraordinary
experience on challenges that continue to affect workers at workplaces.
Their deployment to occupational safety and health, applied standards and
fishing centre committees, had enriched them as legislators.

The issue of social security in the fishing sector and the challenge of the
unemployed youth remain a global phenomenon. It was, however, difficult to
deploy them to other committees, as activities were taking place
simultaneously.

Those members who were attending the government caucus every day, which was
mapping out the African position, one of the lessons of the caucus was that
if Africa is united and speaks with one voice, it earns respect from other
regions. The delegation was able to draw this conclusion, when developing a
united position in support of Zimbabwe and Swaziland’s positions. It was
perceived that to put the said countries on the agenda of the ILO, it was
politically motivated; therefore it was not right platform to deal with
these challenges.

This exposure gave the members a clear understanding on this critical role
South Africa is playing in such a forum led by the Minister of Labour,
Minister Membathisi Mdladlana. Also his re-election as the chairperson of
the AU Labour and Social Affairs Commission for a consecutive year, bears
this testimony.

Our country was also supported by Africa to get a titular membership in the
governing body, which means a permanent seat in the governing body of the
ILO. The delegation was also able to observe the strategy used by rich
countries like America and Britain to manipulate the ILO. Those countries
were pushing for the reduction of ILO budget so that it could not be able
to meet the challenge of improving workers’ conditions. This situation
would further impact negatively on the poor countries. The fact that
America has ratified only one convention remains a challenge about how it
conducts its business in terms of understanding the challenge of the ILO in
improving workers’ conditions. We, however, need to applaud South Africa
for its continued financial support to the ILO.

The issue of skill development strategy was also seen as a challenge,
especially to the youth worldwide. It was observed that the mismatch of
skills continued to be an impediment in addressing the unemployment of
youth and deal with poverty. Countries have to focus on education and
training, which would address the skills needed by the economy.

Our skills development plan, as a country, would contribute to this global
vision.

In conclusion, the portfolio committee would like to recommend that next
year it convenes the workshop with all the stakeholders that are relevant
to the sector before the delegation goes to ILO. It also urges the members
of this Parliament to read this report so as to acquaint themselves with
the challenges that confront the ILO in terms of meeting the demand of the
workers.

We therefore request that this Parliament considers a bigger delegation to
the ILO next year; so that members are able to participate in all other
committees. We recommend that Parliament adopts this report. I thank you.
[Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we move that the
reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE AND LAND
                     AFFAIRS - VISIT TO GAUTENG PROVINCE
There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker we move that the
report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SAFETY AND SECURITY –
       OVERSIGHT VISIT TO WESTERN CAPE REGARDING SERVICE DELIVERY AND
           IMPLEMENTATION ACTION STEPS OF THE FIREARMS CONTROL ACT

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we move that the
report be adopted. [Applause.][Laughter.]

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT – BUDGET
                                  HEARINGS

There was no debate.
The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We move that the report be
adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS – VOTE NO 6
                               – PUBLIC WORKS

There was no debate.


The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We move that the report be
adopted.




Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INDUSTRY
                      – VOTE NO 32 – TRADE AND INDUSTRY

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We move that the report be
adopted.
Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND
 TOURISM – OVERSIGHT VISITS CONDUCTED IN KWAZULU-NATAL, PONDOLAND AND COEGA
                           DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we move that the
report be adopted, and also that it be the last.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                 ALLEGED IMPROPER CONDUCT OF DEPUTY SPEAKER
                                  (Ruling)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I would now like to deal with one or two very
brief matters. I wish to make an announcement on a matter that had been
tabled before the House. On Tuesday, 13 September 2005, the hon Chief Whip
of the Opposition gave notice of a substantive motion in the House against
Deputy Speaker Mahlangu-Nkabinde, making serious allegations of improper
conduct on her part in her capacity as Acting Speaker during the floor-
crossing period.

It is standard practice that members are not permitted to make
unsubstantiated allegations against other members in this House. This
practice is strictly observed. The only exception is when adequate grounds
exist, which warrant that the House specifically attend to particular
allegations. In that event, the allegations must be presented to the House
by way of a substantive motion and the Speaker must be satisfied that there
is indeed prima-facie evidence warranting that the motion be placed before
the House.

A substantive motion against the Deputy Speaker alleging improper conduct
on her part as Acting Speaker is particularly serious, as it affects an
elected presiding officer of this House. I therefore decided that I should
inform the House that, having considered the substantive motion, I have, in
writing, ruled it out of order as no substantiation for the detailed
allegations was offered.

There has been further correspondence between the hon Mr Gibson and myself
because we do not share the same understanding regarding the use and
application of substantive motions. I emphasises that the House has the
right and authority to attend to allegations against any member, including
office bearers, by way of a substantive motion when that is clearly
warranted. It is evident, however, that this mechanism should be used only
with due caution and responsibility and should not, for instance, be
resorted to for political expediency.

Good practice has yet to develop around substantive motions. I am concerned
that notice of such a substantive motion can be given in the House before
there is an opportunity to assess whether it is in order. I shall therefore
be asking the Rules Committee to consider appropriate processes for dealing
with a substantive motion. I understand that the Chief Whips forum has also
been engaging on this issue. They could report in due course to the Rules
committee as well. That concludes that particular matter.

  FIRST REPORT OF JOINT CO-ORDINATING COMMITTEE ON THE AFRICAN PEER REVIEW
                                  MECHANISM

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I would now like to make a brief announcement on
the first report of African Peer Review Mechanism. I should like to draw
your attention to the First Report of the Joint Co-ordinating Committee on
the African Peer Review Mechanism, which appeared in yesterday’s ATC.

Unfortunately, the report appeared too late for it to be brought before the
House today for debate. Members and parties should engage with the issues
raised in the report and also bring them to the attention of the
communities and municipalities in their constituencies. Members’ active
support for this process is critical if Parliament is to play an effective
role in the peer review process. The report will be brought before the
House and debated at an early opportunity in the New Year.

Hon members, I am sure you will be very happy to hear that, in fact, that
concludes the business for the day. However, I do wish you a good break and
hope that you will take a bit of rest, maybe for a day. But you must get on
the road because I know all of you are very eager to start the campaign
trails. But we will be back in December. That is why we are not having
farewell speeches because it’s not yet time to say our farewells. That
concludes the business for the day. The House is adjourned until 13
December 2005.

Farewell speeches stood over.

The House adjourned at 20:31 until 13 December 2005.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 16 November 2005:


         (i)     Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of
              Certain Laws Bill [B 25D – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76)

     (2)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 16 November
         2005:


         (i)     Forestry Laws Amendment Bill [B 24B – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 76)
         (ii)    Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 37 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 77)
         (iii)   Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 77)
         (iv)    Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)
         (v)     Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 28B – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)
         (vi)    Auditing Profession Bill [B 31B – 2005] (National Assembly
              – sec 75)

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Messages from National Council of Provinces to in respect of Bills
     passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly
      1) Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly


         Bills, as amended, passed by National Council of Provinces on 16
         November 2005 and transmitted for consideration of Council’s
         amendments:


         (i)     Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 23D – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 76)
         (ii)    National Credit Bill [B 18D – 2005] (National Assembly –
              sec 76)

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


 1. The Minister of Labour

    (a)     Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Forest  Industries
         Education and  Training  Authority  for  2004-2005,  including  the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
         2005 [RP 90-2005].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Deployment of
   SANDF, dated 16 November 2005:

    The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the letters
    from the President on the deployment of the SANDF to areas outside the
    borders of the country, referred to the Committee, reports that it has
    concluded its deliberations thereon.



National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
   Development on the Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of
   Certain Laws Bill [B 25D - 2005] (National Assembly – section 76), dated
   16 November 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
    having considered the subject of the Repeal of Black Administration Act
    and Amendment of Certain Laws Bill [B 25D-2005] (National Assembly –
    section 76), as amended by the National Council of Provinces and
    referred back to the Committee, reports that it agreed to the
    amendments, and accordingly the Bill.


    Report to be considered.

 2. Interim Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
   Development on the implications and approval of the proposed new salary
   scales for 2005 for the Magistracy, dated 16 November 2005

   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
   (Portfolio Committee) and the Select Committee on Security and
   Constitutional Affairs (Select Committee), held joint hearings on the 18
   October 2005, inter alia, to enquire into the details and implications of
   the implementation of the proposed new salary scales for 2005 for the
   Magistracy and its consequences for Government, in particular the
   proposed new motor vehicle allowances for magistrates and senior
   magistrates, as recommended by the Independent Commission on the
   Remuneration for Public Office Bearers to the President and submitted
   subsequently to Parliament by the President in terms of Section 12 (3)
   (a)  of the Magistrates Act (Act  90 of 1993) (the Magistrates Act), and
   the Portfolio Committee wishes to report as follows:


    Due to time constraints, the Committees have not been able to fully
    deliberate on all the substantive issues raised during the said
    hearings and consequently, due to the urgency of the matter, the
    Portfolio Committee, in the interim, wishes to recommend that the House
    resolves as follows:

               i. To rescind its previous decision  of  7  September  2005,
                  which approved the draft notice and schedule received  in
                  terms of Section 12(1) (a) of  the  Magistrates  Act,  as
                  amended by Section 3 of the Judicial  Officers  Amendment
                  of Conditions of Service Act (Act 28 of 2003);

              ii. In terms of Section 12(3)(b)(i) of the Magistrates Act,
                  approves the draft notice and schedule tabled by the
                  President in Parliament on 7 September 2005;

             iii. That the costs for the implementation of the motor
                  vehicle allowances for senior magistrates and magistrates
                  be allocated to the Justice Vote in terms of Section
                  213(2)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
                  Africa, read with Section 12(4) of the Magistrates Act;
                  and
    That the Portfolio Committee table its final report in the House,
    before the end of the year, detailing the outcomes and recommendations
    in relation to legislative and procedural matters relating to the
    determination of salary levels for magistrates; the absence of a
    budgetary allocation to defray the proposed new motor vehicle
    allowances for senior magistrates and magistrates; the development of
    policy measures to deal with the implications arising from the
    extension of motor vehicles allowances to senior magistrates and
    magistrates; and any other matter relevant to or emanating from the
    said hearings.

   Report to be considered.

3. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on the Annual
   Reports of the Department of Public Enterprises and Transnet, Eskom, and
   Alexkor, and an Interim Report from Denel, dated 16 November 2005:

   The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, having considered the 2004-
   2005 Annual Reports of the Department of Public Enterprises, Transnet,
   Eskom and Alexkor and an Interim Report from Denel, reports as follows:

A. Introduction

 1. The Committee considered the 2004-2005 annual reports of the Department
    of Public Enterprises (DPE) on 11 October 2005, Transnet on 12 October,
    Eskom on 19 October and Alexkor on 26 October, and an interim report
    from Denel on 18 October.


 2. The Committee also received a separate briefing from South African
    Airways (SAA) on 12 October on its annual report, but since SAA is still
    part of Transnet, the Committee reports on SAA as part of Transnet.

 3. The annual reports of Denel and Alexkor had not been tabled in
    parliament. Alexkor explained that their Annual General Meeting (AGM)
    was still to take place. Alexkor presented a draft of their annual
    report and financial results.  Alexkor will be having its AGM on 4
    November 2005. Mr Shaun Liebenberg, CEO of Denel, explained that as he
    had just taken over, he was unable to meet the 30 September Public
    Finance Management Act (PFMA) deadline. A new Board Chairperson and
    Chairperson of the Audit Committee had also been appointed and they had
    identified certain shortcomings in the financial statements. In the
    interest of reflecting clear, accurate and transparent financial
    results, it was necessary to delay the presentation of the annual
    report. Final adjustments are being made to the financial statements,
    and the annual report will be released at the AGM in mid-November and
    tabled in Parliament shortly thereafter.

 4. Safcol’s (South African Forestry Company Ltd) financial year coincides
    with the calendar year. In view of this, Safcol’s annual report was not
    tabled in parliament by the 30 September deadline. As from next year,
    Safcol will adjust to the normal financial year as required by the PFMA.
    Safcol will be having its AGM on 15 November, and will brief the
    Committee on its report early in the new year.

 5. The Committee finalized its report on the 2004 annual reports of DPE and
    the SOEs in November last year. The report was published in the ATC on
    22 February 2005. The current report has to be understood in the context
    of last year’s report and will not cover ground covered in last year’s
    report. In respect of DPE, issues covered in our budget report to
    parliament, which was published in the ATC of 13 April 2005, will not be
    covered in this report, unless necessary. In the case of Alexkor, some
    of the issues that were raised are not covered in this report as they
    were dealt with in our report on our study tour there, published in the
    ATC of 16 March 2005.

 6. The approach in this report is to first present a brief overview of the
    presentation made to our Committee on each annual report, and then
    offers our responses to the report. Where there are responses that are
    more general to the SOEs, they are carried in section H of the report.
    Of course, this report provides no more than a summary of the
    presentations made to our Committee.  To get a fuller and better
    understanding of the presentations, copies of the documents put before
    the Committee can be obtained from the Committee Secretary, Mr Chris
    Thisani.

 7. The report is much longer than we would have like it to be. Unlike last
    year, we have paid greater attention to SAA because it is soon to become
    a separate SOE and we have also covered Alexkor. Ideally, we should
    focus much less on a summary of the presentations made to us and more on
    what our Committee’s responses are. But we are still trying to come to
    grips with where our SOEs are, and this report is meant to collectively
    assist us in that regard. It is also meant to contribute towards
    defining our oversight role and shaping our strategy and programmes. As
    we get to better understand the SOEs, so will it become less necessary
    to be detailed about their presentations. Of course, there is another
    value to the detail – the report is published in the ATC, and MPs who do
    not serve in our Committee and other interested parties can get an
    overview of the annual reports of DPE and the SOEs. Still, we might want
    to consider whether we should do a shorter, separate report on DPE and
    each of the SOEs rather than one longer report in future?

B. Towards More Effective Oversight

1. As proposed in our report last year, the Committee organised several
   workshops over the year to better equip us technically to carry out our
   oversight role. Of course, there is still much more to do in this regard,
   and our technical empowerment has to be seen as an ongoing process.

2. The Committee does not currently have a full-time researcher, although
   we have received research support through an assistant that has been
   drawn in.

3. Following the decisions taken in last year’s report, the Committee
   Chairperson has been in touch with the other committees whose portfolios
   overlap with ours to discuss the senses in which our respective roles are
   distinct and also overlap, and the need for the committees to co-operate
   more effectively. This has also been raised in the economic cluster of
   committees, the Committee of Chairpersons and other forums. While there
   has been some progress in this regard, more certainly needs to be done.
   The Eskom annual report was considered jointly by the Minerals and Energy
   Committee and our committee – and this is most welcome. Denel’s interim
   report was considered jointly with the NCOP Select Committee on Labour
   and Public Enterprises.

4. The Committee’s concerns in evaluating annual reports largely derive
   from the PFMA, and were set out in section A5 of last year’s report in
   quite some detail. Essentially, we are concerned with the relationship
   between the measurable objectives in the strategic or  business  or
   corporate plans, how the budget allocated for the achievement of these
   objectives was used, progress achieved in fulfilling these objectives,
   and the financial performance of the organizations. This is within the
   overall concern to evaluate the contribution being made to reducing the
   cost of business, making South Africa more competitive, encouraging
   economic growth and social development, and bridging the gap with the
   “second economy”.

5. The Committee is guided in our approach to considering annual reports by
   the report commissioned by the Speaker’s Office, “An Operational Plan for
   the National Assembly on Legislative Oversight through Annual Reports,”
   and National Treasury’s “Guidelines for Legislative Oversight through
   Annual Reports.” The DPE and the SOEs are requested to acquaint
   themselves with these documents should they want to better understand the
   approach of the Committee. These documents can be obtained from the
   Committee Secretary.

6. Following discussions within the Committee of Chairpersons and our
   Committee, we feel that for us to more effectively carry out our
   oversight role, annual reports would have to be tabled by 30 August, not
   30 September, each year. We are usually away from parliament for a two or
   three week constituency period during mid-September to early October –
   and immediately upon our return we are expected to plough through
   weighty, technically challenging reports, business plans and financial
   statements. We usually have a brief five-weeks or so before parliament
   rises for the year in mid-November in which we are expected to process
   these reports and table our own report on these reports to parliament. If
   the Committee received annual reports by the end of August, it would give
   us more time to prepare for the briefings on the reports, engage
   independent experts to evaluate the reports, and organize public hearings
   in which we could engage civil society stakeholders and the public on the
   issues raised in the report and the performance of DPE and the SOEs. We
   could also have a debate in the House on our report on the annual
   reports. Certainly, the comprehensive and valuable proposals set out in
   the two documents referred to in section 5 above will be very difficult
   to implement in any reasonable measure if reports are tabled at the end
   of August. The PFMA is likely to be amended next year, and the Committee
   mandates the Chairperson to pursue the need for and feasibility of an
   amendment that will require annual reports to be tabled by the end of
   August with all the relevant authorities and stakeholders.

7. Of course, the Committee acknowledges that DPE and the SOEs prepare
   their annual reports not for parliament alone, but a wide range of
   stakeholders. There are legislative, regulatory, public relations,
   normative and other considerations that influence the form and content of
   the reports. Overall, the Committee feels that the reports could be more
   user-friendly, and in some cases, briefer. At least, they should include
   an accessible and easy-to-read overview or executive summary. To some
   extent, the approach taken by DPE and the SOEs in the power point and
   slide presentations to the portfolio committee might serve as a guide.

8. For the Committee to evaluate annual reports properly, we need to be
   fully acquainted with the strategic or business or corporate plans for
   the previous financial year, the budgets allocated for the plans (and in
   the case of DPE, the relevant sections of the Estimates of National
   Expenditure) and the annual reports, and, in particular, the relationship
   between these documents. Given the Committee’s lack of research and other
   technical support, we are not, at this stage, able to effectively use
   these documents. This reinforces the imbalances of technical skills
   between the Committee, on the one hand, and DPE and the SOEs, on the
   other. We will, of course, over time, develop our technical capacity. We
   are determined to do so.  But we have to be rigorous in exercising our
   oversight role now. We know it may be difficult, but we want
   representatives of DPE and the SOEs to make their presentations to us
   more accessible, simple and jargon-free, and hence more transparent, so
   that we can exchange with them more effectively. Overall, the
   presentations, in this regard, were much better this year than last year
   – but, more, we believe, can still be done in this respect. We also would
   like the presentations to the Committee to be much more pointed in
   setting out the measurable objectives decided on, the deadlines set, the
   budgets allocated, and the progress achieved in the form of tables or
   other accessible and easy-to-follow means, as some organizations
   appearing before us did indeed seek to do. We request all the
   organizations to kindly do this for next year’s briefings on the annual
   reports; and if this is not done, we expect the process of our exchange
   with the organizations to be considerably slowed down and laborious; in
   other words, it is in all our interests that this be done!

9. Of course, we appreciate that there are many challenges in finalizing
   shareholder compacts with SOEs. But once the compacts are finalized, we
   would like the Minister, as we pointed out in our last year’s report and
   our report on DPE’s budget this year, to table the shareholder compacts
   in parliament so that we are able to monitor the SOEs and carry out our
   oversight responsibilities more effectively. If the compacts are too long
   and complex, perhaps a summary of its key aspects can also be tabled?

10. The Committee strongly feels that organisations that present their
   annual reports to us must respond to the relevant issues we raise about
   them in our last annual report on their annual reports. If there are
   views and any requirements we have set out in our reports that are unfair
   or outside of our mandate or in some other way questionable, then the
   organizations must engage with us about this. But respond they must, to
   the issues we raise – and we will be more demanding about this at next
   year’s consideration of the annual reports.

C.  Department of Public Enterprises

   1. The Department was represented by Director  General  (DG),  Ms  Portia
      Molefe; Deputy Directors General, Ms Sandra Coetzee,  Mr Tebogo Mphuti
      and  Mr  James  Theledi;  Chief  Operations  Officer,  Rashida  Issel;
      Parliamentary  Liaison  Officer,  Ms  Dudu  Mhlongo;  and  Ministerial
      spokesperson, Ms Gaynor Kast.


   2. The financial year  under  review  saw  the  consolidation  of  a  new
      leadership in the Ministry and Department. Much of the year was  spent
      on refining the mandate, vision and  mission  of  DPE,  and  providing
      greater clarity to the SOEs on their mandate and greater certainty  on
      policy. The Department’s mandate, as covered in our budget  report  in
      April, is to work with the relevant policy departments and  regulators
      to provide oversight and strategic direction for the SOEs reporting to
      it. “DPE is really a backroom office”,  said  Ms  Molefe.  “Our  front
      office is the SOEs. A large part of our work entails interacting  with
      the other departments and the regulators.”


   3. The Department and its programmes were restructured to reflect its new
      mandate. This was covered  in  our  Budget  Report.  The  Department’s
      reorganized programmes are:


            ▪ Administration
            ▪ Analysis and Risk Management
            ▪ Governance and policy
            ▪ Corporate Strategy and Structure
            ▪ Corporate Finance and Transactions


   4. The Department’s new three-year strategy will be subject to a mid-term
      review this November, and the Department would be interested to engage
      with the Committee on some of the issues that emerge from the  review.
      Much of the financial year under review was also spent on  defining  a
      new shareholder management model. Departments do not  have  a  set  of
      common standards on shareholder  management.  Consideration  is  being
      given as to whether  there  is  a  need  for  generic  legislation  on
      shareholder management or whether amendments to the PFMA might be able
      to cater for this. In any case, the new shareholder  management  model
      is to be finalized by February 2006, and will begin to be  implemented
      in phases from 1 April 2006.

   5. Among the achievements in respect of the administration programme were
      the following:


            ▪ Implementation of Employment Equity Plan
            ▪ Implementation of fraud prevention plan
            ▪ Implementation of automated procurement systems
            ▪ Implementation of manual ‘accrual basis”  monthly  management
              reports to improve expenditure management and cash flow
            ▪ Launched the Telkom Initial Public Office Reference Manual


   6. Ms Molefe explained that  the  employment  equity  plan  needs  to  be
      reviewed in terms of the Department’s performance  management  system.
      She said that “there seems to be a correlation between the bonus cycle
      for senior  managers  and  reporting  on  employment  equity  figures.
      Managers are more likely to employ people from  designated  groups  in
      the period immediately prior to the bonus cycle. However, DPE  has  no
      way of tracking how long these people remain in those  positions.  The
      solution would be to  create  an  environment  that  is  conducive  to
      employing people from the designated groups.”


   7. Achievements in the Analysis and Risk Management programme included:


            ▪ Implementation of the Holt  Evaluation  Model  for  financial
              benchmarking of SOEs
            ▪ Quarterly Reports on SOEs performance
            ▪ Closure of SAA hedge book
            ▪ Approval of SOEs infrastructure plans
            ▪ Publication of a  report  on  the  financial  performance  of
              SOEs and a report on risk management in SOEs
   8. In respect of the Governance and Policy programme, the following  were
      among the achievements:

            ▪ Remuneration and benefits guidelines for SOE CEOs  and  Board
              members
            ▪ Guidelines for the development of shareholder compacts
            ▪ Appointment of new Board members for SOEs

   9. Ms Molefe explained that there is an absence of  specific  legislation
      governing shareholder compacts with the  SOEs.  The  compacts  drafted
      have sought to take account of different laws and regulations applying
      to a particular SOE and have become too detailed and  bulky.  Attempts
      are now being made to simplify and shorten them, and not cover all the
      relevant legislation and regulations applying to an SOE; the  SOE  has
      to abide by these anyway.


  10.  Achievements  in  the  Corporate  Strategy  and  Structure  programme
      included:


                     ▪   Energy      Review   of   generation   policy    in
                       conjunction with Department of Minerals  and  Energy;
                       approval of Eskom’s  PFMA  application  for  an  open
                       cycle gas  turbine;  and  Cabinet  approval  for  the
                       developmental electricity price.
                     ▪ Transport Approval of Transnet’s  4-point  turnaround
                       strategy; and revision of  National  Ports  Authority
                       Act to retain the  National  Ports  Authority  within
                       Transnet and removal of the regulatory function
                     ▪ Defence   Reviving South Africa’s aerospace
                       industry through the allocation of work packages for
                       selected components for the A400M aircraft; and
                       change strategy for Denel
                     ▪ Forestry  Concluded business sale and shareholder
                       agreements on the divesture of SAFCOL from Mountain
                       to Ocean Forestry and Amatola

   11.      Achievements in the Corporate Finance and Transactions programme
      included:


           ▪ Telkom  Paid out R2,4 million to Khulisa Trust and R3,1
                        million to Diabo Trust as part of the Telkom Initial
                       Public Offering
                     ▪  Alexkor    Ongoing  negotiations  with   Richterveld
                       community; and Community Public  Private  Partnership
                       package approved.
                     ▪  Eskom:     Finalised  Request  For   Proposal    for
                       disposal of Eskom Finance Company
            ▪ Transnet     Work plan for separation of SAA from Transnet
                     ▪  Denel      Approval  of  equity  sale  by  Denel  in
                       Arivia.com; and acquisition negotiations  for  Airbus
                       aircraft for the South African National Defence Force
                     ▪ Aventura  Land transfer to Forever Resorts


   12.      DPE’s budget for the  financial  year  under  review  was  R77,3
       million. Spending was within the 2% margin. The Department  received
       an unqualified audit report. For the  second  year  in  a  row,  the
       Auditor General’s Office noted “no matters of emphasis”.


 13.  The Department explained that it had made it clear to the  SOEs  that
       job losses should be avoided when they sell their  non-core  assets.
       The department has drawn up  transaction  guidelines  governing  the
       disposal of non-core entities and will not approve  of  transactions
       that do not comply with the guidelines. DPE has suggested that  SOEs
       might want to sell their assets at a somewhat reduced  price  if  it
       means that jobs can be retained. However, DPE cannot guarantee  that
       employees will not lose their jobs in any  future  restructuring  of
       the divested businesses.


   14.      Ms Molefe explained that DPE  uses  Black  Economic  Empowerment
       (BEE) Charters to ensure that appropriate people  benefit  from  its
       procurement activities.   The SOEs  use  sector  specific  charters.
       SOEs are now also required to visit service providers to check their
       BEE credentials.


   15.      Ms Molefe explained that there is a  constant  need  for  public
      awareness of the role of SOEs. “SOEs need  to  be  distinguished  from
      development agencies and even  parastatals.  SOEs  are  owned  by  the
      government, but don’t get money from the fiscus. They have  to  borrow
      from the capital markets. They have to compete in the private  sector,
      and they have to be commercially viable.  They  have  to  have  strong
      balance sheets and protect their credit.  They play a  major  role  in
      economic development. Parastatals don’t have the  same  pressures  and
      get money from the fiscus at times. Parastatals  have  a  more  direct
      socio-economic  role.”


   16  Ms Molefe explained that the two key challenges that  DPE  confronted
      in the 2005 financial year were “lack of access to suitably  qualified
      and experienced staff and lack of synchronization between DPE and  the
      SOEs”.  The SOEs have highly skilled  technical  experts  compared  to
      DPE. This makes DPE’s oversight of the SOEs particularly  challenging.
      The salary scales in the civil service also limit the possibilities of
      DPE  employing  people  with  the  requisite  skills.   The  lack   of
      synchronization between DPE and the SOEs, including differing planning
      cycles, was being addressed, said Ms Molefe.


   17.      A key concern of DPE over the next 3  years  is  to  effectively
      monitor the implementation of  the  infrastructure  programme  of  the
      SOEs.  Major emphasis will also be placed on a risk management  system
      for SOEs. A  new  benchmarking  programme  to  track  the  operational
      efficiency of SOEs is to be introduced. DPE  is  to  “tighten  target-
      setting and its oversight role on SOEs”. Its concerns also include:


                     ▪ Energy    New electricity generation  by  independent
                       power producers
                       Restructuring   of   the   electricity   distribution
                       industry
                       Multi-year price determinations
                       Benchmarking Eskom’s performance
                       Accelerate development  of  the  Pebble  Bed  Modular
                       Reactor

            ▪  Transport     Private  sector  participation  (PSP)  in  the
              ports sector
                       PSP in Spoornet’s branch lines, Blue Train  and  core
                       network operations
                       Separation of SAA from Transnet
                       Establishment   and   monitoring    of    operational
                       benchmarks

            ▪ Defence      Denel’s change strategy
                       Denel’s Recapitalisation
                       Partnership programme for Denel
                       Further research and development support for Denel
                       Stimulate advanced manufacturing in  the  non-defence
                       economy, such as composites and the aerospace cluster
                       initiative
                       Further market access for Denel through  co-operation
                       with the Department of Defence and Armscor

            ▪ Forestry     Supply  and  demand  analysis  of  the  forestry
              sector
                       Review of forestry and downstream  industry  analysis
                       by Departments of Trade and Industry, and  Water  and
                       Forestry
                       Develop strategy for future role of Safcol
                       Define  Safcol’s  new   reporting   relationship   to
                       government

                     ▪ ICT Assess state investments in ICT:  Arivia,  Telkom
                       and the second network operator
                       Seek to consolidate state ICT assets
                       Define government’s role in this sector
                       Define Arivia’s role in ICT sector


   18 DPE will also be  taking  forward  its  work  on  the  “Joint  Project
       Facility” covered in the Committee’s Budget  Report.  This  includes
       investment  in  Africa,  human  resource  development  and  capacity
       building,  ICT,  pipelines  and  energy,  property,  and  industrial
       cluster development.


   19.      Clearly, the last financial year was a year  of  transition  for
       DPE, but much indeed got done, especially if it is considered that  a
       new and young management team is at the helm. DPE’s  current  clarity
       of purpose is an outcome of the work done in the year  under  review.
       The Department is commended  for  spending  98%  of  its  budget  and
       achieving the audited report it did.


   20.      While  emphasising  the  distinct  and  specific  roles  of  the
      Committee and the Department, and recognizing the  oversight  role  of
      the Committee, Ms Molefe said she is keen to see a  more  co-operative
      relationship between the Committee and the Department. She  also  said
      that DPE would be able to submit its annual reports by the  30  August
      deadline suggested by the Committee, especially as it  does  quarterly
      reports anyway. The Committee welcomes the attitude of the DG. We also
      appreciate the candour and openness with which the DG relates  to  the
      Committee.


   21.      The Committee is interested to see progress in finalizing a risk
      management framework to apply to SOEs in general, and  hopes  that  it
      will begin to come into effect from 1 April next year as proposed. The
      Committee supports DPE’s proposal that risk management be included  as
      part of the new shareholder management model. The  Committee  welcomes
      the establishment of the Risk Management Forum including all the SOEs.
        The Committee also notes the progress in finalizing  the  guidelines
      on the remuneration and benefits of  SOEs Board members and CEOs.


   22.       The  Committee  notes  the  progress  in  finalizing  the   new
      shareholder  management  model.  The  Committee  was  briefed  on  the
      proposed model earlier this year. We fully support the view  that  key
      aspects of the model should apply  to  SOEs  generally,  except  where
      there are specific circumstances that would  make  this  unreasonable,
      and we certainly think aspects of the model should be in  legislation.
      We also agree that there should be legislation on shareholder compacts
      – and this should apply to SOEs generally, unless there  are  specific
      reasons that make this untenable.


   23.       Of course, the Committee, as we have  repeatedly  said  in  our
      reports, does not believe that  SOEs  are  some  sort  of  “employment
      agency”. We appreciate the SOEs are under certain  pressures.  But  we
      feel more should be done to retain  jobs, and if there  is  absolutely
      no other option, job losses should be dealt with  through  appropriate
      social plans and other ways, including effective negotiations with the
      trade unions. We do not fully  understand  the  practical  meaning  of
      DPE’s position on job-retention relating to the SOEs sale of  non-core
      assets referred to in section 13 above, but  we  are  encouraged,  and
      want to pursue this matter further with DPE.


   24.      While the majority in the Committee appreciates aspects  of  the
      DG’s distinction between SOEs and parastatals, there are aspects  that
      are very debatable. The Committee would like to  engage  further  with
      the Ministry and Department on the issues related to  this,  and  also
      develop our own views on this. An appropriate opportunity will have to
      be found for this.  Perhaps at one of our annual beginning of the year
      workshops of the Ministry, Department and Portfolio Committee?


   25.      The Committee particularly welcomes DPE’s commitment to “tighten
      target-setting and its oversight role.” As DPE will appreciate, we, as
      the Committee,  also  need  to  tighten  our  oversight  role  of  DPE
      particularly and also the SOEs.  To play our role more effectively, we
      require DPE’s presentation on its annual report to  be  more  pointed,
      and more clearly draw out  the  relationship  between  the  measurable
      objectives in its strategic plan for the financial year under  review,
      the use of its budget during that year, and progress in respect of the
      main measurable objectives. In the way DPE presented  its  report,  it
      was not always clear what had been achieved within the 2005  financial
      year and what in the six months since then. We refer again to  section
      A5 of our last year’s report and section B above in respect of what we
      need to play our role effectively in  processing  annual  reports.  Of
      course, we appreciate that the 2005 financial year was unique in  some
      senses for DPE, but next year  we  will  be  more  demanding  in  this
      regard. We are encouraged by the DG’s agreement that  the  committee’s
      requirements are fair and reasonable,  and  will  be  met  in  greater
      measure next year.


   26.      Given the nature of  the  parliamentary  programme,  there  will
      inevitably be time and other constraints, but the Committee is to try,
      as far as possible, to arrange briefings on  DPE’s  quarterly  reports
      and monitor progress more constantly. The Committee is keen to  pursue
      with DPE the more technical  aspects  of  its  strengthened  oversight
      role. Among the issues we need to understand better are the following:


            ▪ The challenges in finalizing shareholder compacts
            ▪ The new  benchmarking  programme  to  track  the  operational
              efficiency of SOEs,  including  financial  benchmarking  with
              such methods as the Holt Evaluation Model
            ▪ Guidelines for the disposal of the SOEs non-core assets
            ▪ SOEs investment map and the “investment dashboard”

   27.      Overall, while there are obvious capacity  challenges,  and  the
      Department is aware of this, the  Committee  is  encouraged  by  DPE’s
      achievements in the year under review, its progress in the six  months
      since, and its strategy and programmes for the period ahead.


D.    Transnet
   1. Transnet was represented  by  Board  Chairperson,  Mr  Fred  Phaswana;
      Group Chief Executive, Ms Maria Ramos; Group Chief Financial  Officer,
      Mr Chris Wells;  Group  Executive:  Strategy  and  Transformation,  Mr
      Pradeep Maharaj; Group Treasurer, Ms Swazi Tshabalala; Chief Executive
      Officer of SAA, Dr Khaya Ngqula; and Chief Financial Officer  of  SAA,
      Ms Tryphosa Ramano.

   2. Mr Phaswana explained that, since last year’s briefing, the respective
      roles of the Board and the executive had been finalized  and  Transnet
      was much clearer both about the challenges confronting it and what  is
      required  to  meet  the  challenges.  Transnet  was   finalizing   its
      shareholder compact with the government and it would be  available  by
      next year’s briefing on the annual report.


   3. ‘Never before”, he said, “has Transnet been required to spend so  much
      money in so short a time. The question is not money, but capacity, and
      not just capacity, but getting the outcomes, and  not  just  outcomes,
      but meeting the  deadlines.”  He  was  clear  that  “given  the  will,
      Transnet’s tasks are eminently do-able”


   4. Ms Ramos also stressed that, less than finances,  Transnet  is  facing
      capacity challenges “across the length  and  breadth  of  the  group”.
      Among the  skills  required  are  project  management,  financial  and
      engineering, and others in several technical areas which Transnet  had
      long ago stopped developing.  Even train drivers need  new  skills  to
      manage the new technologies being installed on  locomotives.  Transnet
      had therefore adjusted its turnaround strategy.  It  retained  the  4-
      point plan but had merged corporate governance  and  risk  management,
      and introduced human capital as its 4th pillar –  so  its  current  4-
      point turn-around plan is to:


       ▪ Redirect the business
       ▪ Restructure the balance sheet
       ▪ Ensure corporate governance and risk management
       ▪ Develop human capital

   5. Transnet had made further advances towards becoming a focused  freight
      transport  company,  with  rail,  port  and  pipeline  operations.  It
      functions through  Spoornet,  NPA  (National  Ports  Authority),  SAPO
      (South African  Ports  Operation)  and  Petronet.  Transnet  has  also
      decided to  retain  Transwerk,  which  is  the  rail  engineering  and
      maintenance division, and Protekon, which provide  project  management
      and engineering skills.  The  technical  work  to  unbundle  SAA  from
      Transnet will be completed by March 2006. The passenger rail  services
      will be transferred to the Department of Transport and negotiations in
      this regard are in the final stages. Transnet  had  received  approval
      from the Minister, in terms of the PFMA, to dispose of a number of its
      non-core assets.

   6. At 13% of GDP, transport and logistics costs are far too high compared
      to our competitors, and have to be reduced. Tariff increases  averaged
      2,6% , below the 4% inflation for 2005 financial year. But the  answer
      does not  lie  just  in  tariff  reductions.  Transnet  has  to  fully
      implement its turnaround strategy to ensure that it reduces  transport
      costs on a sustainable basis.

   7. From a loss of R6,3 billion in the 2004  financial year, Transnet made
      a profit of R6,8 billion in the 2005 financial year. Key aspects of an
      understanding of Transnet’s finances include the following:

       ▪ In 2004 there was a R4,2 billion impairment,  mainly  relating  to
         aircraft. In 2005 impairment of assets amounted to R153 million.

       ▪ In 2005 R6 billion was paid to unwind SAA’s hedge book.

       ▪ The iron ore contract was re-negotiated and pricing is no longer
         based on the rand-dollar exchange rate and world iron ore prices
         but is now Rand-based.  Accordingly, the embedded derivative
         liability of R3,9  billion was reversed.

       ▪ In 2005 there was a fair value profit of R4,7billion relating
         primarily to the reversal of the embedded derivative liability of
         R3,9 billion and the mark to market (?) shares.

   8. Transnet’s turnover increased by 6% to  R46,2  billion  and  operating
      expenses increased by just  2,7%,  while  inflation  averaged  4%,  so
      Transnet experienced real growth. All the core businesses  experienced
      real  growth.   Profit  from  operations  before  net   finances   and
      impairments increased by 35,5% to R5,9 billion. The  operating  profit
      margin increased from 0,4% in 2004 to 12,6% in 2005 – the highest in 6
      years Capital and reserves are up from R9,8 billion to R16,9  billion.
      Derivative liabilities have been reduced from R14,1  billion  to  R1,2
      billion. The gearing ratio has been reduced from 83% to 67%.  Transnet
      wants to reduce it to between 50 and 55 % over the  next  five  years.
      Transnet  believes  that  its  volatility  is  over  and  it   expects
      relatively stable operating profits with margins above 12% in the next
      few years.   Capital expenditure of R5,6 billion was spent during  the
      year, of which R3,7 billion was spent  on  expansion  projects.   Cash
      flow from operations increased by R2,6 billion  to  R7,5  billion,  an
      increase of 51%.

   9. Transnet has an actuarial liability of  R4,7  billion  on  its  Second
      Defined Benefit Fund, and will have to fund this amount in the next  5
      years or so. Transnet hopes to find a solution to this by the  end  of
      this financial year.

  10. Transnet’s progress since last year in respect of the first pillar of
      its 4-point turnaround strategy, re-directing its business, includes:


         ▪ Re-engineering core business processes: efficiency, cost
           reduction, service delivery, market share increase
         ▪ Top management in place
         ▪ Restructuring of corporate office towards being more focused
           and slim near completion
         ▪ Investment Plan of R40 billion approved

  11. Progress in respect of the second pillar, restructuring the balance
      sheet, includes:


         ▪ Approval of exit of most non-core assets
         ▪ Closure of SAA hedge book and removal of embedded derivatives
         ▪ Unwinding of MTN share transaction structure in progress
         ▪ SAA recapitalization agreed at R2,4 billion


   12.      In respect of the third pillar, corporate  governance  and  risk
      management, progress includes:


         ▪   Board’s   Governance,   Remuneration   and   Risk   Management
           committees now functioning
         ▪  The  executive   committee   and   sub-committees   now   fully
           functional
         ▪ Risk committees established at business units
         ▪ Enterprise Risk Management Framework in progress
         ▪ Fraud Prevention Plan and Ethics Programme established
         ▪ Financial management and control strengthened
         ▪ Internal audit outsourced


   13.      In respect of the fourth new pillar,  human  capital,   progress
includes:

         ▪ Decision taken to appoint executive
         ▪ Organisational design and development process approved
         ▪ Talent management policy established
         ▪ Employment equity policy updated
         ▪ Training and development
         ▪ Performance management and reward


   14.      Spoornet experienced a loss of R21 million in 2005. The loss  in
   2004 was
      R668 million, including embedded derivatives.  Spoornet  is  the  only
      core business that is underperforming.   But  it  is  the  largest  of
      Transnet’s divisions and its success is crucial to Transnet’s success.
      “Spoornet  remains  both  our  biggest  challenge  and  our   greatest
      opportunity. The bulk of our work focuses on Spoornet”, says Ms Ramos.
      R16 billion is to be spent upgrading infrastructure over  the  next  5
      years. Transnet aims to improve Spoornet’s profitability by  about  R2
      billion over the next 5 years  through  operational  efficiencies  and
      asset upgrades.  The aim is for Spoornet to reduce costs and  increase
      volumes. The current 28 million tons of iron ore transported is to  be
      increased to 41 million tons in the  next  5  years.  The  current  67
      million tons on the coal line is to be increased to 86 million tons by
      2009.  General freight is to  be  increased  from  86  million  to  88
      million tons over the short  term,  and  a  strategy  is  underway  to
      increase this significantly within five years.


  15. NPA secured a profit before tax of R2,7 billion, a 26,1%  increase  on
      2004.
      NPA spent R1,1 billion on capital expenditure  The major  capex  spend
      on projects related  to  the  construction  of  the  Ngqura  port  and
      expansion of the container and car terminals at Durban port. NPA is to
      spend more than R1,billion on capital expansion in the 2006  financial
      year mainly at the Durban, Richards Bay and Ngqura ports.
  16. SAPO’s profit before tax was R1,9 billion, compared  to  R348  million
      in
      2004. However, about R1 billion of this was a once-off gain  from  the
      ending of the embedded derivative and fair value  adjustments.   There
      was an impressive 27% increase in volumes of vehicles  handled  and  a
      12%  increase  of  containers.   SAPO   invested   R591   million   in
      infrastructure. SAPO aims to spend over R1 billion in Capex  in  2006,
      mainly on equipment at its main ports operations.


  17. Petronet’s profit before tax increased by 39,3% to R333  million.  Its
      return on
      assets of 15% is in line with  international  benchmarks.  The  coming
      regulation may have an impact on Petronet  but  it  is  too  early  to
      specify details. Petronet is planning  a  new  multi-product  pipeline
      that will cost between R3 and R5 billion depending on the gauge of the
      pipeline.


  18. Of Transnet’s R40,8 billion capital expenditure over the next 5 years,
      R16,1
      billion is to be spent by Spoornet, R15,4 billion  by  the  NPA,  R5,1
      billion by SAPO and R4,2 billion by Petronet. Transnet expects  to  be
      able to fund about R28 billion of this from its own sources  and  will
      have to borrow about R12 billion from the  capital  markets.  It  will
      also have to fund about R13 billion to pay the bonds  and  loans  that
      are maturing in the next 5 years. Hence Transnet may  have  to  borrow
      R25 billion over the next five years. “However, this is the worst-case
      scenario”, said Ms Swazi  Tshabalala, “and does not take into  account
      the gains that are expected to  be  made  through  re-engineering  our
      businesses,  selling  our  non-core  assets   and  implementing  other
      aspects of our turnaround  strategy.  The  reality  is  likely  to  be
      different, possibly vastly different,  from  this  projection  of  R25
      billion.”


  19. Dr Khaya Ngqula, CEO of  SAA,  explained  in  detail  the  challenging
      nature of
      the airline industry globally, especially at present   Profit  margins
      ranged from 2.4% in the USA, to 2.1% in  Europe and 4.5% in Australia.
      Low-cost carriers are out-performing the established network  carriers
      with an average 19% gap. “We face  a very tough and  hostile  external
      environment. Creating shareholder value is a continuous challenge  for
      airlines all over the world”, he said.

   20.      SAA’s new Bambanani strategy has three pillars:


                     ▪ People:   Develop and nurture world-class talent
                       through enhanced training and performance management
                     ▪ Patronage:     Provide seamless travel experience
                       to customers and deliver excellent internal support
                       services
                     ▪ Profit:   Provide sustainable return on invested
                       capital to investors


   21.      The key initiatives in respect of the focus on people include:


          ▪ Redesign of organizational structure
          ▪ Collapsing management structures
          ▪ Focus on risk management
          ▪ Customer services training of all employees
          ▪ Sales organization restructure and sales forces training

   22.      A new SAA leadership group is in place, based on  the  following
principles:

         ▪ A focus on people
         ▪ A focus on strengthening risk management
         ▪  An  aggressive  focus  on  customer  service   throughout   the
           organization
         ▪ A culture of excellence with profit and cost control
   23.      The key initiatives in respect of the patronage  pillar  of  the
       strategy includes
      product improvement like  the  highly  regarded  “lie-flat”  seats  to
      London  becoming part of the Star Alliance partnership, and reviews of
      service standards.  Major  achievements  include  the  VIP  programme,
      customer service training and sales training. There is also  going  to
      be a focus  on  talent  and  performance  management,  a  distribution
      strategy, and the optimization of working capital.

   24. Key initiatives in respect of  the  profit  pillar  of  the  strategy
      include growth in Africa, the Asian market entrance, increasing  cargo
      business, the zero agency  Commission  rollout,  loan  and  leases  of
      aircraft,  and  migration  to   the   Amadeus   Reservations   system.
      Achievements include daily routes to Mumbai,  Zurich,  Paris  and  Sao
      Paulo; new routes to Washington, Zanzibar and Livingstone; and  a  new
      code-share agreement with United and Austrian airlines.

    25.     SAA experienced a net profit of R966 million in  2005,  compared
       to the loss of R8,6 billion in 2004. There were specific and  unique
       reasons for much of the loss which was dealt with in our last year’s
       report. There was a 6,8% increase in total revenues this  year.  The
       average load factor grew from 67% to 70%.  SAA wants to improve this
       to above 75%, as most airlines have a load of 80%. There  was  a  5%
       gross profit margin despite a more than 40% increase  in  oil  price
       The gross profit margin of 5%  was the  highest  in  the  last  five
       years  Operating costs increased by a mere 1,9% as  a  result  of  a
       cost cutting exercise. Net asset value of a  negative  R2,6  billion
       improved to a positive R2 billion. The  return  on  market-value  of
       operated  aircraft  was  6,2%.  Provided  the  oil  price  does  not
       increase, SAA aims to improve this to 10% within 5 years.  SAA  paid
       R1,6 billion of its R4 billion loan from Transnet


    26. Ms Ramano explained that SAA was  concerned  about  the  increasing
        price of oil. For the current financial year there was an estimated
        increase of R1 billion in  the  fuel  bill,  without  increases  in
        fares. Transnet also pointed out that by international  benchmarks,
        they have about 3000 too many people employed.


    27. Most of the financial gains have come from operational
        efficiencies, said Chief Financial Officer, Ms Tryphosa Ramano. By
        restricting the travel of senior management and other staff
        members, it is estimated that SAA saved R100 milllion, including
        the cost of accommodation and meals. “For our gains to be
        sustainable, it’s simple. Do what we learned in Accounting 101.
        Increase revenue, reduce costs, focus on profits, improve
        productivity and efficiencies. But this will require a change in
        mindset.”


    28. Ms Ramano explained that the previous management had sold  aircraft
        far below their market value in transgression of the PFMA  and  had
        taken bonuses in (??Technical) of R100  million  when  the  company
        experienced a loss of R8 billion. These matters had  been  referred
        to the government to act on.


    29. Questioned by the Committee, Ms Ramano explained that the recent
        SAA strike caused a loss of approximately R150 million. “Had we
        conceded to the strikers original demands, the company would have
        lost R1,6 billion of value in the long term”, said Ms Ramano. Dr
        Ngqula conceded that management did not handle the strike well and
        should have communicated better with its customers and the public.
        “This was the first strike ever in SAA’s history. We were not
        properly prepared for it. And strikes are very complex, very
        painful. We learned valuable lessons from it.”


    30. SAA’s key priorities over the medium  term  include  reviewing  its
        business   model   to   compete   with   the   low-cost   carriers,
        “revolutionizing its fleet”, developing alliances and partnerships,
        and simplifying travel arrangements for passengers. At present, 75%
        of SAA’s revenue comes from passengers, 9% from cargo and 16%  from
        other income. SAA wants to increase its transport of cargo to 20  %
        by 2010. Most airlines get approximately 40% of their revenue  from
        cargo.  59%  of  SAA’s  revenue  is  derived   from   international
        passengers, 25% from domestic passengers,  and  16%  from  regional
        passengers. Currently, 25% of SAA passengers  are  on  the  Voyager
        programme. SAA wants to increase this to 35% in 5 years  time.  SAA
        also wants to increase the utilization of aircraft.


    31. Challenged by the Committee, Transnet explained that they are
        determined to keep job losses to a minimum with the sale of non-
        core assets and other aspects of restructuring. “We did not start
        by saying we have financial losses, let’s see how many jobs we can
        get rid of to save money”, said Ms Ramos. “We started with the need
        to restructure Transnet, and the jobs that are necessary are
        decided in this context.” Transnet is in constant negotiations with
        the unions about these issues and is committed to implementing its
        Social Plan. Some of the non-core businesses are running losses and
        will be liquidated unless they are sold.   The current Head Office
        staff of more than 400 will be reduced by 250. Other possible job
        losses are difficult to tell at present. The fulfillment of
        Transnet’s capital expenditure plans will contribute to economic
        growth and job-creation, it was stressed.


    32. Ms Ramos explained that negotiations for the sale of the MTN shares
        held by the MCell Trust on behalf of the Second Defined Benefit
        Fund to Umthunzi Telecoms Consortium, were terminated following a
        failure to reach agreement.


    33. Ms Ramos explained that there were 4 cases of non-compliance with
        the PFMA. These relate to an Air Tanzania exchange control approval
        matter, lack of executive authorization for investment in Spoornet
        Zambia, lack of shareholders’ agreement for participation in a port-
        related joint venture in Ghana, and the use of deposits by the
        Housing Division of Transnet. All of these occurred in prior years
        and did not have a material impact on Transnet.  All of the matters
        are being attended to.


    34. Ms Ramos emphasized that “while the results are pleasing, we still
        have a long way to go. There are no short-cuts, and the turnaround
        strategy will take about 5 years to properly implement”


    35. The presentations made to the Committee were clear and accessible
        and the Committee expresses its appreciation. It was a more
        confident, clear and positive Board and management team from
        Transnet that the Committee met this year. The Committee feels that
        considerable progress has been made in refining and implementing
        the turnaround strategy since the previous financial year, and
        welcomes the focus on human capital as a major pillar of the
        strategy. In fact, the Committee has been more concerned than we
        have suggested in our reports, that Transnet will have major
        capacity challenges in implementing its ambitious strategy, and we
        are now more at ease with Transnet’s clear acknowledgment of the
        challenges and commitment to deal with them. This is not to say, of
        course, that the capacity challenges will be easy to meet; but the
        first major task in responding to them is surely to acknowledge the
        depth, scope and nature of the problem? Transnet has certainly done
        that – and we wish them well as they tackle it.


    36. The Committee is concerned about pending job losses, but feels
        otherwise that, overall, Transnet’s strategy is fairly clear and
        basically correct. There are many commendable aspects to it.
        Without detracting from the considerable value that the current
        leadership brings to Transnet, the Committee cannot understand why
        key aspects of this strategy were not decided on and implemented 5
        years ago! It would have been enormously beneficial for the country
        if this had happened.


    37. Lacking the necessary technical expertise and struck by the
        magnitude of the financial turnaround, from a R6,3 billion loss in
        2004 to a R6,8 billion profit in 2005, the Committee was initially
        cautious about being too enthusiastic about the results. What
        exactly do the very nice figures mean? To what extent does this
        turnaround reflect real, material gains as against a juggling of
        figures to take account of  new accounting standards and ways of
        reporting?  To what extent are the results due to the fact that
        there were major once-off losses in 2004, such as the SAA hedges
        and impairment of aircraft, and so the 2005 results are not as good
        as the figures suggest? To what extent are the much better results
        a consequence of the implementation of the turnaround strategy and
        the re-engineering of the business units? More specifically, how
        much is due to greater efficiencies in operations, cost-reductions,
        greater productivity, increase in volumes and greater market share?
         Crucially, how sustainable are these results and what are the
        prospects of even better results?  Of course, there was not the
        time or means to fully come to terms with these issues, but
        following the engagement with the Transnet team and having
        familiarized ourselves with some of the public discourse on
        Transnet’s results, the Committee feels that the results are very
        impressive and promising, and due in good part to the
        implementation of the turnaround strategy. The Committee also feels
        that the results provide a good foundation for the financial
        turnaround to be sustainable, and looks forward to seeing what the
        2006 results are like.


    38. The Committee welcomes the progress being made in terms of a new
        risk management framework for the group and the establishment of
        risk management committees at all levels. The Committee would, in
        future, like to be briefed more fully on this, and will make
        appropriate arrangements with Transnet to do this.


    39. A major concern of the Committee over the next few years will be
        monitoring progress in the implementation of Transnet’s capital
        expenditure plans. We will discuss with Transnet the feasibility of
        regular reports in this regard. As a Committee, we have to consider
        whether we need to develop skills to be more effective in this
        area. The Committee welcomes Ms Ramos’ commitment to ensuring that
        South African companies are fully briefed about the role they can
        play in the infrastructure roll-out. Welcome too is the commitment
        to ensure that, wherever possible, non-South African companies
        involved in the infrastructure programme transfer skills to South
        Africans.


    40. In view of the challenges being confronted by Spoornet, the
        Committee will seek to pay particular attention to Spoornet. While
        recognizing the difficulties, the Committee feels that greater
        attention should be given to increasing the general freight volumes
        by more than the 2 million tons proposed over the next few years.


    41. The Committee exchanged at some length with Transnet about job
        losses. The Committee appreciates the complexities, but also feels
        obliged, in the public interest, to constantly raise issues about
        this. Our overall concerns in this regard are set out in section H2
         below.  We also stress the need for Transnet to ensure that,
        wherever possible, labour-intensive methods are deployed to roll
        out the capital infrastructure.


    42. In respect of the sale of non-core assets, the Committee  expresses
        its concern that  the  Black  Economic  Empowerment  (BEE)  targets
        should indeed be broad-based, and within our capacity  constraints,
        and to the extent consistent with our oversight role,  we  will  be
        monitoring this carefully.


    43.  The  Committee  finds  SAA’s  financial   turnaround   impressive,
        particularly because the oil price increased by 40%  and  the  rand
        appreciated  14%  (so  reducing  the  income   from   international
        passengers). While recognizing the major challenges, the  Committee
        hopes that the financial performance will  be  sustained  and  even
        improved. The  Bambanani  strategy  holds  much  promise,  and  the
        Committee hopes it will  be  properly  implemented.  The  Committee
        welcomes  SAA’s  decision  to  introduce  low-cost   flights.   The
        Committee is keen to monitor progress in regard to  increasing  the
        amount of cargo carried. Is the target of  20%  by  2010  ambitious
        enough, given that
        most airlines draw about 40% of their business from cargo?


    44. The Committee welcomes Dr Ngqula comments about SAA’s handling of
        the strike. It largely overlaps with the Committee’s views. Welcome
        too is Dr Ngqula’s strong commitment to reducing luggage theft on
        SAA flights. “The theft of luggage is too high”, he said. “It’s
        totally, totally unacceptable. You must know from me that we’re
        going to fix this. We can do all these good things, but if people
        cannot get their luggage, they’re not going to want to fly.” We
        will be holding Dr Ngqula’s to his words, and will monitor the
        situation keenly. In 2004, luggage theft cost SAA  R10 million.


    45. Questioned by the Committee, Dr Ngqula insisted that there were
        sound reasons for the exit or pending exit of several senior
        managers. “There is no exodus of senior managers. That’s a
        perception created by the media”, he said. The Committee is unable
        to express a specific view on Dr Ngqula’s response, but raises this
        issue because it is in the public domain.


    46. The Committee welcomes SAA’s referral of the matters referred to in
        section 27 (?) above to the Minister. We will monitor developments
        in this regard.


    47. Again, while not detracting from the considerable value that the
        current leadership brings to SAA, the Committee feels that key
        aspects of the current SAA strategy could well have been introduced
        several years ago. SAA and the country would have benefited
        enormously. The Committee wishes the new SAA leadership well in
        implementing their new strategy.


    48. A bill will have to be passed in parliament to give effect  to  the
        separation of SAA from Transnet.  To  give  expeditious  effect  to
        this, it would be very useful if the  Committee  is  given  a  full
        briefing  on  the  technical  and  other  issues  related  to   the
        unbundling early in the new year.


    49. The Committee notes the 4 examples of non-compliance with the PFMA
        referee to in section 32 (?) and understands that they are being
        attended to appropriately.


    50. In six months time, the Committee would also like to be briefed  on
        progress regarding the following issues:


          ▪ Transnet’s Human Resources Strategy
          ▪ Spoornet’s performance
          ▪ The Second Defined Pension Fund Liability
          ▪ The tackling of corruption within Transnet

51.   At the time of adopting this report, the  Committee  learned  that  Ms
        Maria Ramos was awarded “The Business Leader of the Year”  by  “The
        Sunday Times Business Times Top 100 Companies”  organization.  (?).
        The Committee extends its congratulations to her.

E.    Eskom

   1. Eskom was represented by the Board Chairperson, Mr Valli Moosa;  Chief
      Executive, Mr Thulani Gcabashe; Finance Director, Mr Bongani Nqwababa;
      Managing Director: Enterprises  Division,  Mr  Brian  Dames;  Managing
      Director:  Distribution  Division,  Mr  Mongezi   Ntsokolo;   Managing
      Director: External Relations,  Ms  Nthobi  Angel;  Executive  Manager:
      Office of  the  Chairman  and  Chief  Executive;  and  Public  Affairs
      Advisor, Ms Prudence Pitsie.


   2. The newly  appointed  Board  Chairperson,  Mr  Moosa,  explained  that
      Eskom’s report covered a 15-month period from 1  January  2004  to  31
      March 2005. Previously Eskom’s reporting  period  covered  a  calendar
      year.  During the year under review, Eskom changed its financial year-
      end to 31 March to meet the requirements of the PFMA.  “So our  report
      is on our adjustment year”, said Mr Moosa, “ making  comparisons  with
      the previous year’s report less easy. Still, Eskom  has  delivered  an
      exceptional  performance  for  a  variety  of  reasons   and   is   in
      exceptionally good health, from a variety  of  points  of  view.  This
      includes its financial management and the performance of management as
      a whole. This puts Eskom in a  good  position  to  pursue  the  rather
      ambitious plans government has for it over  the  next  few  years.  Of
      course, Eskom will be challenged, but when you see the results and the
      report, you will see that it’s an enterprise ready and  able  to  meet
      the challenges.”


   3. The theme of the report, explained Chief Executive,  Mr  Gcabashe,  is
      “Building Capacity, Embracing the Future”.  “This  explains  where  we
      are, the capacity we need, and the challenges we’re ready to  face  to
      ensure that our future is, indeed, a prosperous  one”,  he  said.   Mr
      Gcabashe explained that the Minister  had  finalized  the  shareholder
      compact with Eskom in June 2005 and there is now an alignment  between
      the compact, the corporate plan, the  budget  and  the  activities  of
      Eskom.   Eskom  seeks  to   “   deliver   significant   socio-economic
      development and a healthy bottom line, side by side with comprehensive
      upliftment of all South Africans. Eskom's vision is to be  the  global
      lowest-cost producer of electricity for growth and  development.  This
      is reinforced by its strategic intent, which proclaims that Eskom will
      be the pre-eminent African energy and  related  services  business  of
      global stature”. Eskom retained its position as the cheapest  producer
      of electricity in the  world  for  industrial  users  and  the  fourth
      cheapest for residential users.  According  to  the  April  2004  “NUS
      Consulting   Group   International   Electricity   Survey   and   Cost
      Comparison”, Eskom’s cost of electricity for industrial users  is  32%
      lower than its nearest rival, Canada. “In April this  year”,  said  Mr
      Gcabashe, “this gap had increased to 36%”


   4. Based on “triple bottom  line”  reporting,  with  the  addition  of  a
      “technical” component, Eskom measures and reports on  its  performance
      in a single integrated sustainability report  covering  the  following
      key aspects:


               ▪  Socio-economic:        Electrification,   BEE,   HIV/AIDS,
                 people
                                  measures
                                     ▪ Financial:      Profit  before  tax,
                                       return  on  assets,  debt:   equity,
                                       credit rating
               ▪ Occupational health,
                 safety   and   environment:        safety,    environmental
                 performance, research and development.
                                     ▪ Technical:      Plant  availability,
                                       plant reliability,  system  minutes,
                                       supply loss indices


   5 “As Eskom, we delivered on our social commitments for  the  year  under
      review”, said Mr Gcabashe. He pointed out that Eskom  electrified  222
      314  homes,  including  those  of  farm-workers,  during  the  period,
      exceeding the budget by 10 785 connections.  There is now an increased
      emphasis  on  delivering  in  the  rural  areas.    The   budget   for
      electrification capital expenditure has increased to R891 million from
      the previous year’s R586 million, with the cost  per  connection  also
      increasing because of the geographical and topographical challenges in
      providing electricity in  the  rural  areas.  A  significant  part  of
      Eskom’s delivery was to the poorer  provinces  of  the  Eastern  Cape,
      Limpopo and Kwazulu-Natal. Mr Gcabashe highlighted the  importance  of
      the  electrification  programmes  being  combined  with  other   rural
      upliftment programmes. For the current year, the budget  provides  for
      85 000 new connections. “This is of concern  to  us  as  we  have  the
      capacity to deliver more  connections,  but  the  management  of  this
      programme is not entirely in our hands,  and  we  are  discussing  the
      matter further within the  integrated  national  electricity  business
      planning unit and the  national  electrification  advisory  committee,
      which includes the Departments of Minerals and Energy, Provincial  and
      Local Government, and  National  Treasury.”   Mr  Gcabashe  said  that
      customer satisfaction levels  surveyed  by  independent  organizations
      showed an improvement  due  to  some  of  the  “Customer  Relationship
      Management” solutions implemented. A recent survey put Eskom at  close
      to 78,5%, up from 75% in April 2004.


   6.   During the period under review, Eskom revised its business model, in
      light of “new drivers for  change”.  Firstly,  the  market  is  to  be
      restructured  to  bring  in  independent  power  producers.  Secondly,
      Eskom’s surplus electricity generation capacity is being eroded and it
      has to create new capacity. Thirdly, it has at  its  disposal  limited
      human, financial and technical  resources.  As  a  response  to  these
      “drivers’, Eskom is to focus on its core business and curtail its non-
      core activities. Eskom Enterprise has been  restructured,  and  a  new
      enterprise division has been established within the holding company to
      “design, build and refurbish generation, transmission and distribution
      infrastructure”


   7.   As part of its triple bottom line reporting, Eskom referred  to  the
      following key sustainability initiatives:


                     ▪ Development  of  the  Eskom  sustainability  strategy
                       and performance index
                     ▪ Global partnerships and alliances
                     ▪ Key  research  projects  in  support  of  sustainable
                       development
                     ▪  Extensive  demand-side   management   programme   to
                       promote more efficient use of electricity
   8.  Eskom had procured R10,3 billion worth of goods and services from BEE
      enterprises. 66% of this was with the major BEE  companies,  24%  with
      SMMEs and 10% with women-owned companies. With the  implementation  of
      Eskom’s major capital expansion programme, significantly more will  be
      procured from BEE companies in the next five years.
   9.  Many of Eskom's corporate social investment initiatives  are  carried
      out through the Eskom Development Foundation, which spent R157 million
      during the period under review. This included  programmes  for  skills
      development, job creation,  education  and  health;  support  for  the
      “Proudly South African” campaign; and sponsorship of  several  “cause-
      related programmes with emphasis on women, children  and  people  with
      disabilities”. Eskom has also been actively involved in the  13  rural
      nodes identified by the government. Eskom also offers scholarships for
      mathematics and science students.  Mr  Gcabashe  said  that  Eskom  is
      recognized as “one of the top 3 good corporate grant-makers  over  the
      past 6 years and, for the third successive year, as the SOE making the
      strongest contribution  to  development  and  being  the  most  caring
      company in South Africa”


   10. 57, 9%  of Eskom’s managerial, professional and supervisory staff are
      Black and 28,9% women.   2%  of  Eskom’s  workforce  are  people  with
      disabilities. Of the 1568 bursaries offered, 85% went  to  Blacks  and
      55% to women. “We pay particular attention to  developing  mathematics
      and science skills”,  said  Mr  Gcabashe.  Eskom  also  invested  R654
      million in the development and training of employees.


   11.      Eskom had also invested R203 million in research and development
       focused on supporting sustainable development, including  researching
       non-grid options. Most of the  projects  revolving  around  renewable
       energy are still in the research and  development  phase,  especially
       with solar and wind energy. Mr  Gcabashe  said  that  these  projects
       cannot be operationalised at this stage.


  12.  Eskom reported that its relationship  with  the  Pebble  Bed  Modular
      Reactor (PBMR) has significantly changed,  ending  Eskom’s  historical
      role as a catalyst for the project. It’s role has  been  redefined  to
      being “PBMR demonstration power plant host,  customer  for  commercial
      units, and a shareholder in PBMR  Pty  Ltd”.   Eskom  will  no  longer
      invest in the project, and will dilute its present  shareholding  over
      time to about 5%.  Eskom is more likely to become a customer of  PBMR,
      rather than a developer. Eskom will only buy the technology if  it  is
      economically beneficial to do so.


  13. As reported last year, Eskom has a  very  advanced  and  comprehensive
      HIV/Aids programme, and this was  consolidated  in  the  period  under
      review. “We have now included our HIV/Aids performance  in  our  human
      resources  sustainability  index”,  said  Mr  Gcabashe.    Eskom   had
      contributed  R83  million  to  develop  an  HIV  vaccine,  and  is  to
      contribute a further R30 million by 2007.


  14. Eskom’s profit after tax for the 15-month reporting  period  was  R5,2
      billion, compared to R3,4 billion in the previous 12  months.  Revenue
      increased from R32,9 billion to R42, 9 billion. Capital  and  reserves
      were up from R40,6 billion to R44,8  billion.  The  debt:equity  ratio
      improved from 0,18 to 3.0. The return on assets improved from 10,4% to
      12,7%. Total productivity was positive to the extent of  R485  million
      or 1,8%.


  15. The key challenges for the period under review were safety, coal
      logistics and the availability of generator transformers. Eskom
      experienced an increase in the number of work-related fatalities from
      5 the previous year to 18 in the period under review. Public
      electrical fatalities, caused mainly by illegal connections, increased
      from 27 to 39. Eskom is intensifying its efforts to ensure greater
      safety.


  16. Eskom’s key focus areas for now and the next few years are:
         ▪ Safety
         ▪ Capital expansion programme
         ▪ Meeting the skills requirement
         ▪ Funding strategy
         ▪ Restructuring of distribution
         ▪ Electrical connections for the current financial year
         ▪ Meeting the 2006 winter demand


  17. Eskom’s capital expenditure is aimed at addressing the future capacity
      needs of the country. Eskom will be investing R84,2 billion in capital
      expenditure over the next 5 years. Eskom, together with independent
      power producers, intend to provide 5,304 megawatts of new electricity
      in this period.  The initial projects are aimed at increasing peaking
      capacity. In 2007, Eskom will commission two open cycle gas turbine
      power stations with a total capacity of 1000 MW to meet peaking
      demand. Independent power providers are meant to build and operate
      another two such stations with a total of 1000 MW by 2008. Eskom is
      also returning to service 3 power stations that were mothballed 15
      years ago. These are envisaged to contribute 3600 MW between 2005 and
      2011. The plan is to resurrect these stations one unit at a time, with
      Unit 6 at the Camden power station already successfully brought back
      to service and now operational.


  18. Basically, Eskom’s capital expenditure plans revolve around:




                     ▪ Generation:     Simunye  (Camden,  Grootvlei,Komati);
                       open cycle gas turbine; planning
                     ▪ Transmission:  Cape  strengthening;  Platnium  basin;
                       Coega supply; refurbishment
      ▪ Distribution:     Refurbishment; reinforcement of plants

  19. Once again, the Committee congratulates Eskom on its achievements, and
      reinforces the positive comments we made about Eskom in our last
      year’s report.  We are interested to note that, unlike last year,
      Eskom is now more positive about the delivery of electricity in rural
      areas, and has made good progress in this regard, certainly more than
      was suggested possible during last year’s briefing. The Committee
      shares Eskom’s concern about the limited budget for connections during
      the current financial year.


  20. The Committee fully supports Eskom’s focus on the more efficient use
      of electricity by its customers. It would be very useful if parliament
      as a whole was apprised on the need for this as well as Eskom’s
      campaign, so that we can encourage people in our constituencies to
      conserve energy. Our committee will raise this with the other relevant
      committees to see how this can be taken forward.


  21. The Committee is aware that Eskom is exploring alternative sources of
      energy, including more environmentally-friendly and renewable forms,
      but we have not sufficiently engaged with Eskom on this, and will do
      so in future. With the massive new generation of electricity planned,
      there are obviously concerns about the effect of greenhouse gases and
      other environmental issues, and the Committee will work with the
      relevant portfolio committees to monitor this.  The Committee
      understands that Eskom is to reduce its stake in the PBMR project to
      5%, but will consult with the other relevant portfolio committees to
      establish the need for us to be more acquainted with the project.


  22. The Committee expressed its concern at the power outages in
      Johannesburg and the need for Eskom to assist to avoid these. The
      Committee is aware that the Minerals and Energy Portfolio Committee
      had organised a briefing recently on this, and had also expressed its
      concern. Mr Moosa made it very clear that Eskom would do whatever is
      necessary. “We can’t take a narrow business approach to this issue. We
      also need to be proactive and work more closely with City Power and
      the municipality. I have already met Mayor Masondo on this and will be
      having a follow-up meeting. Of course, we can’t solve the problems
      overnight, but I’m reasonably confident we will in time do so.” The
      Committee will be monitoring developments, and will co-operate with
      the other relevant committees in this regard.


  23. As with most stakeholders, the Committee feels that Eskom’s capital
      expenditure programme will be very challenging. Eskom will need to
      find the capacity and resources to effectively implement its plans.
      Given Eskom’s excellent performance so far and its determination to
      succeed, there is reason to be positive about the prospects of Eskom
      meeting its challenges, and the Committee wishes them well. The
      Committee referred to comments by some technical experts that Eskom
      should have begun with the programme sooner and will not be able to
      meet its deadlines because of the long time-span to activate
      mothballed stations, let alone new ones. Eskom’s reply was that they
      can definitely meet their deadlines. “When you bring back a plant
      that’s been mothballed, until you’ve opened it, you’re not actually
      sure what state it is in, and we’ve had a few surprises, but we are
      now better able to anticipate and manage the process. Also, what we
      are doing has not been done anywhere else in the world to this degree
      that we know of”, said Mr Gcabashe. “For the first two new stations to
      be built, the peaking plants, the 18 to 20 months construction period
      is realistic. It’s been done elsewhere. The base load stations have a
      longer lead time, but these too will come into operation in time to
      meet the country’s needs.”


  24. The Committee believes that MPs could play a more active role in
      making our constituencies more aware of the danger to life entailed in
      illegal connections and theft of conductors. Eskom is requested to
      make available pamphlets and other forms of information to the
      Committee for distribution to MPs constituency offices.


  25. The Committee welcomes Mr Moosa’s commitment that Eskom will make
      available its annual report to the Minister for tabling in parliament
      by 30 August as from next year, as well as his positive views about
      the value of public hearings on Eskom that the Committee is to
      consider in future

F.    Denel

   1. Denel was represented by Board Chairperson, Dr  Sibusiso Sibisi;  CEO,
      Mr Shaun Liebenberg; and Board member, Dr Ian Philips.


   2. As explained in section A3 above, Denel’s annual report was not tabled
      in parliament. An overview of some  key  aspects  of  the  report  was
      presented which dealt with a “situation/business analysis, a financial
      update and a strategy update”
   3. The newly appointed Board Chairperson, Dr Sibisi, explained that Denel
      would be “quite open about our challenges, problems and opportunities,
      which should be discussed collectively as we need collective wisdom to
      move forward. We are interested  in  your  suggestions,  comments  and
      criticisms”


   4. “Denel”, explained CEO Mr Liebenberg, “is in a major  change  process.
      It’s not a turnaround. We cannot just turn around  what  we  have.  We
      need to change fundamentally. We need to  fix  Denel  –  and  all  the
      stakeholders need to have a single view of what this is.”  He said  it
      was impossible for Denel to make progress because there has  not  been
      consensus among all the  key  stakeholders,  including  the  different
      government departments, on what exactly Denel should do.  “We  need  a
      single vision and a single purpose”. Over the past few months this was
      beginning to emerge. He said that fixing Denel included:


         ▪ Becoming a profitable, commercially viable and dynamic entity
         ▪ Delivering consistent, real growth
         ▪ Attracting, developing, retaining  and  appropriately  rewarding
           world class skills
         ▪ Achieving world class productivity
         ▪ Focusing on areas in which Denel can compete credibly
         ▪ Partnering with state agencies  to  meet  the  county’s  defence
           needs
         ▪ Developing partnerships/alliance ventures with true value add
         ▪ Competing in the open market,  which  means  behaving  like  the
           best  in  the  open  market  (systems,  processes,   governance,
           marketing, equipment, commercial culture, etc)


   5. He said Denel “cannot achieve  world  class  results  with  a  subsidy
      mindset. Anything  other  than  world  class  will  not  cut  in  this
      competitive environment.  We need to decide who we are  and  stick  to
      the game plan. This calls for a reality check based on the facts.  The
      mind-set required for this process will take courage.”  He  said  that
      clarity on what “fixing” Denel meant would provide the pillars of  the
      new strategy.


   6. Essentially, there are 5 key messages  that  will  help  to  create  a
      vision and define a strategy for Denel. These are:


         ▪  Much  of  the  global  defence   spend   is   inaccessible   to
           independent contractors, making players highly reliant on  their
           domestic markets.  Furthermore,  changes  in  the  industry  are
           forcing players to consolidate, build  alliances  and  carefully
           focus their businesses.
         ▪ Denel is facing a  funding  crisis,  and  there  is  significant
           risk associated with the current financial projections.
         ▪ Denel is not viable under the current model. It  no  longer  has
           the domestic market and  scale  to  succeed  as  an  independent
           systems integrator and exporter of a broad range of products.
         ▪ To succeed, Denel  should  pursue  a  strategy  based  on  prime
           contracting in the domestic market and the export of systems and
           components through selective equity partnerships  and  alliances
           with global prime contractors.
         ▪ A process is underway to  evaluate  alliance  opportunities  and
           drive internal improvements across all business units.


   7. Mr Liebenberg explained that Denel lacked the basic  prerequisites  to
      be viable under its current business  model  and  a  new  strategy  is
      needed, which would enable Denel to operate in  the  changing  defence
      environment. This strategy includes:


         ▪ Establishing long term  formal  business  partnerships,  locally
           and internationally, so that Denel can become  more  sustainable
           in sales and revenue, share in  research  and  development,  and
           gain experience from global best practice methodologies
         ▪  Focusing  on  businesses  that  are  commercially  viable   and
           exiting those that are not
         ▪ Reviewing  processes,  systems,  efficiencies  and  skills,  and
           placing the right resources where required.
         ▪  Improving  collaboration  with   defence-related   public   and
           private sector stakeholders, like  Armscor,  the  Department  of
           Defence, as well as local and international suppliers
         ▪ Reviewing the changing nature of the global  and  local  defence
           industry and ensuring that Denel remains in touch  with  current
           defence requirements.


   8. Mr Liebenberg explained that “although global defence procurement is a
      $360 billion market, much of the global defence spend is not  directly
      accessible to independent contractors such as  Denel.”  It  is  nearly
      impossible for them to serve the US and countries of NATO, which  have
      a closed bidder and tender process. The US and Europe are also  trying
      to expand their markets to  areas  previously  served  exclusively  by
      Denel, such as the Middle  East,  the  Far  East  and  South  America.
      Independent contractors like Denel are forced  to  become  reliant  on
      domestic markets.


   9. The global domestic defence industry has undergone significant  change
      over the past decade, and  the  pace  of  change  will  increase.  The
      declining defence spend and changing nature of conflicts and  shifting
      customer needs have resulted in:


          ▪ Lengthening product life  cycles  and  reduced  demand  for  new
            platforms
          ▪ Shift to smaller, more mobile  weapons  and  increasing  use  of
            electronics
          ▪ Increasing consolidation to achieve minimum scale
          ▪  Smaller  players  forming  global  alliances  and  focusing  on
            supply  of  systems,  sub-systems  and  components  to  alliance
            partners and playing a maintenance and upgrade role for domestic
            customers

  10. Mr Liebenberg explained that Denel has a very impressive  product  and
      service portfolio. “I’ve been abroad 10 times in the  past  4  months,
      and everywhere Denel’s  technology  capability  is  highly  respected.
      There is a desire for our products, our intellect, our capabilities. I
      can truly say  we  must  be  one  of  the  leading  countries  from  a
      technological point of view. However, commercially  we  are  failing.”
      Denel, he said, is in serious financial  difficulties  and  “there  is
      significant  risk  attached  to  future  projections”.  The  financial
      statements are still being finalized but it is expected  that  Denel’s
      loss for the 2005 financial year, which is currently put at about R850
      million, is likely to increase to R1,6  billion,  once  the  audit  is
      completed. Last year, Denel experienced a loss of R377,5 million.  The
      main reason for the jump from R850 million to a possible R1,6  billion
      loss is that through a  more  thorough  audit  process  new  financial
      commitments and risks were discovered. This includes:


          ▪  R679.8  million  contract  risk  provision  for  loss  on   the
            Rooivalk attack helicopter
          ▪ Provision for retrenchment costs and labour disputes
          ▪ Contract risk and performance guarantee provision
          ▪ Pension fund provision
          ▪ Impairments of investments in  associated  companies,  property,
            plant  and  equipment,   prepaid   expenses,   inventories   and
            intangible assets
          ▪ Failure to achieve sales targets
          ▪ Increase in  provisions  for  postponement  or  cancellation  of
            major contracts
          ▪ Adverse effects of the exchange rate
  11. Denel would receive a qualified audit for the 2005 financial year. “In
      real terms, our revenue has not increased.  Equity  has  deteriorated.
      Denel’s balance sheet is under tremendous pressure. There  were  times
      when the auditors notified us that we were very close  to  bankruptcy.
      In July we received a cash injection of about R1,5  billion  from  the
      government,” said  Mr Liebenberg. This  is  expected  to  carry  Denel
      through to March 2006. .  He also explained that Denel only has  45  %
      order cover for 2006, whereas the ideal situation would be  more  than
      80%. Its allocation to research and development is 4,5% of  turn-over,
      when it should be between 7 to 10%. Most of Denel’s plants are running
      at less than 20% capacity. “We do not have the volumes to overcome the
      fixed overhead structures.”   But  Denel  can  certainly  improve  the
      situation and will  be  doing  so,  he  said.  It  would  have  to  be
      recapitalized,


  12. Essentially, Denel is not viable under the current model. It does  not
      have the domestic market  and  scale  to  succeed  as  an  independent
      systems integrator and exporter of a broad range  of  products,  Denel
      must move from being a global prime contractor, competing with some of
      the biggest companies in the world,  to  focusing  on  supplying  sub-
      systems in components to the global prime contractors. “It must become
      the  integrator  for  big  opportunities  in  the  local   market,   a
      specialized contractor in terms of what we produce, and  part  of  the
      solutions of some of the big deals globally. Denel  should  not  be  a
      major systems developer, as in the case of the  Rooivalk,  but  rather
      work with the major global players and build some  of  the  components
      for their systems, such as we’re doing with the Gripen Our role in the
      Airbus A400M production is also the way to go.  We  are  also  working
      with government to look into the ‘open tender’ system and how  we  can
      get more of the domestic market”. Interestingly,  while  only  42%  of
      Denel’s business came from the domestic market,  General  Dynamics  in
      the USA got 94% of its domestic market and BAE got 78% of its market.


  13. Denel has an obligation to deliver 12 Rooivalk helicopters to the  Air
      Force, which would have to be maintained for the next  30  years.  The
      Rooivalk project cannot  be  closed  down,  but  Denel  would  examine
      whether there is life  for  the   Rooivalk  beyond  the  SANDF  order.
      Certain guidelines, time-frames and a roadmap would have to be adhered
      to. If opportunities cannot be found, the Rooivalk would no longer  be
      marketed.

  14.  Denel is currently reviewing  the  sustainability  of  its  munitions
      operations in the country. It is  foreseen  that  the  seven  existing
      munitions stations  would  be  consolidated  into  five  or  six.  The
      Swartklip munitions operation could be affected by the  sustainability
      study.

  15.  In  order  to  improve  efficiency  and  accountability,  Denel   has
      instituted a process of decentralization. Corporate office staff  will
      be reduced and Denel has engaged extensively with organized labour  in
      this regard. Denel currently  employs  about  10000  people,  but  its
      operational requirements warrant only about 3500 employees. There have
      been 72 suspensions in the last 24 months, as part of Denel’s drive to
      improve performance at the SOE.

  16. Mr Liebenberg explained that  Denel  is  under  investigation  by  the
      Central Bureau of Investigation in India over a contract.  The  Indian
      Ministry of Defence had informed Denel of their  intention  to  cancel
      contracts and the Indian market is currently closed  to  Denel.  Denel
      has sought legal advice in  both  South  Africa  and  India,  and  can
      confirm that no laws were transgressed,  in  either  South  Africa  or
      India. However, Denel is working closely with stakeholders in India to
      address the situation. Mr Liebenberg confirmed that Denel, as with all
      defence companies, used consultants and marketing agents  to  securing
      access to overseas markets.


  17. Although the Committee has been aware for some time now that Denel  is
      seriously challenged, we are only now becoming aware of the extent  of
      this. We are obviously concerned. All the  relevant  stakeholders  are
      called upon to work together and do their utmost to reconstitute Denel
      and ensure it serves the national interest and is commercially  viable
      on a sustainable basis. We agree with Mr Liebenberg that part  of  the
      problem has been a lack of clarity  among  the  government  and  other
      stakeholders on exactly what role Denel should  play.  To  the  extent
      that there is increasing convergence among the major  stakeholders  on
      the exact role of Denel,  and  greater  co-operation  among  them,  we
      welcome  it.  If  there  is  this   agreement,   particularly   within
      government, surely there should be more political  support  for  Denel
      too, especially as we are told defence companies globally are  reliant
      on this? Of course, we understand that Denel  faces  huge  challenges,
      and it will take some years to overcome them, but we would like to see
      definable progress in that direction.


  18. We are not defence specialists. Nor even do we have a  defence  expert
      to advise us. But the picture conveyed of the nature  of  the  defence
      industry globally, the state of Denel and the  need  to  fundamentally
      transform it, seem reasonable to us.  The  key  elements  of  the  new
      vision and strategy for Denel also seem reasonable to us. But  we  are
      struck by how substantially; even fundamentally, different  these  are
      from the “new” vision and strategy proposed at last year’s briefing by
      the previous Denel leadership. How much of the new  approach  proposed
      this year will be implemented and by when? What will be the measurable
      objectives and the deadlines to achieve them? What exactly will be the
      implications and effects of the implementation of  different  elements
      of the strategy? How will the new skills  and  capacity  necessary  be
      found? How many jobs will be lost and how will  this  be  dealt  with?
      Fundamentally, what are the financial implications of the  new  vision
      and strategy?  We are understandably  cautious  about  what  is  being
      proposed this year. We need to know more.  Obviously,  the  new  Denel
      leadership has to be given more time to finalise its new approach.  We
      will call Denel within six months to further brief  us  on  their  new
      approach and we will seek to engage more rigorously with them then. We
      will also need to be briefed further on the financial state of Denel.


  19. In respect of Denel’s difficulties with  India,  the  Committee  feels
      that, at this stage, we cannot pursue the matter further,  but  should
      developments make it necessary,  and  it  is  within  the  Committee’s
      oversight responsibilities, we will obviously pursue the matter.


  20. In respect of Denel’s failure  to  finalise  its  annual  report,  the
      Committee finds the reasons given understandable and  acceptable.  But
      it will not do not to get the report on time in future, as  the  Denel
      leadership will also agree.


  21. The DA (Democratic Alliance)  and  the  IFP  (Inkatha  Freedom  Party)
      believe that Denel should not be given any state funding and should be
      privatized.


  22. The majority in the Committee appreciates that the new  leadership  at
      Denel has a major responsibility to  restructure  Denel  and  make  it
      viable, and we wish them well.

G.    Alexkor

   1. Alexkor was represented by Chairperson of the Board Mr Nchakha  Moloi,
      and recently appointed acting CEO, Mr Mzamani Mdaka.


   2. As noted in section A3, Alexkor’s report was not tabled in parliament.
      The draft of the report presented to the Committee covers a nine-month
      period from 1 July   2004  to  31  March  2005.  Previously  Alexkor’s
      financial year- end was 30 June. It has had to  adjust  this  to  take
      account of the PFMA requirements.


   3. Mr Moloi explained that Alexkor’s vision is to transform the SOE  into
      a  competitive  and  sustainable  organisation  that  will  contribute
      positively towards the needs  of  all  stakeholders.  Its  mission  is
      optimise revenues from mining, ensuring satisfactory  returns  to  the
      shareholder.  Alexkor  also  seeks  to  implement  the  socio-economic
      upliftment of the region and ensure a healthy and safe environment.

   4. Alexkor’s core business is land and marine diamond mining through  the
      Alexander Bay Mine (ABM). Its non-core  business  is  agriculture  and
      tourism through Alexander Bay Trading (ABT). The  non-core  businesses
      include ostriches, oysters, dairy, citrus and  guest  houses.  Alexkor
      also has responsibility for the maintenance of Alexander Bay Town  and
      for providing health care and emergency services to Alexander Bay  and
      Richtersveld communities. The mine  also  provides  potable  water  to
      Alexander Bay and Port Nolloth and rental subsidies for the  Alexander
      Bay community. It runs the airport and museum.

   5. Mr Moloi said that Alexkor had a very high turnover  of  CEOs  -  more
      than 10 since 1996. It  has  had  3  Board  Chairpersons  during  this
      period. This lack of continuity has posed difficulties for  developing
      a long-term strategy. But what has also mainly held  Alexkor  back  is
      the uncertainties surrounding the ongoing  land  claims  case  of  the
      Richtersveld community. “Nobody wants to invest, and staff  morale  is
      low. Until the case is finalized we can’t be sure where we are going”,
      said Mr Moloi. Alexkor is also awaiting the  outcome  of  other  legal
      cases, including Nabera’s claim of R54 million, Ruslyn Mining’s  claim
      of R5,2 million and Coin Security’s claim of R2,5 million.  All  these
      cases are expected to be concluded by the second quarter of next year.

   6. Mr Mdaka reported that Alexkor experienced a R 4, 7 million loss  over
      the reporting period, as against a R35,7 million  profit the  previous
      financial year. The main reason for this is  that  diamond  production
      was down 38%.  Income decreased  from  R182,  5  million  to  R143,  9
      million, despite a 15% increase in price per carat. Alexkor attributes
      the loss to a combination of operational problems in land mining and a
      continuous downward trend in sea days. Overall, Alexkor made  a  small
      profit on mining, but its  non-core  businesses  suffered  significant
      losses.


   7. Alexkor’s non-mining operations showed a loss of  R5,  5  m   for  the
      period under review. Alexkor had to write  off  the  parsely  project,
      which had been valued at R850 000. In addition,  ABT  had  to  revalue
      maize with a negative value of  R2,5  million  because  there  was  no
      business plan to deal with the disposal of crops that are perishable.


   8. The ostrich flu virus led to a decreased sale of ostriches. ABT cannot
      export ostrich meat to international markets as  their  abattoir  does
      not comply with international health and safety standards and  Alexkor
      does not have the funds to upgrade  the  abattoir.  They  are  however
      selling  live  birds  to  other  SA   abattoirs   that   comply   with
      international standards.


   9. Alexkor is currently undercapitalized and  short  of  funds.  “A  huge
      replacement Capex programme is required”, said Mr  Mdaka.  Funding  is
      also required for post-retirement medical aid. Alexkor also  needs  to
      provide for unforeseen expenses  related  to  legal  matters.  Alexkor
      reported that a determination of the exact extent of  their  potential
      environmental liability is  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  delay  in
      finalizing their financial statements.
  10. Alexkor had continued to contribute to skills development through  its
      “social responsibility and investment” programme. 5 out of 10  bursary
      holders are females. 7 out of 11 employees  in  mentorship  programmes
      are females. 3 out of 10 apprentices are females. Alexkor used 3,1% of
      its wage bill on training. Alexkor also has an HIV/Aids programme.


  11. Unlike other SOEs, Alexkor is not currently  planning  to  dispose  of
      their non-core functions. The CEO  reported  that  the  best  strategy
      would eventually be to transfer the commercial non-core functions to a
      separate company and to hand over the  maintenance  of  the  town  and
      other social functions to the local and provincial government.


  12. Among  Alexkor’s  short-term  production  improvement  plans  are  the
      following:


         ▪ Implementation of double-shift work in land mining
         ▪ Involvement of labour in production planning sessions
         ▪ Implementation of remote mining techniques
         ▪ Emphasising cost reduction and control
         ▪ Market development for ABT products


  13. Among other aspects of Alexkors plans are:


         ▪  A  short-term  focus  on   improving   financial   performance:
           optimize use of resources; implement  productivity  improvement;
           continuously reduce operting costs and pay limits.
         ▪ Develop long-term strategy beyond a single mine company
         ▪  Collaborate  with  established  companies  and  leverage  their
           ability to fund expansion plans.


  14.  Possible growth opportunities include:


         ▪ Acquisition of other  mineral  rights  in  other  parts  of  the
           country
         ▪ Restart mining operations at Muisvlak
         ▪ Embarking on an extensive exploration programme
         ▪ Recapitalising current land mining
         ▪ Replacing current mining equipment


  15. Alexkor is planning to move beyond a single  mine  structure  and  has
      received permission from government to look at mining and  exploration
      at other locations within South Africa. This  strategy  will  soon  be
      implemented, and it will  focus  on  the  Northern  Cape,  North  West
      province and Limpopo. Alexkor will brief the Committee on  this  at  a
      future date.


  16. Mr Moloi explained that Alexkor  is  keeping  a  close  watch  on  the
      processing of the Precious Metals Bill 30 of 2005 as it sees itself as
      a base-load supplier for the proposed State Diamond  Trader.  An  area
      like Namaqualand would be ideal for the  establishment  of  the  State
      Diamond Trader as many diamond companies operate in the region.


  17. Of course, the Committee appreciates that the  land  claims  case  and
      other uncertainties, as well as certain other unique challenges,  make
      Alexkor’s progress difficult. The Committee also appreciates  that  it
      is difficult to  attract  technically  qualified  people  to  work  at
      Alexkor. But we feel more can be done to ensure  that  Alexkor  works.
      The swing from a profit of R35,7 million  to a loss of  R4,7   million
      in 9 months is too extreme,  and  the  reasons  given  not  compelling
      enough. Nor is the Committee taken by  the  proposals  on  how  to  go
      forward. They were too general and vague, and presented more as goals,
      with no strategy or plans or programmes on how to achieve these goals.
      Even if the outcome of the land  claims  and  other  cases  cannot  be
      forseen, surely there should  be  some  forward  planning  that  takes
      account of different possible outcomes? Mr  Moloi  agreed  in  general
      with the Committees views expressed here, and explained that  a  major
      strategy workshop is to be held in November to address these and other
      issues. He agreed that the Committee should be briefed on progress  at
      Alexkor in 6 months time. At this briefing Alexkor would  also  report
      back on progress in  respect  of  the  women’s  empowerment  projects,
      “national  question”  and  other  issues  raised  in  the  Committee’s
      previous report on Alexkor.


  18. As raised in our previous report, Alexkor should phase in its  handing
      over of responsibilities to local and provincial government.


  19. The Committee does not fully understand the issues related to  Alexkor
      serving as a base-load supplier to the proposed State Diamond  Trader,
      but will raise the matter with the Minister.


  20. The DA feels that Alexkor should be sold off as soon as possible.  The
      IFP expresses its severe reservations about the future of Alexkor


  21. The Committee feels that Alexkor should organize its AGMs  earlier  so
      that its annual report can be tabled in parliament in time.


  22. While recognizing the personnel, resource  and  other  constraints  of
      DPE, the majority in the Committee feels the Department should do more
      to assist Alexkor, and urges the  Board  and  executive  to  meet  the
      challenges they face.

H.    On SOEs in General

   1. Overall, the Committee feels that Eskom is doing very well, and
      although it will be severely challenged with its major infrastructure
      plans, it can find the necessary capacity and meet the challenges;
      certainly it has the potential to do so. Transnet has undergone a
      remarkable financial turnaround and in other respects has
      significantly improved its performance, and has developed an overall
      turnaround strategy that is very promising. Denel is, of course,
      seriously challenged in financial and other respects. The evolving new
      vision and strategy seem reasonable, but the Committee does not have
      the expertise to effectively evaluate these, and does not, at this
      stage, have a clear enough sense of what the implications of the
      proposed new approach are, how the strategy will be implemented and to
      what extent it will make Denel viable. But the new leadership at Denel
      has to be given more time to finalise their approach, and the
      Committee wishes them well. While the Committee recognizes that
      Alexkor is in a sort of limbo until the Richterveld community’s land
      claim is settled, and there are various other challenges that make
      forward-planning difficult, we feel Alexkor is performing well below
      what it should, and even as it waits for the outcome of the court
      case, it can certainly improve its performance.  We recognize that DPE
      has many and huge responsibilities and is a small department, but we
      urge it to pay more attention to Alexkor.


   2.  As covered in section C 23 and elsewhere above, the Committee does
      not believe that SOEs are “employment agencies” and recognizes that
      for them to fulfill their developmental roles they might, at times,
      have to shed jobs. But the Committee feels that all the SOEs need to
      do more to save jobs and ensure that those employees they have to
      forego are supported in terms of a Social Plan, drawing in the sector
      education and training authorities where possible, and through other
      means. Needless to say, these and other related issues must be
      effectively negotiated with the trade unions. In respect of the
      infrastructure roll-out, SOEs will obviously have to focus on labour-
      intensive methods wherever possible.  All of this and more can be done
      without weakening – indeed it will strengthen – the developmental role
      of SOEs. The Committee needs to see whether we can develop more
      technically sound arguments for our positions on this.  The majority
      party was elected on a mandate of “creating jobs and reducing
      poverty”, and while we are not industrial relations experts, and to
      the extent consistent with our oversight role, we are going to monitor
      job losses in the SOEs much more carefully.


   3. Of course, the committee recognizes that because of the nature of some
      of the goods and services to be procured by the SOEs, it will not be
      easy to ensure that the BEE beneficiaries are broad-based enough. But
      the Committee feels very strongly that more should and can be done to
      ensure that the BEE is indeed broad-based and includes SMMEs. With the
      SOEs sale of non-core assets, this issue has also become important.
      DPE is urged to monitor the SOEs stringently in this regard, and
      certainly the Committee expects SOEs to explain in detail the
      categories of their BEE beneficiaries at next year’s presentations on
      annual reports. Of course, the SOEs will also have to brief the
      Committee on progress in this regard at the annual briefings we have
      on BBBEE in the second quarter. The Committee will also be keenly
      monitoring the extent to which businesses owned by women are
      beneficiaries. To what extent are youth benefiting as well?


   4. The Committee also feels that SOEs should report in greater detail on
      the incidence of corruption they experience, how they deal with this,
      and their corruption prevention strategies generally.


   5. To differing degrees the SOEs have very good programmes on HIV/Aids,
      and the Committee is very encouraged by this. Where possible, more
      should be done.


   6. SOEs are clearly playing an increasingly important role in our economy
      and society. The Committee is acutely aware of the magnitude of the
      infrastructure programmes that Eskom and Transnet are taking on. The
      other SOEs also have major responsibilities. Precisely because of the
      increasing significance of the SOEs, the Committee needs to be more
      effective in our oversight role, and within our capacity constraints,
      we need to monitor developments in the SOEs more actively and receive
      more progress reports through negotiations with DPE and the SOEs.


   7. The DA repeats its reservations about the role being allocated to the
      SOEs, and believes, in fact, that the SOEs should be privatized.


   8. The Committee feels that there may well be a need for us to better
      understand the broader role of SOEs in the social transformation of
      South Africa. Some of the SOEs might also feel the need for this. We
      will raise this with the Minister, and also see whether as a Committee
      we want to do our own work in this regard.


   9. Obviously, SOEs have to contend with negative effects of the apartheid
      system on them. But the Committee believes that a significant number
      of the problems SOEs are currently dealing with flow from some of our
      failures over the past ten years. Without subscribing to a crude
      notion of “great men and women in history”, it certainly seems to us
      that the success of SOEs depends substantially on the leadership they
      have.  This means that the government has to ensure that the Boards
      and executives of the SOEs are the right people to be leading the
      SOEs. The government, SOEs Boards and executives also have to ensure
      effective succession strategies to ensure that when leaderships change
      the SOEs do not automatically become weakened.


  10. Each of the SOEs deals with very complex and technical issues. For the
      Committee to be more effective in our oversight role, we need help
      from energy, transport and defence experts. We are to explore the
      possibilities of this. But if we are technically deficient, we are, we
      believe, reasonably politically sound, and will continue to draw on
      our political mandate and strengths to play our oversight role.


  11. We stress again that organizations appearing before our Committee must
      respond to the issues we have raised about them in this report when
      they come before us. Otherwise the report will have very limited
      value!


I.    Aspects of Committee’s 2006 Programme


     1. Our 2006 programme will be shaped substantially by the issues
        raised in this report. Of course, it will also be shaped by the
        more specific 2006 programme of the Ministry and Department that we
        will be briefed on at our annual workshop in late February.


     2. The local government elections will affect the parliamentary
        calendar next year. Exactly how, is not clear at this stage. But
        our programme will be partly dictated by the number of
        parliamentary sitting days next year.


     3. In various sections of this report, we have set out issues we
        intend to pursue next year. In this section we will not repeat all
        of them. We will refer to some of them. Our programme next year
        will include a focus on:


            ▪ Annual workshop with the Ministry and Department in late
              February
            ▪ Briefings on shareholder compacts finalized with SOEs
            ▪ Where possible, quarterly progress reports from DPE.
            ▪ Monitoring more closely the SOEs infrastructure programme
            ▪ A six-month progress report from the SOEs early in the
              second quarter of next year. Our main interest will be on
              Denel, Spoornet and Alexkor
            ▪ Briefings on broad-based BEE in the second quarter and on
              womens empowerment in August, even if constantly monitored
            ▪ SOEs sale of non-core assets
            ▪ Processing the SAA bill and any possible legislation on
              shareholder compacts or a shareholder management model
            ▪ Risk Management frameworks and structures
            ▪ Continuation of our education and training programme to
              make us a more effective Committee
            ▪ Continuation of our study tour visits


     4. Within our constraints, we will seek to do as much as we can around
        the above and other issues.


     5. The Committee notes with appreciation that most of the
        organizations that appeared before us were amenable to having their
        annual reports available for tabling in parliament by 30 August
        each other. We hope this is effected.  It will be of enormous help
        to the Committee.


     6. The Committee needs to work closer with other relevant portfolio
        committees in fulfilling our oversight role in respect of the SOEs.


     7. The Committee need to explore the possibilities of technically
        advanced research support.


     8. The Committee will look into the need for this report to be debated
        in the House early in the new year.


J.    Appreciation


        1. We extend our appreciation to the leadership of DPE and the SOEs
           for their co-operation in our processing of their annual
           reports.


        2. We also acknowledge the contribution of research assistant, Ms
           Desmoreen Carolus, who prepared the initial report on which this
           report drew.

So far the key constraints that have been identified include the



