---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 March 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-03-17
---

THURSDAY, 17 MARCH 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr D K MALULEKE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the DA, that the House debates the question of security at
primary and high schools. Thank you.


                  EARTH TREMOR AT STILFONTEIN DRIDGOLD MINE


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M R BALOYI: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House—


    1) notes with sadness the earth tremor at the Stilfontein DRIDGOLD mine
       in which two people died and more than 58 miners were injured;


    2) further notes that the effect of the tragic tremor caused injury to
       scores of other people and damage to property in Stilfontein town;

    3) recalls that this tremor, which, according to the project leader of
       the SA National Seismograph Network, measured 5,3 on the Richter
       scale and was a secondary effect from mining activity, resulted in
       the rescue team having to work more than two kilometres underground;

    4) further notes the continuing anxiety of the unions on issues of
       labour and poor safety conditions in the Stilfontein DRIDGOLD mine;

    5) believes that an urgent meeting of relevant Ministers and all
       parties to resolve the above issues should be convened;

    6) conveys its condolences to the bereaved families and wishes the
       injured a speedy recovery; and

    7) believes that these true and brave sons of the soil, like many
       others, toiled and laid down their lives for a country they loved,
       for the benefit of all of us.

Agreed to.

                   RACIAL SLUR BY AUSTRALIAN RUGBY PLAYER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby move without notice:


  That the House—


    1) expresses its extreme dismay at the racial slur made by an
       Australian rugby player against a South African player during a
       Super 12 rugby match on 12 March 2005;

    2) notes that the offending player has owned up to the remarks, and
       apologised for them;

    3) believes that such behaviour has no place in sport in our country or
       anywhere else in the world; and

    4) trusts that the rugby authorities will take the appropriate action
       against the guilty party to ensure that such behaviour is rooted out
       of sport.


Agreed to.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                       (The late Rev Allan Hendrickse)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House—


     1) notes—

           a) with sadness, the passing away of Rev Allan Hendrickse on 16
              March 2005;

           b) the important role that Rev Hendrickse played in South
              Africa’s political life as leader of the Labour Party, and
              the contribution he made to our democracy as a member of the
              Senate after 1994; and

           c) that he was awarded the Order of the Baobab, Silver Class,
              last year;

      2) believes that Rev Hendrickse will be remembered for his
         contribution to the struggle against apartheid and for the
         positive role he played in the transition to democracy; and


      3) extends its deepest sympathies and condolences to the Hendrickse
         family, and mourns the loss of a South African patriot.

Mnr T D LEE: Adjunkspeaker, Helenard Joe Hendrickse, beter bekend as Allan,
vir sommige net Meneer, sal in die anale van die geskiedenis van ons land
onthou word as ’n baanbreker en ’n onverbiddelike kampvegter vir
menseregte.

As hoërskoolonderwyser, en hy was ook my onderwyser, en predikant kon hy,
as hy wou, ’n sorgvrye lewe ly, maar omdat hy soveel vir sy medemens
omgegee het, het hy dit alles prysgegee en hom vir die bevryding van ons
land en al sy mense beywer.

Allan Hendrickse het geglo dat mense nie omgee vir wat jy weet nie, maar
dat mense wil weet dat jy omgee. Vir sy moeite is hy in 1976 onder die
destydse staatsveiligheidswetgewing vir ’n baie lang ruk in afsonderlike
aanhouding in die tronk, te Grahamstad, aangehou. Sy latere besluit dat die
Arbeidersparty van Suid-Afrika moes deelneem aan die destydse
driekamerparlement in 1984 is deur baie veroordeel, maar hy’t geglo dat
daar binnelands na ’n vreedsame oplossing vir die land se politieke
probleme gesoek moes word. Nawete sê vir ons dat sy besluit reg was, omdat
hy daardie platform gebruik het om op ’n vreedsame wyse die arbeidswette
uit te daag.

Wie sal ooit sy beroemde swem op die apartheidstrand in Port Elizabeth
vergeet? Minder mense onthou hoe hy klein-apartheid destyds hier in die
Parlement beveg het, en aangedring het dat alle eetplekke in die Parlement
vir almal oopgestel moes word.

’n Groot seder in Suid-Afrika, en veral in die bruingemeenskap, het geval.
Die DA se diepste wense en medelye gaan aan sy vrou, Terry, sy kinders,
Arlene, Marie, Peter en Michael. Mag hy in vrede rus. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Deputy Speaker, Helenard Joe Hendrickse, better known as
Allan, and to others simply as Sir, will be remembered in the annals of the
history of our country as a pioneer and a relentless campaigner for human
rights.

As a high school teacher, and he was also my teacher, and as a minister of
the church he could, if he had wanted to, have led a carefree life, but
because he cared so much for his fellow man, he gave it all up and
dedicated himself to the liberation of our country and all its people.

Allan Hendrickse believed that people do not care about what one knows, but
that they want to know that one cares. For his troubles he was detained in
solitary confinement for a very long time in 1976 under the then state
security legislation in the prison at Grahamstown. His later decision in
1984 that the Labour Party of South Africa should participate in the then
tricameral Parliament was criticised by many, but he believed that we
should be looking for a peaceful solution to the country's political
problems from within. Hindsight tells us that he was right in his decision,
as he made use of that platform to challenge the labour laws in a peaceful
manner.

Who will ever forget his famous swim on the apartheid beach in Port
Elizabeth? Fewer people will remember how he fought against petty apartheid
here in Parliament, and insisted that all the restaurants in Parliament
should be opened to everyone.

South Africa, and in particular the coloured community, has lost a great
man. The DA would like to extend their deepest sympathy and condolences to
his wife, Terry, his children, Arlene, Marie, Peter and Michael. May he
rest in peace. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is with sadness that we have noted
the passing of the late Allan Hendrickse. The late Allan Hendrickse was a
colourful person and throughout his career it was a case of you either
agreed with him or you disagreed with him.

Of course, on a controversial aspect, there was a time that we would have
regarded the hon Hendrickse as an opponent from the IFP perspective,
especially at the time of the tricameral Parliament. But from our side, at
a later stage, we also learned to respect, in particular, the way in which
he in his own way addressed the particular aspects of apartheid, and how he
became a person very well known in the struggle.

Particularly to his family - I was such a good friend of the family - his
sons and daughters, we would like to convey our sincere condolences. May
his soul rest in peace. We think of you, and we honour Allan Hendrickse. I
thank you.

Rev M S KHUMALO: The ACDP would like to associate itself with the previous
speakers. We wish to pay tribute to the late Rev Allan Hendrickse for his
contribution to the political development of this country. As a leader of
the Labour Party of South Africa in the 1980s, the late Rev Allan
Hendrickse effectively became the voice of the disadvantaged within the
tricameral Parliament at the time when oppressed communities were silenced
at every turn.
He made the historic declaration that he would make the system unworkable
from within, and proceeded to make his mark in politics with great courage
and determination. The late reverend leaves behind a legacy of bravery in
the face of adversity. What he did in his life is an example to us all that
striving for a principle with conviction is an attainable goal. Thank you.

Mnr S SIMMONS: Adjunkspeaker, kollegas, dit is met hartseer en leedwese dat
die Huis kennis neem van die skielike heengaan van Eerw Hendrickse,
Woensdagmiddag in Port Elizabeth.

Eerw Hendrickse sal die beste onthou word as leier van die arbeidersparty
wat in 1987 by Koningstrand, toe dit nog slegs vir blankes was, gaan swem
het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S SIMMONS: Deputy Speaker, colleagues, it is with sadness and regret
that the House notes the sudden passing away of Rev Hendrickse, on
Wednesday afternoon in Port Elizabeth.

Rev Hendrickse will best be remembered as the leader of the labour party
who went swimming, at King’s Beach in 1987, when it was still for whites
only.]

Even though he was a member of cabinet, he was often in disagreement with
Cabinet decisions and voiced his disagreements publicly. This did not have
any impact on the cabinet itself. As a result, on 4 January 1987, in
protest at government’s limited reforms of 1984, together with a group of
supporters, he entered a beach reserved for whites only and started
swimming. This was in direct violation of government statutes.

He later resigned from cabinet and joined the ANC after its unbanning, and
in 1994 became one of the party’s senators. He retired from active politics
at the next election. In 2004, Rev Hendrickse was awarded the Order of the
Baobab by President Thabo Mbeki for his lifetime contribution to the
struggle against apartheid, and for the establishment of a free and
democratic South Africa.

On behalf of the NNP and the people of South Africa we wish to express our
deepest condolences to Rev Hendrickse’s family and his loved ones. Thank
you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the MF fully associates itself in
expressing its condolences to the family of the late Rev Allan Hendrickse
on the passing away of the reverend. We praise his contribution to the
struggle against apartheid. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you, Deputy
Speaker.
Dr C P MULDER: Geagte Mev die Adjunkspeaker, dit is vir die VF Plus ’n
voorreg om ons te assosieer met die voorstel wat voor die Huis dien, waarin
medelye en simpatie uitgespreek word met die skielike afsterwe van eerw
Allan Hendrickse.

Ek het die voorreg gehad om eerw Hendrickse te leer ken in die periode vóór
1994, tydens die driekamerparlement, toe hy hier opgetree het as leier van
die Arbeidersparty. Ek het hom ervaar as ’n waardige politikus, iemand wat
graag in debat getree het met ander partye, wat graag sy standpunt gestel
het, én mens mag maar met hom verskil het of nie verskil het nie, maak nie
saak nie, hy’t hom altyd op ’n waardige wyse gedra. Ons eer sy
nagedagtenis.

Ons het ook die voorreg gehad om, nadat hy hier weg is, sy kinders te leer
ken, wat in die politiek betrokke geraak het en wat vorentoe gegaan het.
Ons ken vir Peter, wat tot vandag toe nog hier by ons in die Raad is, maar
ook – baie van u mag dit dalk nie weet nie – sy seun Michael, wat ’n groot
en prominente rol speel by die Verkiesingskommissie. Hy was ook ’n tyd lank
’n parlementslid, en het die politieke tradisie voortgesit.

Ek dra graag ons simpatie en meelewing oor aan sy gesin. Ons het miskien ’n
kollega verloor, wat sommige van ons goed ken, en ander nie so goed ken
nie, maar die Hendrickse-familie het ’n vader, ’n oupa, en ’n eggenoot
verloor, en ons dra ons medelye aan hulle oor. Baie dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Hon Madam Deputy Speaker, it is a privilege for the FF Plus
to associate ourselves with the motion before the House, in which
condolences and sympathy are expressed on the sudden passing away of Rev
Allan Hendrickse.
I had the privilege of making the acquaintance of Rev Hendrickse in the
period before 1994, during the tricameral Parliament, when he acted here as
leader of the Labour Party. I knew him as a dignified politician, someone
who readily entered into debate with other parties, who readily put forward
his viewpoint, and no matter whether one differed with him or not he always
behaved in a dignified manner. We honour his memory.

After his departure from Parliament, we also had the privilege to get to
know his children who became involved in politics and who made their mark
in that field. We know Peter, who is still in the House today, as well as
his son Michael - many of you may not know this – who plays a big and
prominent role at the Electoral Commission. He was also a member of
Parliament for a while, and continued the political tradition.

I would like to convey our sympathy and condolences to his family. We may
have lost a colleague whom some of us knew well and others not so well, but
the Hendrickse family have lost a father, a grandfather and a husband, and
we convey our condolences to them. Thank you.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ID would like to share the
sentiments of the House expressed today. We were extremely shocked to hear
about the untimely death of Rev Allan Hendrickse.

Rev Allan Hendrickse was truly an icon of the struggle and will be missed
by all freedom-loving South Africans. We wish to convey our condolences to
the family and friends of Rev Allan Hendrickse. Thank you.

Mr N T GODI: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the PAC, I also want to
join the House in expressing our heartfelt condolences to the family of the
late Allan Hendrickse. As already expressed by numerous speakers, the role
that Rev Hendrickse played in the struggle was recognised by the National
Orders award that he received. In his own way, from his own perspective, he
did contribute to the realisation of the ultimate objective of the demise
of apartheid.

I once again wish to express the PAC’s heartfelt condolences. Thank you.

Mr J BICI: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the UDM, I would also like to
join the House and send our heartfelt condolences to the family of Rev
Hendrickse, and of course we do realise the role that he played within the
system to try and usher in the system that we have today. We are sure that
his family is proud of this. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC, in extending its condolences
to the family of the late Rev Allan Hendrickse, would like to place on
record in this Parliament as to why the ANC, in the first instance,
extended to him the Order of the Baobab. Also, we would like to place on
record our gratitude for the contributions made by Allan Hendrickse and his
colleagues. I do not talk theoretically; I talk through the lived
experiences with him as person, as a cadre of the ANC, and as a comrade.

I first met Allan Hendrickse in 1967-68 when, communists like Fred Peters,
noncommunists like Sonny Leon, people like myself and others met in Durban
to discuss the future of the oppressed people of our land. It was in that
context that the Labour Party was born in Durban.

The question arose as to how we should build unity among our people, and
Allan Hendrickse was in the forefront of saying, like the ANC had always
done, that unity has got to be an action. And the first action that he
initiated against the system of apartheid was the bread boycott in 1970-71
for which many of us were penalised.

On the heels of this, and through his relationships with people like the
late Steve Biko, Barney Pityane and others, Allan never hesitated to be
associated centrally in the resistance movement.
When Soweto burned, Allan was one of the first people to come to Durban,
and ask: “Now what?”

To understand why the Order of the Baobab was given to him, is to
understand this background of Allan. On the heels of Soweto in 1982 when
other sectors of the population were mobilised to protest and demand, we
were suddenly saddled with the dilemma of the tricameral system and the
Koornhof Bills, and it was in this context that I have a particular memory
and I would like to share this with the House on behalf of the ANC.

On his way to Eshowe on the first day of January 1983, Allan had the
strength of character to knock at my door at four o’clock in the morning to
say that the future of the coloured people would be decided that day. He
said:

  I would like you to know that we are going to take a decision to enter
  the tricam or not to enter the tricam, but in the event that we do, I
  make a commitment that it won’t be a sense of betrayal, but a strategic
  move away to another terrain of struggle.

This was formidably seen when the likes of us took control and entered the
British consulate as a result of our opposition to the tricam.

One of the first messages that I received when we had occupied the British
consulate was from Allan Hendrickse, extending solidarity, wishing us well.
When other members of the tricam were celebrating the entry of the tricam,
and we were shoved into police vans, Allan Hendrickse was the first to say:
“You are where you are, and I am where we are, but never forget that our
destination is the same.”

During the time of the treason trial in Pietermaritzburg it was Allan
Hendrickse who did not hesitate to be associated with us, notwithstanding
the fact that, just after that, when we decided to take to the streets and
initiate the concept of ungovernability, Allan found himself in a very
difficult situation, but he didn’t hesitate, in a swimsuit, to defy the
laws of this country, much to the ire and anguish of P W Botha.

I do not want to make a speech here; but we want to celebrate the life of
Allan Hendrickse in extending our condolences to his family. This is why
the ANC did not hesitate in 1991. I had the historical privilege of
introducing the President of the Republic, Thabo Mbeki, to the Labour Party
conference in Durban. If I remember well, Luwellyn Landers, the
pronouncement was made then that, yes, we believe that South Africa belongs
to all who live in it, and to you, Sir, we give the commitment that we will
do our best to make it liveable for all who live in it. Luwellyn?

On the heels of this the Labour Party did not hesitate to become an
integral part of the forces of the Freedom Charter at both Codesa and
Kempton Park. Those of you who participated in the processes there will
understand why people like Luwellyn Landers could chair sessions at Codesa
and at Kempton Park, and why Allan Hendrickse could play the role that he
played on behalf of the Labour Party and, in broad terms, on behalf of the
so-called coloured people of this country to make it possible for us to be
where we are.

To some of us, who were associated as closely as we were, a tragedy
occurred in our lives when we realised that Allan, in physical terms, had
lost his sight. In a telephonic discussion, however, with Peter on my side,
he said: “I might have lost my physical sight, but with people like you
around the sight of our nation will never be lost.”
With these words, on behalf of the ANC, we can only pray and wish his
family strength. We can pray that South Africans across the colour line
will understand that, indeed, South Africa belongs to all who live in it.
In the spirit of Allan Hendrickse it is our responsibility to make South
Africa liveable for all who live in it. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon members, these messages will be conveyed
to the family. We did send some flowers on behalf of Parliament and on
behalf of all of you to say that we are with the family at this moment. We
know the family and the late Comrade Allan have worked with a number of
people. The Speaker also wishes that her voice be added to the sentiments
of this afternoon.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: There are other
motions without notice.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: All right! Proceed, hon member.


                         EASTER HOLIDAY CELEBRATIONS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House-

   (1)      acknowledges that Easter Weekend, which begins on 25 March (Good
           Friday) -


            (a)  is celebrated by Christians worldwide; and


            (b)  is a time when Christians identify with the death and
                 resurrection of Jesus Christ; and


       2) wishes everyone a peaceful and happy Easter  holiday  and  wishes
          those who are travelling at this time a safe journey.


Agreed to.

    TRAGIC EVENTS AT BAVIAANSPOORT CORRECTIONAL CENTRE AND GROOTE SCHUUR
                    HOSPITAL, AND AT POPCRU DEMONSTRATION

              (Statement by Minister of Correctional Services:)
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed to member’s statements,
I wish to advise the House that I have agreed to the request by the hon
Minister of Correctional Services for an opportunity to make a statement.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members,
you will be aware of the tragic events that have unfolded at Baviaanspoort
Correctional Centre in Gauteng on Sunday, 13 March, and at Groote Schuur
Hospital on 14 March 2005.

Two juvenile offenders, who are normally cleaners at the hospital section
at Baviaanspoort Correctional Centre during weekdays, breached security at
the centre while they were supposed to be engaged in recreational
activities, and misled two female nurses into giving them access to the
hospital. Upon entering the hospital, they brutally and violently attacked
the nurses, who are familiar with the offenders, resulting in serious
injuries being sustained by both nurses.

I have visited the nurses in hospital, as well as their families, and
assured them that the department will ensure that the law takes its course
speedily to bring these criminals to justice. I have also given
instructions that senior investigators do a thorough investigation into
whether security breaches on the part of any member of the department
contributed to this incident. The necessary steps will be taken if this
proves to be the case. Both nurses are recovering well in hospital, and the
department is ensuring that the victims and families of other traumatised
members also receive the required medical treatment and counselling
services.

In the Groote Schuur incident, four young men from the department’s
emergency support team risked life and limb to ensure that an awaiting-
trial detainee did not escape, or that the safety of the public at the
hospital was not compromised. That resulted in the tragic death of Officer
Jacques Horne, who succumbed to his wounds in hospital after the shooting.

I call on this House to join the department and myself in expressing our
heartfelt condolences to his wife, Anneline, and their respective families.
Sadly, their first-born will be born soon. Both the SA Police Services and
Correctional Services investigators are investigating all avenues to arrest
the gang of perpetrators of this horrendous crime who apparently attempted
to free the inmate taken to the hospital for medical treatment.

These criminals showed no respect for human life and did not care about the
safety of the public, using high-calibre weapons in a hospital in the
presence of other patients. While the department remains committed to
rehabilitation of offenders, there is a category of criminals who will
never correct their offending behaviour, and it is such villains who will
be incarcerated under conditions where they cannot present any threat to
the public and to the custodial officials. [Applause.]

The manner in which the correctional officials responded to this incident
speaks of courage and bravery. They did not care for their personal safety.
One of them paid the supreme price, and another is injured and
hospitalised. They did this in the service of their country and of our
people and must be commended for this. [Applause.]

Despite having the opportunity to consider their own safety, they chose to
remain true to the mandate as servants of the people of South Africa. We
salute the fallen hero, Jacques Horne, and his colleagues. Officer Horne
will be buried tomorrow morning in Tokai.

In both cases, the department has taken measures that will ensure that the
culprits will not be in a position to repeat their devious deeds. At the
same time, I must remind all correctional officials: Collusion with
criminals and a failure to perform required duties that result in such
tragedies will not only be dealt with in terms of the departmental
procedures, but you will also be criminally charged.

Before the convening of this House, I am sure hon members might have
witnessed a gathering in front of the gates of Parliament. It was a
demonstration and a march organised by Popcru. It is purported that those
who took part in the march are members of Correctional Services. While
there were members of my department involved - some misusing a sporting
event taking place in Cape Town to be present at this march today - reports
that we have received from correctional centres in the Western Cape
indicate that the levels of attendance at work are high and that all
correctional centres are functioning optimally, with no threats to safety
and security. [Applause.]

Popcru has consistently been misleading its members about negotiations with
the department. The leadership of the union has been involved in
negotiations with my department since July last year and as recently as
Monday of this week, we met and reached a number of agreements in
principle. They are not telling their members about these meetings. They
are misleading the public and their members by meeting the department,
while at the same time encouraging their members to embark on illegal
strike and industrial action.

The union must accept full responsibility for the suspension and dismissal
of its members from Correctional Services. They called on their members to
go on strike, while agreeing with the department that Correctional Services
is an essential service where industrial action is outlawed. Popcru knew
that if their members went on strike they would face dismissals under
agreements that Popcru had been party to. They use their members as canon
fodder for their own selfish ends.

Even worse, when suspended and dismissed workers had the opportunity to
make representations through the normal grievance procedures, the union
failed to represent them. This was grossly irresponsible of the union who
chose, instead, to further mislead these members by claiming that they
would be reinstated by the department.

Those who called on the workers to strike are now sitting back comfortably,
while the members and the family members of the dismissed workers have to
suffer. Many of the dismissed workers are sole breadwinners of their
families. They now have no source of income; yet the union continues to
encourage other workers to embark on irresponsible actions.

Popcru has failed its members. They now resort to personal attacks and
misleading information. They have still not admitted to the families of
those dismissed workers that they were wrong to call them out on strike.
Those families are suffering, while the union continues to mislead others -
like today.

Nobody wants to see any person being out of a job, including the Minister
of Correctional Services, who is called Maggie or a Storm Trooper. Those
who were dismissed are starting to realise that the union has misled them.
At many correctional centres, they are refusing to co-operate with the
union and are instead turning to the department for assistance.

The commitment of this department to the safety of its members, the safety
of the public, the inmates that we look after, remains undiminished and we
will strengthen this aspect of our core business. However, we cannot agree
to the abuse of public funds, as some have been doing with weekend work. We
must use the resources of the state in such a manner that we address
critical social issues, such as unemployment, by creating much-needed job
opportunities within Correctional Services. That is why we are on a drive
to recruit and to retain more and more professionals within Correctional
services.

I have real empathy for the dismissed workers. Their union has let them and
their families down. I sincerely would want to see all those workers back
at work. I am human. I come from the ANC. We want to create jobs and make
sure that people stay at their jobs. [Applause.] But, there is one thing
that I will not compromise on – I will not compromise the labour laws that
this House has put in place. I will not support their dismissals being
reversed at the expense of undermining my own department, of undermining
the government and of undermining this Parliament.

As an essential service department, there are mechanisms that must be used
in disciplinary procedures. The union must let this run its course and
allow the members to go through and represent themselves. I will not
intervene in the disciplinary processes, as the union wants me to do. Those
processes were created by our labour laws. I will not reinstate these
workers without the due processes.

My heart lies with those dismissed workers. I would like to see them back
at their jobs, but in a proper way that will not undermine any discipline
within my department. The union must accept the reality of this and start
negotiating in the joint technical committee, which I have put together,
where they are co-chairs of that team. But what they say there inside is
different to what they say to their members outside. Strong-arm tactics are
unconstructive, and will not yield any results.

I’m sure that this House will agree that the union cannot expect the
department and myself to agree to employ people who make themselves guilty
of criminal activity such as taking officers hostage; destroying state
property; brandishing firearms; encouraging prisoners to break out and
escape; destroying state symbols by ripping off the insignia of others and
destroying it; attacking members for refusing to support their strike
action; closing gates so that supplies cannot come into prisons; not
feeding the prisoners for a whole day; gross insubordination; neglect of
duties, as was the case when union members, who were supposed to be
guarding an inmate in hospital, chose to sleep in their car while others
wondered off, only to find the inmate had actually walked out of the
hospital.

Popcru enjoys the privilege of serving within the Department of
Correctional Services on that JTC which I have created. This is a privilege
not enjoyed by other unions. It is only this particular union which serves
on that. They meet with my department behind closed doors, and they reach
agreements with the department, but then they take to the streets, feeding
their members disinformation.

Ek is nie kwaad vir enige iemand nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] [I am not angry
with anyone. [Interjections.]]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: [Onhoorbaar.] [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Ek is nie kwaad nie. [I am not
angry.]

I will continue to encourage the union, as with all other stakeholders, to
engage with the department and with me in a rational way. If the union
wants to be regarded as a progressive trade union, they must start
representing their members with honesty and sincerity. They have to stop
creating the false impression that they co-manage this department. I will
not co-manage the department with anybody. [Applause.] While there is a
space for all stakeholders in Correctional Services, it is only those
mandated by this House and by the President of this country who will manage
my department.

I call on this House to support the legitimate disciplinary and grievance
procedures agreed to by all unions involved in Correctional Services and to
support the efforts of the department to address the challenges that are
facing us as a department, such as overcrowding, the issues of awaiting-
trial prisoners, issues of insignia, issues of corruption and the
recruitment that we are doing within the department of suitable candidates
as correctional officials.

I will definitely consider, as I said in the beginning, looking at the
categories of dismissed workers and dealing with that, not because the
union marches, but because it is my responsibility as the Minister to make
sure that that happens. And I will not let chaos reign within the
Department of Correctional Services! Thank you.

Mr J SELFE: Madam Deputy Speaker, we’d like to thank the Minister for the
prompt reports supplied, not only to the National Assembly today, but also
to the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on Tuesday.

Many officials who work for the Department of Correctional Services have to
endure conditions of work that are extremely dangerous and, as recent
events have shown, even life threatening. We would like to extend our
deepest sympathies to the families of officials who have lost their lives
or who have been injured in the line of duty. The barbaric tragedies that
occurred at Baviaanspoort and Groote Schuur are immediate examples of this,
but similar events have happened in many other correctional centres over
the past year, for example at C-Max in Pretoria last year, where two
members died.

Each and every day correctional officials go to work with the fear that
they may be stabbed or shot by gang members who infest our prisons. Every
day these officials return to their homes, knowing that the gangs inside
the prisons have friends on the outside who can threaten them and their
families. The conditions of work are unpleasant in many other ways. The
hours are long and, because of overcrowding, the average official has to
look after too many inmates.

Despite these conditions the vast majority of the officials perform their
duties cheerfully and conscientiously. They have pride in their work, they
know it has to be done and they do it well. With their help the
universities of crime can be transformed into centres of rehabilitation.

We must, however, take urgent steps to improve the security of our staff.
There can be no more Baviaanspoorts or Groote Schuurs. We must ensure that
they’re properly trained and properly paid. In some cases consideration
should even be given to danger pay. The department is already employing
extra staff, and this process needs to be accelerated.

Unfortunately, as the Minister pointed out, there seems to be a minority of
officials who place their narrow interests ahead of what this country and
its prisons need. These people refuse to accept that Correctional Services
is, correctly, an essential service and that walking off the job, as they
did last year in Nelspruit, must necessarily result in disciplinary action.
These people seem to forget that structure, good management and respect are
necessary for any efficient organisation.

We, therefore, support the action that the Ministry is taking. We do not,
like some others, think that he is a stormtrooper or a Maggie Thatcher.
[Applause.] He must take the process through to its conclusion and then we
will have prisons that work. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Deputy Speaker, firstly, we would like to associate
ourselves with the condolences to the families and friends of the deceased.
It was a tragic incident that is not acceptable at all. Secondly, we have
debated this matter and we will send our chief whip and the deputy
chairperson of our caucus to attend the funeral, because the tragedy
happened while the House was in session.

The Department of Correctional Services is a service department. I hope the
staff will take care of what they are dealing with, especially if they are
going to strike, because it’s important that it’s a service delivery. They
cannot just take a unilateral decision to go on strike if the process is
not followed correctly.

Mr Minister, we support you on the gross insubordination, because we cannot
allow that to happen in any department of the government, because
immediately when it happens delivery gets lost and then people don’t get
helped and assisted. We urge the Minister to be strong and tough, as you
are trying to be strong and tough, and to make sure there is nobody who
will divert you from the position you are taking, and follow the law as it
happens.

That is why we say the law should be applied as it stands. Proper security
measures must be properly done to make sure that when you are liaising with
all the stakeholders, including the unions, the law is there to help you
and assist you. Take the bold step and fire who is supposed to be fired.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev M S KHUMALO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP identifies with the
statement of the Minister and expresses its sincere condolences to the
family and friends of those who have lost their lives. Correctional
Services officials in general must be commended for their commitment to
their duty, and the ACDP regrets the fact that there are some who have
discredited this institution by their misbehaviour. I thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Geagte Adjunkspeaker, die agb Minister kom en hy praat
met betrekking tot die grieweprosedure. Ek dink nie dit is maklik om elke
werksdag van jou lewe met misdadigers te werk nie. Die vraag is, is die
prosedure billik en word daar verseker dat bewaarders billik gehanteer
word?

Ek kan vir die agb Minister vandag sê – en hy sal binnekort my brief
ontvang – ek weet van vier bewaarders van die Klerksdorp-gevangenis wat nou
al ’n jaar lank geskors is. Hulle skorsing word nie afgehandel nie omdat
daar onbillikheid was aan die kant van die voorsittende beamptes. Dit is
dan onbillik teenoor die bewaarders wat moet opoffer en hulle lewens in
gevaar moet stel om misdadigers op te pas.

Die VF Plus se standpunt is ook dat die agb Minister gedurig onder druk
verkeer wat betref sy begroting. Daarom kan daar nie behoorlike salarisse
betaal word en alles wat daarmee gepaard gaan nie. Dit het tyd geword dat
misdadigers begin werk en hulle eie kos begin produseer in die gevangenisse
sodat daar genoeg geld is om die bewaarders ’n behoorlike salaris te
betaal. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Deputy Speaker, the hon Minister comes here and
talks about the grievance procedure. I don’t think that it is easy to work
with criminals every workday of your life. The question is, is the
procedure fair and do we ensure that warders are treated in a fair manner?

I can tell the hon Minister today – and he will receive my letter shortly -
that I know of four warders from the Klerksdorp prison who have been
suspended for a year now. Their suspension is not being finalised because
there was unfairness on the part of the presiding officers. This is unfair
towards the warders who have to make sacrifices and who have to put their
lives in danger in order to look after criminals.

The view of the FF Plus is also that the hon Minister is constantly under
pressure with regard to his budget. For this season proper salaries and
everything that goes with it cannot be paid. The time has come for
criminals to start working and start producing their own food in the
prisons so that there is enough money to pay the warders a proper salary.
Thank you.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is only proper that we support the
Minister of Correctional Services on this occasion. We certainly cannot
accept indiscipline in an important institution such as this one, and
therefore gross insubordination cannot be accepted at all. We, as the PAC,
would of course want the security conditions in these institutions to be
improved. We do send our very heartfelt condolences to the families
involved. Thank you very much.

Mnr D V BLOEM: Adjunkspeaker, dit is baie, baie hartseer dat mense hierdie
soort voorvalle uitbuit vir hulle eie doelstellings. Dit is die tweede keer
dat Popcru hierdie soort gevalle uitbuit. In C-Max het mense hul lewens
verloor. Hulle het dit uitgebuit en gemaak asof dit ’n speelding is. Hulle
wil populêr word op ander mense se bloed. Hulle is vandag hier voor die
Parlement omdat twee vroue verkrag is. Dit is moeders wat verkrag is. Dit
is ’n hartseer ding. Kinders het ’n pa verloor. Hulle is besig om ’n
bespotting te maak van die hele voorval.

Minister, daar is geen manier waarop ons oor dissipline en respek in
gevangenisse kan onderhandel nie. U moet u voet neersit: enigeen wat nie
die gedragskode van die departement wil volg nie, moet sy baadjie vat en
loop. Daar is nie plek vir enigeen wat ongedissiplineerd is nie. [Applous.]
Daar is geen manier waarop ons mense se lewens in gevaar kan stel nie.
Onthou, dit is moordenaars, verkragters en ander gevaarlike misdadigers wat
daar binnekant sit, en as ons toelaat dat ’n vakbond hierdie departement
gaan regeer, gaan ons chaos kry.

Iemand soos Pieter, wat nie weet wat in ’n gevangenis aangaan nie, sal kom
praat soos hy hier praat, maar hy weet nie ons is elke dag daar binne nie.
Die bestuurders daar binne kry baie swaar ten opsigte van dissipline en
respek. Ons, as portefeuljekomitee, gaan dit nie langer duld nie. Ek wil
dit baie duidelik stel: die portefeuljekomitee gaan dit nie duld dat daar
nie dissipline in die gevangenisse is nie. Ons besoek al die gevangenisse
en dit is ons boodskap dat mense moet onthou as hulle nie respek en
dissipline het nie, moet hulle hul baadjie vat en loop.

Daar is nie plek vir ’n ge-toyi-toyi of enige iets soortgelyk nie. Ons
steek dit nie weg nie. Dit staan enige vakbond, nie alleen Popcru nie, wat
nie wil luister wat hierdie departement sê nie, vry om te loop. Daar is
miljoene mense daar buite wat werk soek. Daar is duisende kinders wat elke
jaar matriek slaag, maar ander mense speel . . .

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, kan ek net vir die agb lid ’n
vraag vra, asseblief? [Tussenwerpsels.]

Mnr D V BLOEM: Vra hom, vra hom, vra hom! Ek is nie bang nie. Vra hom!

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Dankie. Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, ek wil net vir die
agb lid vra . . . (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Speaker, it is very, very sad that people exploit
such incidents for their own purposes. This is the second time that Popcru
has exploited these kinds of incidents. In C-Max people lost their lives.
They exploited this and treated it as a game. They want to become popular
at the expense of other people’s blood. Today they have appeared here in
front of the Parliament because two women were raped. These were mothers
who were raped. It is a sad thing. Children have lost a father. They are
making a travesty of the whole incident.

Minister, there is no way we can negotiate about discipline and respect in
prisons. You must put your foot down: Anybody who does not want to comply
with the department’s code of conduct should take his hat and leave. There
is no room for anybody who is undisciplined. [Applause.] There is no way we
are going to put people’s lives at risk. Remember, those are murderers,
rapists and other dangerous criminals inside there, and if we allow a trade
union to govern the department we will have chaos on our hands.

Someone like Pieter, who does not know what goes on in a prison, will come
and talk the way he does here, but he does not know that we are in there
every day. The managers in there have great difficulty with regard to
discipline and respect. We, as the portfolio committee, will not tolerate
this any longer. I want to put that very clearly: The portfolio committee
will not tolerate a lack of discipline in the prisons. We visit all the
prisons, and our message is that people must remember if they have no
respect or discipline, they must take their hat and leave.

There is no room for toyi-toying or anything of the sort. We make no bones
about it. Any trade union, not only Popcru, that does not want to listen to
what this department says, is free to get out. There are millions of people
out there who are looking for a job. There are thousands of youths every
year who pass matric, but other people are playing . . .

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I ask the hon member a
question, please? [Interjections.]
Mr D V BLOEM: Ask it, ask it, ask it! I am not afraid. Ask it!

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Thank you. Madam Deputy Speaker, I would just like to
ask the hon member . . .]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! I think, even if we are angry, let
us respect the House.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Dis reg, ja. [That’s right, yes.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the hon member first indicate whether he would like
to take the question, and then you put the question.

Mr D V BLOEM: Ja! [Gelag.][Yes! [Laughter.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: And before I actually finish with this ruling, no
matter how angry we are, an hon member remains an hon member. There’s no
Pieter here. Everybody will be referred to in the way the House has
determined.

Hon member, you would like to ask a question? The hon member says yes, go
ahead and ask the question.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Hy’t gesê hy sal die vraag aanvaar, dankie,
Adjunkspeaker. Ek wil net vir die agb lid vra: as hy mooi geluister het na
my toespraak waarin ek juis opgekom het vir dissipline, is dit billik en
regverdig van hom om, omdat hy vir Popcru kwaad is, nou vir my ook kwaad te
wees? Ek dink nie dis billik nie. [Gelag.]

Mnr D V BLOEM: Om jou te antwoord, mnr Groenewald, daar is geen rede waarom
ek vir jou kan kwaad wees nie. Ek is ook nie kwaad vir Popcru nie. Ons het
’n taak om uit te voer as lede van hierdie Parlement, naamlik dat ons moet
wys dat hierdie Regering nie deur enigiemand, maar énigiemand, uitgedaag
gaan word nie, en dat hierdie Regering wette het. Mense het hulle bloed
gestort vir hierdie vryheid en niemand kan speel en trap op daardie bloed
nie. Ek kan nie kwaad word vir jou of vir Popcru nie. Al wat ek kan doen,
is om hulle die regte pad te wys en te sê hulle moet terugkom, want die pad
wat hulle loop, is verkeerd.

My laaste woorde is aan die Minister: Minister, u het die volle
ondersteuning van die Portefeuljekomitee op Korrektiewe Dienste. Daar is
nie ’n manier waarop ons enige ongedissiplineerdheid gaan toelaat nie.
Hierdie lede wat hier sit – die kommissaris en sy mense – het ons volle
ondersteuning. Ons besoek gevangenisse, en daar is sommige mense wat dink
hulle kan doen wat hulle wil in die gevangenisse. Ons is vir rehabilitasie,
maar as mense hierdie soort dinge doen . . . Ek stem heeltemal saam; ons
moet harder optree teenoor gevangenes wat dink ons het sag geword teenoor
hulle met dissipline.
Ons meegevoel aan die familie van die twee verpleegsters, en aan die
familie van die lid van Korrektiewe Dienste wat sy lewe verloor het. Ons
weet daar is, uit die 33 000 lede, 10 of 15 wat ongedissiplineerd is. Die
meerderheid van hulle – ons ontmoet hulle – is baie gedissiplineerde mense,
mense wat regtig wil sien dat hierdie Regering se vlag hoog waai. Ons wil
ook aan hulle sê ons waardeer wat hulle doen. Dit is ’n ondankbare werk.
Hierdie arme mense kry altyd slegte woorde. Hulle kry nooit aanmoediging of
dat iemand vir hulle sê hul werk word waardeer nie. Hulle werk dag en nag
met gevaarlike mense wat ons mammas verkrag. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Elke mens in hierdie land moet die hoed afhaal en net ’n dag spandeer om te
dink aan hierdie mense. Ons waardeer wat hulle vir ons doen! [Tyd
verstreke.]

Die ADJUNKSPEAKER: Baie dankie, mnr Bloem. Mnr Groenewald, ek is baie bly u
en mnr Bloem bly nog steeds vriende! [Gelag.](Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: He said he would accept the question, thank you, Deputy
Speaker. I just want to ask the hon member: if he listened to my speech
attentively, in which I, in fact, stood up for discipline, is it fair and
just of him to be annoyed at me, just because he is annoyed at Popcru? I
don’t think that’s fair. [Laughter.]

Mr D V BLOEM: To answer you, Mr Groenewald, there is no reason why I should
be annoyed at you. Neither am I annoyed at Popcru. We have a task to
perform as members of this Parliament, namely to show that this government
will not be challenged by anybody, whoever they may be, and that this
government has laws. People paid for this freedom with their blood, and
nobody is allowed to play with and trample on that blood. I cannot be angry
with you or with Popcru. All I can do is show them the right way and urge
them to return to it, because they have gone astray.

My final words are addressed to the Minister: Minister, you have the full
support of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services. There is no
way that we will tolerate any undisciplined behaviour. These members
sitting here – the Commissioner and his people – enjoy our full support. We
visit prisons, and there are those people who believe they can do as they
please in prison. We are in favour of rehabilitation, but when people do
these kinds of things … I totally agree; we have to act more decisively
against prisoners who believe we have gone soft on them regarding
discipline.

Our sympathies to the family of the two nurses, and to the next of kin of
the member of Correctional Services who lost his life. We know that, out of
a total of 33 000 members, there are 10 or 15 who are undisciplined. The
majority of these members – we meet them – are highly disciplined people,
who really want to do this government proud. We also want to tell them that
we appreciate what they are doing. It is an unrewarding task. All these
poor people get, are harsh words. They never hear any encouragement, or
hear someone say their work is appreciated. Day and night they work with
dangerous people who rape our mums. [Interjections.]

Everyone in this country should take off their hats and spend just one day
thinking of these people. We appreciate what they are doing for us! [Time
expired.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Bloem. Mr Groenewald, I am very
glad that you and Mr Bloem are still friends! [Laughter.]]

Debate concluded.


                             MEMBERS’ STATEMENTS





                           FIRST AMCHUD CONFERENCE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the African Ministerial Conference
on Housing and Urban Development, or Amchud, took place in Durban from 31
January to 4 February this year. This was the first conference of its kind,
which brought together Ministers of Housing and Urban Development from
across the continent.

The theme of the conference was urbanisation, shelter and development
towards an enhanced framework for promoting sustainable cities and towns in
Africa. The conference discussed and deliberated on the steps that need to
be taken and the strategies that need to be implemented to reduce the
number of people living in slums and the backlog in housing on the African
continent.

South Africa was elected as the first chair of Amchud. We are confident
that the Minister of Housing, Comrade Lindiwe Sisulu, will during the next
two years provide the leadership that is required to ensure that housing
delivery plays its part in helping, not only South Africa, but the
continent of Africa in achieving the millennium development goals.

The ANC wishes the Minister every success in this position, and also
congratulates the Minister, the Department of Housing and all those who
helped to make the first meeting of Amchud the success it was. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                             ZIMBABWEAN ELECTION

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr W J SEREMANE (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker and hon members, it is highly
regrettable that the conduct of our government observer mission in Zimbabwe
has so far been reprehensible. It appears that the government is intent on
repeating actions of the year 2000, when it went out of its way to find the
Zimbabwean elections free and fair, regardless of the enormous evidence to
the contrary.

The credibility of the ANC is thus so severely compromised that it appears
likely that, at this stage, the MDC may refuse to meet with the South
African government delegation, and is also seriously considering not
meeting with the ANC delegation. This is a stunning illustration of the low
esteem in which the ANC is held within Zimbabwe, and it also pours scorn on
its attempts to present itself as an objective observer of the elections.

In the light of its actions so far, any report presented by the ANC
delegation should be treated with circumspection, as the impression can
only be gained that it will do anything possible to rubberstamp what is
already a flawed election. It is time that the ANC looks beyond old
loyalties, acts in the interests of the people of Zimbabwe and also upholds
human rights as it professes. I thank you. [Applause.]


                   SA MAN APPEARS ON WEAPONS CHARGES IN US


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Ngiyabonga, Sihlalu. [Thank you, Chairperson.]

Christiaan Dewet Spies, a South African man who is believed to have worked
for Armscor, was arrested in the United States while allegedly trying to
finalise an arms deal with an undercover FBI agent. Mr Spies appeared in
court yesterday along with 17 other conspirators for allegedly trying to
sell former Eastern bloc and Russian anti-aircraft weapons, antitank
rockets, rocket-propelled grenade launchers and semiautomatic machineguns
to an undercover agent. If found guilty, he could be facing 30 years in
prison.

We urge the relevant South African authorities to follow this case closely,
and to assist US authorities if necessary. It is of the utmost importance
that we rid the world of any threat of terrorism or acts that promote
terrorism, especially at a time when the world is trying to rid itself of
the threat of terrorism and terrorist activities, which have claimed the
lives of so many innocent people.


                             NATIONAL WATER WEEK


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B G MOSALA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC would like to join the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry in its Water for Life campaign.
The week 21-27 March is National Water Week. The severe drought that is
being experienced in some parts of the country has raised awareness
regarding the value of water, economically, socially and recreationally.

Given the limited water resources, and the fact that these resources are
unevenly distributed, the government should continue to lead in campaigns
that raise water awareness. Water has played an important role in improving
the social and economic life of South Africans.

When the ANC government took over in 1994, the existing legislation then
denied millions of our people access to clean water and safe sanitation.
Today 14 million people have been supplied with basic water infrastructure.
Through proper sanitation and the provision of clean water reports of
waterborne diseases have dropped quite drastically. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]


           PRIMARY SCHOOL NUTRITION PROGRAMME IN THE EASTERN CAPE


                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): Chairperson, the UDM expresses its shock regarding the
reported state of the primary school nutrition programme in the Eastern
Cape. Pupils in the Eastern Cape were regularly fed stale bread, biscuits
infested with mites, as well as margarine and jam that were beyond their
expiry dates. This was contained in a 2003 report on the primary school
nutrition programme and later backed up by another report drafted at the
beginning of this year.

The Eastern Cape was the focus of serious reports regarding malnutrition
several years ago. The programme was initially under the Department of
Health, but is now handled by the Department of Education. The taxpayers
and this Parliament are committing millions of rands towards these
programmes, but other children still go hungry.

We call upon the Minister of Education to urgently address this matter
because our children deserve better. Thank you.


                    PROMISE TO DELIVER CLASSROOMS BROKEN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Yesterday the Western Cape provincial education
department was greeted by the sight of hundreds of protesting primary
school pupils who were demanding classrooms that had been promised to them.
The ID is appalled that primary school students have to resort to
protesting in order to get the government to deliver on what is their
constitutional right.

What is even worse is that a commitment to deliver these classrooms was
given last year, and that these promises were simply broken. If we are
prepared to break our promises to children over something as important as
education, then our society is in a very sorry state. The ID is tired of
excuses and the passing of the buck to other government departments on this
issue. The ID brought up the concerns of nondelivery of mobile classrooms
in the Western Cape at the start of last year’s school year and still the
problem has not been resolved.

Education is a constitutional right that does not have a resources
limitation. This means that the government cannot claim it does not have
money to build these schools and classrooms. It is for that reason that the
President promised in his state of the nation address last year that by
April this year no child shall be taught under trees or in unsafe
structures. This target has not been reached and in fact the budget that
was allocated for it fell woefully short.

Estimates are that we need between R12 and R20 billion to address the
backlogs and school provision. This money must be made immediately
available and ring-fencing conditional grants to provincial departments. If
the Department of Public Works cannot live up to its mandate, then the
Department of Education must take responsibility for this. The children of
South Africa are entitled to their education, and this is one issue that
our society simply cannot compromise on. The ID demands that urgent action
be taken on this issue. [Time expired.]


                        TOXICITY OF WATER IN GAUTENG


                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Chairperson, the ACDP is concerned that the health
of the people of Gauteng is at risk, because of the pollution and toxicity
of water in that province. Newspaper reports about the quality of water in
South Africa’s richest province are raising serious concerns that require
immediate intervention by the government. The confidential minutes from the
Gauteng department of agriculture, conservation and environment have
revealed that a lack of political will to remedy the problem is
exacerbating the threatening situation as the government and the mining
bosses squabble over who should bear the enormous costs of correcting the
problem.

It is very unfortunate that the relevant authorities do not seem to care
that the quality of water in Gauteng is slowly deteriorating. The
Krugersdorp Nature Reserve is said to have lost animals, including a
cheetah, lion and springbok as a result of pollution and toxic water from
the stream running through the reserve. What is even more frightening is to
hear reports that the entire water supply of Gauteng could be poisoned
within the next three years, because of the provinces’ old toxic mines.

Therefore, the ACDP calls on the government to act swiftly and put the
concerns of the members of the public to rest by informing them what
government intends doing about the pollution and toxicity of water that
threatens their health.


                          NATIONAL HERITAGE COUNCIL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksk N D MBOMBO (ANC): Kule mpela veki edlulileyo uSekela Mongameli
uMsholozi ngokwake, uvule inkomfa yokuqala yezaMafa eBuntu Kraal eSoweto,
ebonisa ukuba sithathe ubuzwe namasiko ethu ngengqalelo.

Siphide silungiselele nenkomfa kazwelonke okanye eyomhlaba wonke ezakuba
ngoJulayi eThekwini. Siyabulela kuwe Khongolosi ngokusikhulula
emakhamandeleni wasifaka enkululekweni, ngoku sazi izinto ebesifudula
singazazi. Siyazidla ngoku ngobuzwe bethu. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs N D MBOMBO (ANC): During the past weekend, the Deputy President,
Msholozi himself, opened the first heritage conference at uBuntu Kraal in
Soweto. He was showing that we have taken our nationality and culture into
cognisance.

We will again make preparations for the national conference or world
conference that is going to be held in July in Durban. We thank the ANC for
freeing us from the chains and taking us to freedom, now we know things
that we did not know before. We are now proud of our nationality.]

The National Heritage Council is tasked to integrate our previously
fragmented heritage institutes and restore our indigenous knowledge and
integrity. Moreover, it seeks to ensure cohesion between the various
manifestations of heritage in our country, thereby ensuring preservation
and balance in the melting pot. It also plays a critical role, as
demonstrated during the conference, by acting as a catalyst of the heritage
sector, given that it engages with communities and all sectors of society.

As the ANC, we have no doubt that this Council will continue to be guided
by democratic principles through which we wish the Ministry and other
partners in this project great speeches as they continue to bring . . .
[Time expired.]


               FAILURES REGARDING HOUSING IN THE WESTERN CAPE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A C STEYN (DA): Chairperson, the hon Minister of Housing continues to
try and blame me or my party for her failures with regard to housing in the
Western Cape. In reply to a question yesterday the hon Sisulu asked me if I
knew who she was and where she came from. This, presumably, was in
reference to her term as Minister of Intelligence. Am I meant to be
intimidated or threatened by these remarks? [Interjections.] I will give
the hon Minister the benefit of the doubt and say it was meant as neither.

The Minister also referred to her invitation to me to join her in a
walkabout. I accepted the invitation then, as I do now. I have given her
parliamentary liaison officer all my contact details. To date, I have not
heard from her office in this regard other than the outburst by the hon
Minister in this House. I wish to ask the Minister: Is this one of your
empty promises? And in reply to her earlier question my answer is: Yes,
Minister, I do know who you are. You are a servant of the people and it is
time that you begin to serve all of them. I thank you.

                     LOSS OF LIFE DUE TO ROAD ACCIDENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Chairperson, according to Statistics South Africa more
than 34 lives are lost and there are 160 serious injuries on our roads
daily. This has cost South Africa R35 billion a year.

During the holiday periods people indulge greatly in the consumption of
alcohol. Many unfortunately travel on our roads in a drunken state, often
costing lives, including their own. We support the Easter Road Safety
Campaign, launched by the KwaZulu-Natal MEC for transport, which serves to
bring down the number of road accidents and injuries. We call for measures
to be taken in all provinces to make our roads safer.

We also call on the bus, trucking and tow truck companies to clamp down on
reckless driving. The MF calls on public drivers and pedestrians to take
care on the roads and to adhere to road safety.

Only yesterday a mother and two kids miraculously survived going down
Chapman’s Peak. Accidents happen. Buckle up and be safe. To all the
reckless and irresponsible drivers out there, I agree with the KwaZulu
Natal MEC, Bheki Cele, namely that all drunken drivers who recklessly kill
people in accidents should be charged with murder, not with culpable
homicide.


                            RENAMING OF PRETORIA


                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr S B NTULI (ANC): Chairperson, we the ANC note and welcome the name
change of Pretoria by the Metropolitan Council of Tshwane. The renaming
comes after thorough research was conducted on the indigenous people who
lived in the area earlier on in history. This act by the Tshwane Council is
in fact a reinstatement of the original name of the area.

According to the report by the name changing committee, comprising of the
fourteen academics, oral history says that the name Tshwane originated from
the first Ndebele ethnic group, which had occupied the area under the
leadership of Chief Muzi Mnyamane. Tshwane, who was one of his six sons,
ruled after his death. Re a tshwana, we are the same. We welcome the name
and let us all promote the name. I thank you. [Applause.]


                        NANTES PRIMARY SCHOOL CLOSED





                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE (DA): Chairperson, the DA has taken note of the fact
that the Nantes Primary School, serving the disadvantaged Eersterust and
Mamelodi communities in Pretoria, was suddenly closed yesterday without any
prior notice by the Department of Labour.

Fourteen months ago the department had condemned the school on the grounds
of health and safety. Despite requests to the education authorities, the
board of management and the school was kept in the dark about developments.
It is quite unacceptable that there has been no proper co-ordination or
contingency planning between the relevant departments, the board and school
about the sudden closure and arrangements for the children.

This could have been done during the aforementioned fourteen-month lead
period and 1 100 children could have started this school year without
disruption. Instead, they are now faced with a last minute scramble for
alternative accommodation and temporary solutions. Surely they deserve
better. This is clearly an example where primary school children have to
bear the brunt of the ruling party’s incompetent and unco-ordinated
administrative endeavours. I thank you.

                     BY-ELECTIONS IN NORTH WEST PROVINCE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mme M W MAKGATE (ANC): Modulasetulo, setshaba sa rona ko Bokone-Bophirima
se ithsupile fa se na le tshepo mo pusong ya mokgatlo wa ANC mo go tliseng
diphetogo le ditlhabologo mo matshelong a batho ka boela ba go kgetha
boemedi mo dithlophong tsa tlaleletso tse neng di tshwerwe ka di 07 March
2005. Dipholo tsona di yana, ANC e fentse ka 90%, Kgetlheng ward 3 ANC e
fentse ka 67%, Kgetlheng ward 2 ANC e bone 53% batho ba tiisa tumelo ya
bona mo Freedom Charteng le mo maikaelong a rona a tlhagelang mo
Manifestong. ANC e tsea nako ae go akgola bathlophi bohle ba ba tswileng go
ya go e tlhopha. Ke a leboga. (Translation of Setswana statement follows).

[Ms M W MAKGATE (ANC): Chairperson, our people in the North West have shown
their confidence in the ANC-led government to bring changes and
developments in their lives through electing representatives again in the
by-election held on 7 March 2005. The results are as follows: The ANC won
by 90%; in Kgetlheng ward 3 the ANC won by 67% and in Kgetlheng ward 2 the
ANC got 53%. People reaffirmed their belief in the Freedom Charter and in
our aims as reflected in the Manifesto. The ANC would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate all voters who went out and voted for them.
Thank you.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P NHLEKO): We have come to the end of the
statements, however there is an opportunity for the ANC to take up one slot
if the party so wishes.


                   CONGRATULATIONS TO MS MASINGITA MASUNGA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C L GOLOLO (ANC): Chairperson, I move that the House formally
congratulates the activist and heroine Ms Masingita Masunga. Gauteng-based
Masingita Masunga has given . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P Nhleko): Hon member, on a point of order: You
are moving a motion?

Mr C L GOLOLO: It’s a statement.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P Nhleko): It does not sound like one, but let
us give you an opportunity.

Mr C L GOLOLO: Chair, it is the recognition of people who are physically
challenged.

Gauteng-based Masingita Masunga has given people with disabilities
throughout South Africa an opportunity to make a viable contribution to
society through projects created by her Tinyungubyeni Talent Promotion
Company. As the company’s managing director and a champion of the
physically challenged from an early age, Ms Masunga has overcome her own
disability of cerebral palsy to establish an organisation that motivates
men, women and the youth.

Chair and judge of the arts and culture category of the awards for all
women, Mr Sipho Mabuze, said her contribution to physically disabled people
in South Africa makes her a true model. Miss Masunga is an incredible
activist in her field, who has risen above her challenging background to
make her motivational impact. She is an outstanding role model. Malibongwe!
[Praise!]




    ACTS OF PROVINCIAL DEPARTMENTS OF EDUCATION, NATIONAL SCHOOL FEEDING
            SCHEME, PROTEST BY SCHOOL CHILDREN AND NANTES SCHOOL

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I have to begin by saying there are
many activities by some of our provincial administrations of education,
which do cause me a great deal of concern, for example, the recent debacle
with respect to the payment of educators who were not on strike last year.
It is a worrying part of a lack of attention to effective administration.
But I think those failures cannot cloud the massive achievements that our
government is making in the education sector and the commitment to
education shown by the allocation to educational activity in our national
budget in South Africa.

With respect to the Eastern Cape, we are attending to this problem
regarding the school nutrition scheme. What I would be happy for hon
members to do is to assist the schools in their local area in implementing
the national school feeding scheme. My belief is that the utilisation of
large contractors to deliver services to our schools is part of the problem
that we have, because a number of these companies are concerned about
profit, rather than providing a service to our children.

I believe that the scheme should create employment opportunities in
communities. Primarily women should be managing those schemes and ensuring
that services are delivered adequately to our children. I believe members
of Parliament can assist in this regard.

A great deal of money goes to the national nutritional programme - over
R800 million - and I really wonder whether a slice of bread and a drink of
orange juice is worthy of the R800 million investment by this government.
Therefore, I am glad members are paying attention, but rather than being
critical, let us look at how we can make the scheme work, because the
children are the children of South Africa, not the children of a particular
party in this House.

With respect to the Western Cape, I have learnt of the protest, and I will
be meeting with the MEC this afternoon. Let me again say with respect to
the provinces, hon members who may have studied the utilisation of
provincial budgets would be fully aware that the allocation for
infrastructure was not fully used in the year 2004-05. Therefore, it is not
inadequate provision by government; it is actual implementation in the
provinces where schools should be built.

We need to examine what is going on and I am doing that in order to ensure
that we improve our ability in order to execute . . . [Interjections.] Stop
shouting and listen. You like commenting, but you never listen. Give me the
power to fire them. You wanted the kind of Constitution we have, which
involves powers, so refer to provinces, look at what is happening in
provinces rather than merely sitting here and shouting across the floor.

Finally, if I could just say that with respect to the Nantes Primary
School, the acting Director-General of Education is in discussion with the
Head of Education in Gauteng, as well as the Director-General in the Labour
Department to see how we can assist with ensuring that education goes on
for these children. I thank you. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P Nhleko): Could I remind hon members that in
terms of Rule 105, ministerial responses shall not exceed two minutes.
However, in this particular case one had to exercise an element of
discretion, given the importance of the matter. So, we had to add an
additional minute. I think it is important to explain that. Are there any
other ministerial responses?

               SETTING UP OF A HERITAGE FOUNDATION FOR AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Chairperson, I just want to thank
the ANC, on behalf of the Ministry of Arts and Culture, as well as the
National Heritage Council, for the statement commending the National
Heritage Council.

I also want to just inform the House that at the moment we are holding the
precommittee workshop that the member referred to in preparation for the
World Heritage Committee Conference, which will be held in July in Durban.
This precommittee workshop is a workshop of African experts that are
preparing for the July conference in Durban. It is presently dealing with
the Africa Heritage Position Paper, as well as looking at setting up an
African heritage fund or foundation.
This fund or foundation for Africa will relate to the conservation,
protection and promotion of African heritage. So, we have moved beyond just
South Africa. We are rising to greater heights. We are actually looking at
the African heritage landscape; we are looking further than just South
Africa.

So, I just want to thank the member for this. It also puts heritage clearly
on our agenda. Thank you. [Applause.]

                    CITATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAWS BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, just under nine years ago
representatives of the people of South Africa gathered in the
Constitutional Assembly and with exuberant dignity, assented to giving life
to a new nation.

This happened when we adopted the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa as the supreme law of the Republic. Confirming its significance on
the occasion of its adoption, the Chairperson of the Constitutional
Assembly, Cyril Ramaphosa, remarked:

       The Constitution is a subject of a rather fortunate paradox. It is no
       one’s Constitution, and yet it is everyone’s Constitution. Just as no
       one party sees its constitutional proposals reproduced in their
       entirety in this Bill, so no one person can claim exclusive ownership
       of this Constitution.


       It belongs to everyone in the Constitutional Assembly and it is a
       reflection of our collective will for a new united and democratic
       nation. This Constitution belongs to South Africans.

Today our esteemed Constitution, a product of a remarkable, open and
transparent process of unprecedented levels of popular participation and
breadth of consultation, from the beginning to the end, serves as a mirror
of our society, reflecting our origins and past and our cherished values
and vision as a new nation united in its diversity.

On the same occasion, the then Deputy President, Thabo Mbeki, said of the
Constitution that it -

       . . . constitutes an unequivocal statement that we refuse to accept
       that our Africanness shall be defined by our race, our colour, our
       gender or our historical origins. It is a firm assertion made by us
       that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white.
       It gives concrete expression to the sentiment we share as Africans
       and we will defend to the death that the people shall govern.

Hon members, because the Constitution is so exceptional, applauded
throughout the world as a remarkable, progressive, basic law, it is
imperative that we should accord it that status; also in practice.
Unfortunately, this does not always happen. We are finding that many legal
practitioners do not understand that we have a Constitution and that it is
the supreme law of the land and, definitely, do not seem to understand that
we live and operate in a constitutional state.

You will, for example, get many a magistrate and practitioner on the
ground, who will refer to our Constitution as Act 108 of 1996. If it was
just the way they referred to the Constitution, it would not have been
problematic, but it is also symptomatic of the way in which they
substantively deal then with issues that are of a constitutional nature.

Therefore, many persons, including members of the judiciary, especially the
Chief Justice, the hon Arthur Chaskalson, have in the recent past expressed
the view that the Constitution should be treated differently from other
Acts of Parliament. For example, by not been allocated an Act number like
other ordinary Acts of Parliament. The view has also been expressed that
the short titles of all laws amending the Constitution should, as in some
other countries, for example, India and the United States, be numbered
consecutively.

Hon members, the Bill before the House today therefore seeks to give effect
to these views by, amongst others, firstly, providing that from the
commencement of this Bill no Act number is to be associated with the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa of 1996. In other words, the
Constitution will in future be referred to as the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa of 1996. No Act number is to be associated with or
allocated to laws amending the Constitution.

Secondly, we are substituting the short titles of existing laws amending
the Constitution so as to provide for their consecutive numbering, for
example, the Constitution First Amendment Act of 1997, the Constitution
Second Amendment Act of 1998 and the Constitution Third Amendment Act of
1998. Thirdly, this Act provides that all the short titles of all future
laws amending the Constitution must be numbered consecutively.

I therefore urge this House to unconditionally support this very important
piece of legislation to further accord the necessarily respect and status
to our Constitution. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

                        STERILISATION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.


     DEBATE ON “A DECADE OF A DECISIVE ADVANCE TO EQUAL RIGHTS FOR ALL”


Mrs N B GXOWA: Ndiyabulela Mhlalingaphambili . . . [I thank you,
Chairperson...]

Hon members and hon Ministers, as we celebrate Human Rights Day on 21 March
this coming Monday, we should always remember that 10 years ago women of
the world recognised women’s rights as human rights. It is a coincidence
that a few weeks ago we celebrated International Women’s Day, recognising
the progress that has been made in the world in assuring implementation of
human rights, rights of women and of the girl child.

As we celebrate human rights and also the 50th anniversary of the Freedom
Charter, it makes sense to recall the experiences of many of our women,
particularly black women. We cannot celebrate achievements we have made as
South Africans if we do not look back at where we came from. During the
apartheid period women in South Africa, especially black women, experienced
triple oppression, regarding gender, race and class, and all were
vulnerable to various forms of oppression and discrimination.

For a number of women this manifested in a lack of education, and
consequently illiteracy, lack of employment and poverty. Women have been
subjected to violence in their homes and communities and to sexual assault,
harassment and discrimination in their workplaces.

Women were exempted from decision-making roles and did not even have legal
power; instead men had total power to run their lives. Women were treated
as minors who could not have access to property, even when their husbands
died. When their husbands died, permission to occupy the house would be
given to a male figure, who could chase the women away if he wished to.

In the past, my son, as a male, had more power than I had. For instance,
let me just give an example of what happened: After my father-in-law died
in 1975, and then late in the 1980s my mother-in-law died, my husband had
to take over the estate of the family in the rural areas of Queenstown in
Lady Frere. When my late husband and I went together to the offices . . .

. . . siyakhona ngenjongo yokuba sibhalise abantwana elifeni. [. . . we
went there with the intention of registering our children in the estate.]

As we entered . . .

. . . uNobhala wathi: “Unaye omnye umfazi ngaphandle kwalo?” [The Clerk
said: “Do you have another wife except for this one?”]

My husband said: “No, this is my only wife.”

“Ndiphe amagama abantwana bakho,” kutsho uNobhala. [“Give me your
children’s names,” said the Clerk.]

We have five children and the eldest is female. When we started mentioning
the first one: “Nonkululeko”, . . .

. . . uNobhala wathi: “Heyi ndoda, awunabo abantwana?” [The Clerk asked:
“Don’t you have children, man?”]

Umyeni wam: “Ndinabo abantwana.” [My husband said: “I have children.”]

Unobhala wathi: “Ndinike amagama abantwana ngoku!”[The Clerk said: ”Give me
their names now!”]

My husband said: “But I gave you the names.”

UNobhala wathi: “Awunabo abantwana, musa ukusinika amagama amantombazana
apha thina, sifuna amakhwenkwe, kanti awuwazelanga amakhwenkwe?” [The Clerk
said: “If you have children, then give us the boys’ names, we do not want
the girls’ names.”]

We then also reacted and asked: “What do you mean?” That meant the girl
children did not have a right to the estate, only the boys had a right to
the estate.

It was difficult for a woman to buy even a stove. In those days there were
stoves known as “Welcome Dovers”…[Laughter.]… the cheapest stove you could
get on the market, which cost about £49. You could not buy that, because
you were a woman. You had no purchasing power. You had to get a man to sign
a surety for you that you can buy the stove. This resulted in a woman going
out and getting any man, even if you did not know that man, but he just had
to go and sign for 25c at the Native Commissioner and get the certificate,
and then sign a purchase order to buy a stove.
As a result, because some of the men were unscrupulous, they took advantage
of the situation, and this arrangement forced women into personal contracts
with men they did not even know. Very few women could purchase on hire
purchase.

Bekukho iibhedi ebezithengiswa kwa Ellerines kusithiwa zi’Golden dollar’
ukuba andiphazami. Ibhedi olala ngayo inyanga ibenye yophuke kodwa
ungakwazi nokuyithenga ngetyala. [There were beds that were sold at
Ellerines Furnishers known as ‘Golden Dollar’, a bed on which you only
sleep for one month then it is broken, but women could not even buy it on
hire purchase.]

Women could not buy cars, as a result there were very few women who drove
cars in those days. It was not because they could not afford them, but they
were not allowed to buy cars or own property. These attrocities were even
harder on women in the rural areas. Whilst women in the rural areas carried
the bulk of the subsistance farming, their access to land was limited by
traditional patriachal values.

IiNkosi bezingafuni kubanika... [Traditional chiefs denied...]

Women in the rural areas lacked access to essential services such as water
and health care. For many years women did not even know a maternity clinic.
They delivered their children at home without medical or health care. As a
result many women could not register their children in order for them to
get identity documents. That is why today we have the problem of many
people without these documents. Women could not register their children,
because they delivered them at home and they had no vaccination
certificates.

I remember a particular incident in Germiston at Georgetown, where a woman
was pregnant at the same time as the employer’s dog. One day her madam
said: “You and this bloody dog make me sick with your pregnancies.”

Banomdintsi kuye njengokuba bekhulelwe bobabini nje.[She detests them both,
the pregnant woman and the pregnant dog.]

Now what this shows is that this hard-working woman was equated to a dog.
At that time dogs had more rights to walk in the streets of suburbs than
black women. Black women had to carry passes or permits, even when they
visited neighbours.

For us 21 March will always stand foremost in our minds as the day in 1960
when the apartheid state unleashed its brutality on innocent people
protesting against the hated pass laws in Sharpeville. Whilst we celebrate
the day, we should always remember those who lost their lives in the
struggle fighting for human rights. It is their fight that has made
Sharpeville a household name around the world, so that it has come to
symbolise the fight against racism and racial discrimination.

Throughout the world 21 March has been recognised as the International Day
for the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination. As we celebrate
Human Rights Day in South Africa, we should recognise the progress that has
been made in pursuance of human rights, including women’s rights, which are
at the core of South Africa’s Constitution. South Africa views gender
equality as central to equal enjoyment of all rights and freedoms by all
those who live in it.

One of the main achievements, in terms of violence against women, is the
Domestic Violence Act, passed in 1997 for the protection of people in
domestic relationships. However, despite the passing of the Act, violence
against women remains a serious problem and sexual violence against women
and children is still rife. The fact that many of these women go to court
is an indicator that women and children are using the Act to protect their
rights. Prior to passing this Act, domestic violence was an issue people
did not talk about, and it was ignored by the legal system.

We, as the ANC-led government, recognise that violence against women and
children remains a challenge that we need to put more emphasis on to ensure
that it is dealt with in this second decade of democracy.

Today women enjoy the right to own property that has been denied to them
for so long. Today they can buy and sell property. Today, we as a country
have a Bill of Rights, a Gender Commission and human rights that ensure
that women are protected. I thank you. [Time expired.]


Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, I want to thank hon Bertha. I think we all enjoyed
that, and we all rejoice in those specific advances.

I hope that all members heard the hon Deputy Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development say a minute ago that it is imperative that we
accord the Constitution the status it deserves. It is in that belief that
we say today that the question which should be debated is whether we have
not seen half a decade of retreat from equal rights for all.

There is no room in our Constitution for the different treatment of
different races, which is the hallmark of racist systems like apartheid, or
for the granting of rights and privileges to one race, whilst withholding
them from another. There is no room in our constitutional scheme for such
an approach.

We did not sit down, after all, to negotiate a transition from white
nationalism to black nationalism. Yet, a racial agenda has been driven over
the last five years. It began with the media racism enquiry in 1999, and
continued with the Racism Conference in 2000. The International Race
Conference followed the next year, an occasion so filled with hatred and
strife that South Africa has so far drawn something of a veil over the
event.

Yet, the hon Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development has been
quoted approvingly citing that conference in the context of the so-called
transformation of the judiciary, which is the latest terrain of struggle
for those who run with the race theme. And I mean that they literally run
with the race theme. A prominent member of the Cape Bench was spotted in
the gym last week wearing a t-shirt proclaiming the transformation of the
judiciary.

Perhaps I should not be surprised at the Minister’s reference to that
conference, considering that Prof Shadrack Gutto now advises her. This
gentleman was a mover and shaker in the tabling in Parliament in early 2000
of the Equality Bill, a piece of work so wild that a leading jurist called
it “evangelical”, and -


      . . . so overwritten that it was clearly based on the slot machine
      model of the judiciary - one puts a set of facts into the machine
      which responds with noise and flickering lights and pops out the legal
      answer.


      This Bill had no fewer than four separate definitions of
      discrimination, as well as something of a legislative first in the
      form of a footnote, which defined “substantive equality” as “including
      equality in terms of the law and in reality. This takes into account
      equality in terms of process and outcomes.”

One can only sigh and start redrafting from scratch, which is what we did,
because as Dr Mamphela Ramphele said, the right to equality does not mean
the right to successful outcomes. Like the DA, she believes it is
individuals who make the difference, once fast-tracked through the right
kind of affirmative action programmes and once given the opportunities
previously denied. Given our history, don’t they make us proud when they do
shine; don’t they, those superb black CEOs, and those superlative female
Constitutional Court judges? They make me very proud.

I want to tell you a little story here. I immediately tabled in that
Equality Law Committee, the Constitutional Court’s authoritative ruling on
what substantive equality is. The court rejected a redistributive
interpretation, and said, both in conferring benefits on persons and by
imposing restraints on certain other action, the state has to do so in a
way which results in equal treatment of all persons.

The very next morning, Prof Gutto tabled in turn what he termed a synopsis
of the so-called equality jurisprudence in which he omitted mention of this
case, and advised hon members that they need not follow the higher courts,
just as the lower courts where the majority of the masses are involved
have, and I quote, in his view -

  . . . many legally sound tactics to avoid the principles developed
  in higher courts and get off with only a judicial reprimand.

Now that is shocking.

He did recant. He recanted upon challenge, but I have kept that document,
because the incident demonstrated what a senior justice department official
said openly there, and what Prof Gutto himself now openly says.

It is the rulings of the court that are at issue. It is not the colour of
the Bench. Race is being used to achieve ends that have nothing to do with
equality. [Interjections.] The way in which our Constitution does provide
for substantive equality is to use the key concept of unfair
discrimination, which - I quote the Constitutional Court here –

  . . . recognises that although equal treatment is our goal,
  we cannot achieve that goal by insisting upon identical treatment
  in all circumstances before the goal is achieved. Each case therefore
  will require a careful understanding to determine whether its overall
  impact is one which furthers equality, or not.

That is the question that we need to ask ourselves. Can we say that all
laws and policy measures now in place will, over all, further the goal of
equality? Or do they advance racial control of the country by a black
nationalist government? Is the blunt instrument of demographic determinism,
under which 5 000 SAPS members have been forced to leave their homes and
their provinces to achieve national racial quotas in police stations, a
bona fide section 9(2) provision, designed to give black policemen a place
in the sun while furthering the ultimate goal of equality? Is that what was
intended with section 9(2), the affirmative action clause? There must be a
rational relationship between ends and means before affirmative action is
constitutional - before the discrimination against non-African police can
be fair. Is this acceptable?

This government, like the government it replaced, knows how to appeal to
race over reason. But if, in the process, race triumphs over rational
affirmative action, then we are in fact in retreat from equal rights. If a
slot machine model of justice is established which spits out rulings that
government likes, then we are in fact in full retreat from
constitutionalism itself. [Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister and colleagues, it has
been 56 years since the United Nations adopted and proclaimed the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Although solemn commitments were made by a
world tired of war and atrocities committed against populations throughout
the world, the abuse of human rights has occurred throughout the 56 years,
and still occurs today in many parts of our global society.

The advent of a democratic dispensation in South Africa, I believe, makes
this debate today very relevant because it will allow us to reflect on our
achievements, confirm our ongoing commitment and act as a warning against
future complacency.

There has been a decisive advance to equal rights for all. The fundamentals
are firmly in place. South Africa has a human rights-based Constitution, a
Constitutional Court, a Human Rights Commission and a vibrant civil
society, which is most important to benchmark and to ring warning bells if
and when necessary.

Yes, South Africa can take pride in what has been achieved in a short span
of time. Our young democracy has progressed significantly in the arena of
human rights.

We do need to remind ourselves, as the first speaker did for us, that a
mere 11 year ago, the majority of our citizens were subjected to one or
other form of human rights abuse on a daily basis over a long period of
time. I feel that by rightfully taking pride in our achievements, we must
not allow this pride to make us complacent as has happened in many other
parts of the world.

Here I want to talk about a true human rights culture, which is something
that needs to be developed. In order to take root, it needs to be nurtured.
I believe that the United Nations, many years ago, fully realised this, and
therefore stated in its preamble, and I quote:

         . . . called on all member countries to publicise the text of the
      declaration and to cause it to be disseminated, displayed, read and
      expanded.

Here I am looking to the hon Minister of Education, principally, for this
to happen in schools and other educational institutions. These very words
were penned in 1948, and it must alert us to the reality that, even if all
human rights instruments are in place, we have to be ever vigilant to
develop a human rights culture, and we must work on this until every
citizen accepts the challenge to honour every aspect of a human rights
culture. The instruments and institutions can only lay the foundations.

We have to reach a level of development in our nation where the abuse of
human rights will simply not be tolerated, not because the law forbids
abuse of human rights, but simply because every citizen is appalled by it
and will not tolerate it.

We have to work at achieving this culture and the understanding and respect
for human rights because, in the final analysis, its not the institution,
it’s not the legal aspect, it is the understanding by every citizen in our
country, and we have to ask our Minister of Education: Can we compel our
institutions of learning, as requested in the preamble, to include,
disseminate, display, read and expound the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights? Should it be part of the curriculum? Do we feel that young people
need to be inculcated with these values? Thank you, Sir. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Nmz J B SIBANYONI: Mhlalingaphambili ngithoma ngokuthokoza ukufumana ithuba
lokobana nami ngiphophothe kulomnghanghiswano ngamalungelo wobuntu
namhlanjesi. Begodu ngilotjhisa woke amalunga wePalamende ahloniphekileko.
Mina ngizokukhuluma malungana nemithetho egade ikhona, ikhethulula mayelana
nobuhlanga, igandelela abantu, idima abantu isithunzi. Okukarisako umbuso
odoswa phambili yi-ANC uphelisile imithetho leyo. Ikulumo yami icale
ubujamo bomthetho, ngamanye amezwi ngingathi ngikhuluma ngokuthi: Uthini
umthetho? (Translation of Ndebele paragraph follows.)

[Mr JB SIBANYONI: Chairperson, let me start by expressing my gratitude for
being granted this opportunity to join this debate regarding human rights
in the present day. I would also like to greet all hon members of
Parliament. I am going to speak about the past laws, discriminatory laws,
laws that demoralised our people, and that denied our people their dignity.
What is interesting is that the government led by the ANC has banned such
laws. My focus area is the system of our law, in other words what the
position of our law system is.]

In South Africa we have a history of no human rights, but a lot of human
wrongs. The violation of human rights was not only done through policy, but
it was also implemented through legislation. Laws that divided every sector
of our community were passed by parliament. I will not endeavour to name
all of them, but a few will suffice. We had laws such as the Reservation of
Separate Amenities Act; the Immorality Act; the pass laws; the Registration
of Voters Act; tricameral parliament laws - which established the national
states parliaments of Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda and Ciskei; and the
old Defence Act - which discriminated on conscription and through which
only whites were allowed to join the army.

I would like to point out that the Population Registration Act was the
basis for defining race. The South African nation was classified initially
as Europeans and non-Europeans or Europeans and natives. Later, it was
classified into whites, coloureds, Indians and Bantus. Although the word
“Bantu” is plural in nature, and means people, the previous legislation
referred to a black person as a “single Bantu” or “one Bantu”. Eventually
the word acquired a derogatory meaning. It was later changed to “plural”
and a person was regarded as “a plural”; one plural, two plurals.
[Laughter.] There was a department of plural relations that dealt with
matters affecting Africans.

The Native Land Act is an example of a piece of legislation that
dehumanised the African community. In terms of this Act, we know that 87%
of the land was allocated to the white community and only the remaining 13%
was reserved for blacks. That is why we are so happy that land reform is
being expedited so that within three years it will be finalised. To add
insult to injury, influx control laws were introduced to keep Africans in
the rural and semidesert areas, and in some pockets of land that were used
as labour reservoirs. Here I am referring to townships or locations.

The Group Areas Act, for instance, segregated the community in terms of
race. It referred to people as different groups. It reserved the big cities
or towns for whites. Blacks, Indians and coloureds were not allowed to live
or trade in towns. If, for example, you were a black person and wanted to
open a business, such as an attorneys’ firm or a shop, you were supposed to
use a person of that race to front for you.

In the implementation of this legislation, communities were forcibly
removed from their areas. Here we think of, for example, the people of
District Six, Sophiatown and many others that were evicted in terms of that
legislation. Pass laws hindered and prevented the free movement of people
from one area to another. People were arrested, tried and sentenced for
merely being at a particular place at a particular time. Curfew laws were
used to restrict the movement of blacks in the so-called urban areas, which
were known as “blanke gebied” in Afrikaans.

The Separate Development Act created skewed communities, thus we have the
first and second economies today. There was also a law that prevented
people who were not of white descent from passing through the Orange Free
State. There was a lot of harassment and intimidation. People in power then
used to talk about “Haak Vrystaat”. There were Acts of Parliament that
regulated, for example, education. We had the Bantu Education Act, the
Coloured Education Act, which provided for the control of education for
coloured persons, and the Indian Education Act that similarly provided for
the control of education for the Indian people.

In 2002, Parliament passed an Act that established a mechanism to deal with
crimes against humanity, derived from the Rome Statute, for example
genocide. It made it possible for the court to sit in South Africa to try
such cases and help maximise co-operation with the International Criminal
Court.

Since the advent of democracy, the people’s Parliament has been repealing
the discriminatory legislation. What still has to go is the Black
Administration Act.

The transformation of the judiciary and the legal professions still poses a
challenge. For example, we have courts that are still referred to by the
names of the old provinces, such as the Transvaal Provincial Division.
There is presently no High Court for Limpopo or Mpumalanga. The judiciary
was even beaten by the local government structures, which were able to
transform. Today we have wall-to-wall municipalities.

As South Africa, we have been pacesetters. One of the clauses of the
Freedom Charter provides that all shall be equal before the law. The
people’s Parliament is accelerating the vision of the Freedom Charter by
ensuring that our people should realise that they are equal. At the first
go we included a Bill of Rights in our Constitution, as Chapter 2. It took
America years and years and amendment after amendment before they
incorporated fundamental or basic human rights in their constitution as the
16th amendment.

Some of our judges play a role globally, in one way or another, for example
Judge Goldstone. Today, South Africa acknowledges socioeconomic rights as
part of our legal system. Such rights are justifiable or enforceable
through courts of law, subject to the availability of resources.

Ngifuna ukuthi kufanele sizikhakhazise ngakho koke esikufumeneko ngokususa
imithetho egandelelako, begodu kufanele sithokoze ngokubuyiswa kwesithunzi
sabantu labo egade batlhoriswa ngesikhathi esigadungileko. Ngithi
ngithokoza kuwo woke umuntu ogade alalaleko njenganje. Ayisele. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of Ndebele paragraph follows.)

[I want to say let us be proud of what we have achieved after these
apartheid laws were banned. Also we must be grateful for bringing back the
dignity of our people who were oppressed in the past. I thank everyone who
was listening at this point in time. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms N M MDAKA: Chairperson and hon members, we salute those who gathered at
various police stations throughout the country on 21 March 1960 to protest
against repression, and we specifically remember those who lost their lives
in the process.

To be able to gather in this House today, representatives of all the people
of South Africa, where every party and ideology is granted an opportunity
to participate, is an honour and a privilege that we can never take for
granted. Certainly, we cannot ever take for granted the impact of 21 March
1960 on our history and on our ability to be gathered here today as a
democratic and inclusive Parliament.

It is for these reasons that 21 March was granted special status in our
calendar, and why we have chosen to celebrate it as Human Rights Day. We
must remind ourselves regularly that the human rights we enjoy now were
achieved at a high price; that freedom and equality are not a given.

We also need to constantly remind ourselves that the human rights, as
enshrined in our Constitution, are objectives that we must continuously
strive for and maintain.

We call upon all South Africans to celebrate this day in unity, and to
reflect upon how far we have come since 21 March 1960. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Thank you, Chair. This past decade has certainly been a
decisive one for South Africa in which we have managed to make a
fundamental break with our tragic past. We have committed ourselves to the
phrase ``never again’’ when it comes to the trampling on of human rights in
South Africa.

This is expressed most vividly in our Constitution, which is praised
throughout the world as embodying some of the most progressive human
rights. This is something that we should all be rightly proud of, but more
than that, it is something we must hold our government accountable to. The
rights contained in the Constitution are mere paper rights unless we are
able to turn it into a living document.

This is the challenge that we all face in South Africa, and it is one that
the ID is committed to. In many respects, great strides have been made to
restore a culture of human rights in South Africa, but great challenges
still lie ahead. A culture of human rights can be judged by how we treat
the most vulnerable or marginalised in our society.

Massive human rights abuses are still occurring in our prisons, which are
grossly overcrowded. The most tragic aspect of this is the awaiting-trial
prisoners, many of whom are too poor to afford bail, and are left to
languish for months on end. Included amongst the prison population are also
child offenders, who have to live in unbearable conditions.

Children’s rights are often also not being respected on our streets, where
frustrated security people take out their pent-up anger against homeless
children as young as eight years old. The streets are becoming a war-zone
for children where they are being used as sex workers, drug pedlars and are
even becoming involved in the human trafficking rings.

The ID would urge this government to do more to protect the basic human
rights of these children. It was shocking to find last night that these
children are not able to access even the most basic human needs such as
food, water and shelter. Our children are our future, and we can only make
decisive advances to equal rights when we begin with our poorest children.

The ID commits itself to realising a culture of human rights for all South
Africans by bridging our divides and restoring our sense of common
humanity. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY:  Chairperson, there is no doubt that huge strides have been
made in South Africa in engendering a human rights culture, particularly
when it comes to the removal of racial and gender discrimination. At the
same time, much has still to be done in promoting God-given rights.

I refer here, specifically, to the lack of protection for unborn babies.
Abuse of children in South Africa is shocking. Can one expect anything else
when the underlying principle of choice of termination of pregnancy is: the
younger the child, the less the value. Many more than 400 000 babies have
been murdered by abortion. They have been denied their most basic God-given
right, which is the right to life.

The ACDP also questions whether South Africa acts in accordance with its
Bill of Rights in respect of human rights abuses in other countries. South
Africa clearly responds in terms of international law regarding human
rights abuses in some states, but this appears to be arbitrary and
inconsistent. South Africa’s stance on Israel is a case in point, with the
executive condemning Israel for its alleged violations of human rights, but
when it comes to the Sudanese government or our neighbour Zimbabwe, the
executive’s record is shameful.

These governments are clearly in violation of norms of international human
rights law. There is hard evidence of torture and killing of political
opposition. According to international law professor, John Dugard,
regarding the Zimbabwean situation, “no serious condemnations are
forthcoming from our executive, on the contrary, it is business as usual.”
According to the learned professor, the failure of the executive to
formulate and execute its policy in respect of Zimbabwe in accordance with
the Bill of Rights is difficult to reconcile with section 8(1) of the
Constitution.

In the words of Prof Dugard: “It is simply not good enough to condemn human
rights violations in Palestine, Iraq and Guantanamo Bay, while condoning
such violations in a neighbouring state.” The ACDP is disturbed as well to
hear that a North Korean delegation will be visiting South Africa soon, and
will be received by government. [Time expired.]

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Chairperson, whether we like it or not, the
constitutional state and the concept of human rights in South Africa are
under threat and, whether we like it or not, the hon Dene Smuts was telling
the truth earlier when she said what she did.  [Interjections.] You might
not like what was said, but you’d better listen to what was said.

We are debating today a so-called “decade of a decisive advance to equal
rights for all”.

Artikel 11 van die Grondwet sê elkeen het die reg op lewe. In die afgelope
dekade waarvan ons praat, is daar in Suid-Afrika 250 000 mense vermoor.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Section 11 of the Constitution states that everyone has the right to life.
In the past decade that we are talking about, 250 000 people have been
murdered in South Africa.]

Sixty-eight were killed every day. For them there was no right to life.

Artikel 10 gaan oor “human dignity”. Elkeen het die ingebore waardigheid en
die reg dat daardie waardigheid gerespekteer en beskerm sal word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Section 10 is about human dignity. Everyone has this inherent dignity and
the right for this dignity to be respected and protected.]

In this country, last year, 52 733 rapes took place; 144 each day. For
those women, there was no human dignity, despite what the Constitution may
say.

In artikel 25 word eiendomsreg beskerm. In die afgelope 10 jaar het roof
toegeneem met 193%. Geen respek vir eiendomsreg is die realiteit waarmee
ons sit.

Artikel 9 gaan oor gelykheid of “equality”. Elkeen is gelyk voor die reg,
maar “affirmative action” trek a streep daardeur.

Ons gee baie keer hoog op, dit het vandag ook gebeur in hierdie Raad oor
hierdie Grondwet. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In section 25 property rights are protected. In the past 10 years robbery
has increased by 193%. No respect for property rights is the reality that
we are saddled with.

Section 9 deals with equality. Everyone is equal before the law, but
affirmative action has put a stop to that. On many occasions we make a
fuss, and it has also happened today in this House regarding this
Constitution.]

It is said to be the most modern and the best constitution in the world.
That’s not true. [Interjections.] No, it’s not. It’s a very good
Constitution, but it’s not the most modern. Do you know why? It is because
the real test for a democracy now is how you go about treating the
minorities in your state, not just individuals. Go abroad and look at
what’s happening. How do you treat and protect the minority communities in
your state? That is what is contained in the most modern constitutions.

So, this one is good, but we can improve on it. We also sometimes refer to
this as a final Constitution. There is no such thing as a final
Constitution. It’s only the current Constitution. Believe me, there will
come a time when there will be a new constitution. [Interjections.]

Dr S E M PHEKO:  Chairperson, there would never have been a Human Rights
Day in South Africa if the PAC had not taken that courageous and historic
step on 21 March 1960, and vowed that the apartheid pass laws, which had
enslaved the African people, must go.

When launching the PAC Positive Action Campaign against the pass laws, the
founding President of the PAC, Mangaliso Robert Sobukwe said:

  I need not list the arguments against the pass laws. All the evidence of
  broken homes . . . the regimentation, oppression and degradation of the
  African people . . . leads to one conclusion . . . that the pass laws
  must go. We cannot be foreigners in our own land.

Writing about the countrywide unrest on Sharpeville Day, 21 March 1960,
Franzt Fanon said:

  Sharpeville shook public opinion for months. In the newspapers, over the
  wavelengths and in private conversations, Sharpeville has become a
  symbol. It was through Sharpeville that men and women in the world became
  acquainted with the problem of apartheid in South Africa.


Influenced by the PAC, the United Nations declared 21 March each year as
the International Day for the Elimination of all Forms or Racial
Discrimination. The PAC is proud to have contributed this important day to
the whole world, dedicated to the elimination of racism.

There is a concerted effort by certain elements in this country to falsify
the history of Sharpeville. I appeal to our very understanding Minister of
Arts and Culture to have a monument erected to our Langa martyrs who were
killed by the apartheid colonialist regime on 21 March 1960. No heroes in
our country should remain unrecognised on the grounds of their political
affiliation. This is sectarianism, not nation-building.

Long live the spirit of defiance against injustice and inhumanity.
[Applause.]


Mna M J MALAHLELA: Ke a leboga motlhomphegi Modulasetulo. A ke ke bontšhe
gape motlhomphegi Pheko gore e re ge le namela sefofane - ka kua go
Sawubona- le lebelele gore ba ngwadile eng ka Sharpeville, ka gore tšeo le
di bolelago di gona ka kua.


Ge ke tšwela pele, ke tla kgopela tshwarelo go bašomi ba tlhathollelo ya
maleme ge ba se ba hwetše polelo yeo ke e hlagišago ka nako, gobane ke
tlile go e bea gabotse ka Sepedi sa mmakgonthe’a kgodi’a kgokgo wa lerotse.
Gape ke bontšhe gore polelo ye, ke e dira segopotšo go wa mphato, mohu
Comrade Castro William Pilusa gammogo le molekani ka yena, mohu Mokgadi
Pilusa. A hudugile mantši moka re bona ka moti go ela!

Mokgatlo wa Makomanisi a Afrika Borwa o rile ge o tšea karolo ditheeletšong
tša Khomišene ya Ditokelo tša Botho, ka kgethologanyo ya mmala goba
bosemorafe ka gare go lefapha la boraditaba, wa bontšha gore go na le
tswalano gareng ga bosemorafe le tlala. Makomanisi a bontšhitše gore tlala,
e bonala kudu gare ga Maafrika – kudu go bathobaso – seo e le ditlamorago
tša semorafe; semorafe seo se tsokotletšwego sentsokela ke pušo ya
kgatelelo; mokokotlong wa pušo yeo e le bokapitale. Ke ka baka leo mmušo wa
batho ka batho o tšerego sephetho sa go ikamanya le mebušo ya boditšhaba-
tšhaba gore ka ngwaga wa 2014 e be re segile tlala ka bogare, go swana le
mosadi wa MoAfrika ge a sega lešela la motoitšhi. Sephetho sa go nkgišetša
tlala mahwafa; sephetho sa go nkgišetša tlala seriba sa tšhwene, se tlišwa
ke kwešišo ya rena, bjaloka mmušo wa batho, gore keteko ya ditokelo tša
botho, moo go renago lefetla la tlala, ke thogako go ngwana wa MoAfrika.

Tše ka moka, re di dira e le ge re tsokotlela ditokelo tšeo di lego ka gare
go Molaotheo. Anke ke di di bale tokelo ya go ba le tlhaka godimo ga hlogo
ya MaAfrika; tokelo ya go ba le diyamaleng; tokelo ya tšhireletso ya tša
leago, le tše dingwe. Ke ka lebaka leo ge o lebelela Tona ya tša Leago, Mna
Zola Skweyiya, a ratwago ke bana ba MaAfrika gobane o ntšha tlala ka gare
go dimpa tša bona.

Kgato yeo e tšerwego ke Grootboom le ba bangwe, ya go iša mmušo wa batho ka
batho Kgotlatshekelo ya Molaotheo, e bontšha gabotse gore MaAfrikaborwa ba
na le kwešišo ya gore ditokelo tša bona ga se maemo, eupša ke tokelo yeo ba
kago go e gatelela le Kgorongtsheko ya Molaotheo. Kgoro ge e tšea sephetho
sa gore mmušo o agele Grootboom le ba bangwe ka ditekanyetšokabo tša
mašeleng tlhaka godimo ga tlhogo tša bona, e be e le go raloka karolo ye
bohlokwa – go tsokotlela ditokelo tša batho, tšeo Grootboom a di etšego
kgotlatshekelo gore a di tsokotlele.

Ga se gwa felela fao, gobane Kgoro ya Molaotheo wa Bosetšhaba e bušitše ya
tšea sephetho, go swana le seo e se tšerego go molato woo ke o boletšego
pejana. Sephetho seo e se tšerego molatong wa bobedi e be e le sa molatong
wa Treatment Action Campaign kgahlanong le Tona ya Maphelo. Sebakwa
molatong wo e be e le gore go be le phatlalatšo ya diokobatši go
Maafrikaborwa, kudu go bao ba swerwego ke bolwetši bja phamokate; gobane
phamokate ye, ruri e a re rathaganya re le setšhaba go swana le ge selepe
sa magagane se rema ngwana wa tšhuana. Molaetša wa ka go thaka ye tshesane
ke wo: Ge o se wa e apeša, o seke wa e tsentšha! Ge e se ya apara, o se ke
wa e dumelela! Ge o palelwa, o itshware!

E ka tswalela mphorokgohlong, ge re ka keteka ditokelo tša botho re sa
bolele selo ka MaAfrikaborwa ao a sa itekanelago mmeleng gobane AfrikaBorwa
ke ya gabobona le ka gobane keteko ya ditokelo tša botho ge e sa ba
akaretše, di tla loma le barafi. Ke ka lebaka leo rena mmušo wa batho ka
batho re tšerego sephetho sa gore MaAfrikaborwa ao a sa itekanelago
mebeleng a swanetše go fiwa karolo ye bohlokwa go hlabolleng setšhaba sa
gabobona gobane Afrika Borwa ntle le bona ga se ya felelela. Ke ka lebaka
leo o bonago ba bangwe ba bona ba le ka mo gare ga Ntlokgolo –
Lekgotlatheramelao la Bosetšhaba.

Afrika Borwa yeo re e agago, re e aga re kwešiša gore dienywa tša kago ye,
ga se di lebane rena, eupša di lebane bao ba tlago tla morago ga ge rena
bao re emego mo re iketše molete mohlaelathupa gobane Sepedi se re mokgodi
wa moriti ga se modudi wa wona.

Re keteka ditokelo tša botho re lebeletše pele, gobane bana ba rena ge ba
tlile go di keteka mengwageng yeo e sa tlago, ba swanetše gore ba keteke ka
maleme a Afrika Borwa ka moka a lesometee ao a fapafapanego, e le ge ba
ikgantšha - go swana le nna ge ke ikgantšha ka Sepedi - ka maleme a Afrika
Borwa yeo e lokologilego. Se, a e be tlhotlho go rena bao re lego ka mo
gare ga Lekgotlatheramelao la bosetšhaba gore bao re lego ka mo re se nyake
go šomiša maleme a gaborena bjaloka dibetša tša go aroganya Afrika Borwa.
Ge e ka se rage e tla tlatša kgamelo. A re šomišeng dipolelo tša gaborena
bjaloka peu yeo e tlago tliša poelano go bao ba tlogo buša Afrika Borwa ge
rena re iketše boyabatho. Re se ke ra swana le boMorena Mulder, ka go
šomiša boafrikanere goba polelo ya gaborena ya Seafrikaanse go aroganya
Afrika Borwa, e le ge re itšhireletša ka gore ke rena ba banyenyane ka gare
ga batho ba bantši.

Rena baetapele ba lehono yeo re e gamago kgomo ke ya lefiša, gobane Sepedi
se re mogami wa kgomo ya lefiša o gama a lebeletše tsela. A re tšeyeng
malebiša go mohu Kalushi Mahlangu yo a rilego pele a tekeletšwa ka molala
go fihlela a neela moya, a re: Mma, botša batho ba ka gore ke a ba rata! Ba
botše le gore ba tšwele pele ka go lwa ntwa ya tokologo! Gomme madi a ka a
tlo nontšha mohlare wo o tlago enywa dienywa tša tokologo – dienywa tšeo di
ka se dirego gore rena bao re lego mo, re tle re rogake tokologo ya
Maafrikaborwa. Ka Sepedi morwa Mahlangu o be a re: Molemi wa lekgwara o
lema a tšwere setsiba sa kgokong. O robale ka kgotso! [Legofsi.]
(Translation of Sepedi speech follows.)

[Mr M J MALAHLELA: Thank you, hon Chairperson. Let me indicate again to hon
Pheko that when he is flying in an aeroplane, he must check out what is
being said in the Sawubona on Sharpeville, because everything he says is in
there.

When I proceed, I will apologise to the interpreters if they cannot follow
my speech in time, because I am going to present it in proper Sepedi. I
will also indicate that I dedicate this speech to the late Comrade Castro
William Pilusa and his wife, the late Mokgadi Pilusa. Our heroes are gone,
but their legacies stay behind!

When the South African Communist Party participated in the Human Rights
Commission hearings, about racism in the media, it showed that there is a
relationship between racism and poverty. The communists indicated that
there is poverty in Africa, especially among the black people, which is the
consequences of racism brought about by the apartheid regime on a
capitalist government. It is for this reason that the government of the
people by the people have agreed to join the international community so as
to ensure poverty eradication by the year 2014. The consensus on poverty
eradication comes with our understanding, as the people’s government, that
celebrating human rights when there is still poverty is an insult to
Africans.

All the efforts are taken with the focus to fight for human rights as
tabled in the Constitution. Let me read them: the right to shelter, the
right to food, the right to social security and so on. The reason the
children in Africa adore hon Zola Skweyiya is that he fills their tummies.

The step that Grootboom and others took by taking the government of the
people by the people to the Constitutional Court shows clearly that South
Africans understand that their rights are not privileges, but that they can
also emphasise them in the Constitutional Court. The court played an
important role when they ruled that the government must build houses for
Grootboom and others from the budget allocation, to fight for their rights,
which was what Grootboom went to court for.

It did not end there because the National Assembly also came to a decision
as I mentioned earlier. The decision taken on the second issue was on the
Treatment Action Campaign against the Minister of Health. The issue was the
dispensing of drugs, especially antiretrovirals to HIV/Aids infected
people, as this diseases is destroying the nation like chopping an orphan’s
head off with an axe.  My advice to the youth is: If you do not have a
condom on, do not have sex! If it is not wearing a condom, do not allow it
in! If you cannot manage, behave yourself!

It would be chaotic if we were to celebrate human rights and not talk about
our disabled people, because South Africa also belongs to them and there
would be trouble if they were not included in these celebrations. That is
why we, as the people’s government, decided that the disabled must be given
an important role to play in developing their country because South Africa
is not complete without them. Hence you see some of them in this House, the
National Assembly.

We are building South Africa with the understanding that the benefits are
not for us, but for those who follow after us when we have passed on. As is
said in Sepedi: the one who does the preparation usually does it for the
others who will follow after him.

We celebrate human rights focusing on the future because when our children
celebrate it in future, they must proudly celebrate it in all the different
eleven South African languages. I am proud of my Sepedi, a language of a
democratic South Africa. Let this be a challenge to us in the National
Assembly to not use our languages as tools to divide South Africa. We will
achieve our goal of unifying the country. Let us use our languages as seeds
that will bring about reconciliation for those who will rule South Africa
when we have passed on. We must not be like hon Mr Mulder and use being an
Afrikaaner or Afrikaans to divide South Africa, protecting them as the
minority among the majority.

As the leaders today we work hard by focusing on the future, because we do
not know what it will bring. Let us follow the example of the late Kalushi
Mahlangu who said: Mother, tell my people that I love them and that they
should go on with the liberation! My blood will serve as nutrients for the
tree that will bear the fruit of freedom the fruits that will not allow us
here to swear at the South African freedom. Mahlangu’s son said in Sepedi:
One needs a lot of strength to be able to labour on a hard ground. Rest in
peace! [Applause.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, many of our citizens eagerly await public
holidays as days to escape from work and other commitments, whilst others
celebrate double pay. But how many actually commemorate these public
holidays?

The MF calls on all the members in this House to make it a priority to
educate our constituencies on the significance of public holidays such as
Human Rights Day. Human Rights Day was founded as a celebration of human
rights, as a reminder to all South Africans of our human rights and to
remember all our human rights activists, our history at Sharpeville and our
victory.

Our national Constitution of 1996 serves as the supreme law of our
democracy. Enshrined in this Constitution is the Bill of Rights. Section
7(1) enshrines the rights of all people in our country and affirms the
democratic values of dignity, equality and freedom.

Our Constitution is our passport to true democracy and in it one finds a
duty incumbent on all households to have a copy of our Constitution so as
to educate ourselves on our rights as citizens of this democracy. On our
way to our 11th year of democracy, we have made every effort to do away
with the horrors of the apartheid regime. Our Parliament has passed
legislation and policies that will ensure this democracy’s success.
Government is doing everything in its power to deliver to the people. All
this is done in compliance to our Constitution and human rights.

The framework for democracy has been successfully set up, but we sadly
still have in our midst people with apartheid mentalities that still
espouse inhumanities, discrimination, racism and prejudice. It was, in
fact, reported by the Western Cape branch of the Human Rights Commission
that the Western Cape has the highest rate of racism and xenophobia. Maybe
it is a result of the fact that after the first democratic election it was
home to all opposition supporters. Currently the office is investigating
140 cases of racial intolerance, but the MF is pleased that since the
establishment of the Equality Court in 2003 victims are liberating
themselves by reporting these incidents. The MF is intolerant of any
violations and contraventions of, or imposition on, human rights.

Our democracy is made up of varying citizenry. We are a government and a
country for the people by the people with no reservation on race, colour or
creed. We have come a long way to establish this democracy. We need to
educate our people in abandoning these in human personas, as this slows
down and hinders our democracy.

Human rights are a birthright, and the MF condemns any inhuman and barbaric
acts that threaten or abuse this democracy. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, in 1943 the ANC wrote in the
preface on its Africans’ Claims in South Africa document:

  We want the government and the people of South Africa to know the full
  aspirations of the African peoples so that their point of view will also
  be presented at the peace conference. We want the government of the
  United Nations to know and act in the light of our own interpretation of
  the Atlantic Charter, to which they are signatories. This document is our
  way of conveying to them our undisputed claim to full citizenship. We
  desire them to realise, once and for all, that a just and permanent peace
  will be possible only if the claims of all classes, colours and races for
  sharing and for full participation in educational, political and economic
  activities, are granted and recognised.

This is the African claim of the ANC and the people of South Africa, stated
in 1943, well before any member of parties to my left became aware of
rights for all South Africans. [Applause.]

For around 40 years, at the beginning of the 20th century, there was
complete silence on universal human rights. The revival of the idea of
human rights really began with a series of articles and letters published
by the author H G Wells. He advocated the declaration of rights, that is a
fundamental law, defining the rights of parliamentary peoples. What he
managed to do was to distil into nine principles a declaration that was
short and readable, and was very different to the previous language of the
French and American declarations.

He began with the simple observation that since a man comes into this world
through no fault of his own, he is in justice entitled, without distinction
of race or colour, to nourishment, housing, covering medical care and
attention sufficient to realise his full possibilities of physical and
mental development and to keep him in a state of health, from his birth to
his death.

Here was, for the first time since the 18th century, an attempt by a middle
class socialist to restate human rights in a simple way, as a protection
against the then coming world war. His declaration was very successful. It
attracted a lot of attention, and he spoke on a number of public platforms
about the new world order and its fundamental principles. After the war,
this was to become one of the more influential books of the 20th century.

Passion and simplicity, these were the two characteristics of Wells’
vision. He used passion and simplicity to make a broader case, the case
that the world needed to be protected against totalitarianism by a world
order that relied on law rather than diplomacy. But when defeat began to
look likely for Hitler and his allies, the simplicity and passion of his
declaration was too radical for the allied governments to contemplate.
Therefore they did not take up the call of rights for all.

The UN Charter identified human rights violations as a matter for global
concern. It provided a mechanism, limited though it was, for international
intervention in the affairs of nation states. However, there was no legal
duty on member states to comply with human rights standards. That movement
was to be agonisingly slow in coming, as we know full well, as South
Africans, and movement was only seen after the atrocities of the late
1980s.

I think it is absolutely vital that we remember, as we speak, our own
history of human rights in South Africa, and that our attention to human
rights predates the universal declaration of the United Nations. Even more
extraordinary in South Africa’s history is the fact that it was a
liberation movement of oppressed people that led the process of developing
and articulating human rights in South Africa.

It was the ANC that led the struggle for human rights in South Africa, the
ANC. [Applause.] It formulated the 1943 African Claims in South Africa. The
rights claimed were universal, but the form in which the rights were
claimed was very particular, because of the racial form of discrimination
that was practised in our country at that time. This historic focus on
rights for all was given an even sharper focus in the Freedom Charter.

As we reap the benefits of this approach in our current Constitution, which
bears the rights of the passion and simplicity of Wells, rather than the
legalese and committee imprint of the universal declaration, it is thus not
an accident of history that the ANC has led the struggle for human rights
in South Africa for over five decades. It is no coincidence that with the
advent of democracy, 10 years ago, the Constitution of South Africa
incorporated political, socioeconomic, and green third generation rights.

Today South Africa is able to report a positive record on access to human
rights. In education, over 12 million children and youth enjoy educational
opportunities that were previously denied to them. Housing, health services
and clean water are increasingly available to more and more South Africans.

In the context of civil and political rights, we have freedom of
association, we have the right to protest and to open access to information
and public services. In the area of political rights, we belong to parties
of our choice and we have celebrated three free and fair democratic
elections at provincial and national level. Our political institutions are
open, accessible and accountable.

We have taken human rights beyond print and ink, and have worked to make
them a living reality. This is because we are fully alert to the fact that
bills of rights and charters, without active government promotion, are
meaningless instruments. For all these reasons and achievements, we
celebrate a decade of rights for all.

Despite this decade of laudable positive realisation, we are also honest
enough to draw attention to the many challenges that still remain as
weighty tasks that we must address. There are people in our country who
have yet to accept that rights are for all, and not just a few, such as
some of our colleagues in the FF Plus.

Sadly, our educational institutions are sometimes a poor example of human
rights standards. Hon members are aware that some of our schools are not
yet open to all our children. Some educationists and others believe that
schools are for groups of children, and not for all children of our
country. Some educators believe that learners are in school to be abused
physically. There are practices that we have to stop in education and in a
range of sectors.

We have to do more to promote nonracism and inclusivity in all our schools
and our tertiary institutions. The full realisation of rights requires us
all to do much more to promote equality and access for all.

I would now like to comment on some of the matters that arose in the
debate. The hon Gxowa correctly reminded us of the work we still have to do
to ensure the full liberation and equality of women in our society. Issues
of culture, custom and history are still factors that impinge upon the
realisation of equality for women in South Africa. Our history expects us
to do no less than ensure that every woman enjoys full access to rights in
South Africa.

The hon Smuts went back to her usual song. She said that we were pursuing a
race agenda. The only thing that can be said about her input is that it was
not a surprise to me at all. She would have disappointed me if she had
referred to our achievements as a people and a country. She cannot do so,
because our success is her disappointment. [Applause.] She and the DA
cannot refer to full rights for all, because this would contradict her
promise to get constituency that she will maintain the status quo and
privilege. [Interjections.]

The notion that there is racial control over our country is absolutely
ridiculous. Her purpose was not to recognise progress, rather she intended
to whip up emotion, and to continue her awful agenda of holding back access
to rights. [Interjections.]

She refers to the judiciary, and says that we want rulings that we like.
This is utter nonsense. Our judiciary is independent in reaching its
decisions. It is, however, not untainted by apartheid. As with every public
institution in South Africa, it is open to scrutiny and comment, and must
be reminded that this is a transforming South Africa with a new
Constitution, a new ethos, a painful past, a positive aspiration, a South
Africa requiring a judiciary fully alert to our history, our vision, and
our context. There is nothing wrong with these demands. [Applause.]

The hon Mars is correct to expect education to do more, and we certainly
will. Hon Sibanyoni is right to recall the core character of our
Constitution, as an instrument offering a new dignity and new access to
human rights. The hon Mdaka’s focus on Sharpville reminds us of the
sacrifice of our people and what was done to achieve our freedom. The hon
Greyling is being made to work too hard by the hon De Lille. He certainly
is correct; we have to do more to address the needs of vulnerable children
in our country.

The hon Dudley, of course, does not live in Zimbabwe, she is a member of
Parliament representing the people of South Africa, and we wish she would
attend to the issues of South Africa, and not Zimbabwe. [Applause.] The hon
Mulder suggested that when the period of crossing the floor comes, he might
be going to sit beside Ms Smuts, in the DA benches. He fully agreed with
her sentiments. He objects to rights that are directed at correcting the
wrongs of the past. The real test of democracy, he says, is attention to
the rights of minorities. Well, I am very sorry, the real test of a
democracy is attention to the rights of all the people in a country.
[Applause.]

Hon Pheko, when the Constitution was adopted, my recollection is that it
was adopted at a monument recognising those who participated and were
killed in the massacre of Sharpeville. Therefore, as far as I am aware,
there is a memorial. Certainly more must be done, I believe, in education,
to record the history of the contribution of all our people through
history, through a range of other learnings that we must have. But we have
a memorial, and certainly we have recognised and do recognise the
contribution that South Africans made. We are not sure who actually looked
at the membership cards of those who were killed outside the gates of that
police station. We don’t know whether they were members of any party, they
were South Africans contributing to the struggle against oppression in
South Africa.

The hon Mahlalela is absolutely right concerning “Sepedi sa nnete” [the
real Sepedi]. We have to improve our utilisation of the indigenous
languages of South Africa. I wish that more and more of us . . .

. . . ba ka dirisa maleme a rona mo ntlung e, ka gore re rata go bua ka
sekgowa le nna ke rata tota go bua ka ga sekgowa nako le nako mme ke a
leka. Ba ba ntsi ga ba nke ba ema fa ba bua maleme a rona. (Translation of
Setswana paragraph follows.)

[. . . use our languages in this House, because we like to speak in
English. Even I speak in English from time to time, but I’m trying. Most
people do not stand when they speak our language.]

We are not doing enough to ensure that the indigenous languages of South
Africa have a place in our country. I agree with the hon Mahlalela that
poverty eradication cannot become an invisible part of the tasks that we
need to address. Certainly, our Constitution must be the seed for building
unity, but that unity cannot be at the expense of neglecting to attend to
the formerly oppressed of this country. If we cannot ensure that those who
were formerly oppressed enjoy the rights that are in our Constitution, and
enjoy the full flight intended by our Constitution, our democracy cannot be
sustainable.

So, while certainly all South Africans must be protected, hon Mulder, it is
absolutely vital that we do not lose sight of the fact that what we are
attending to, is the historic outcome of apartheid, and that we must
address the residue of apartheid in turning around the fortunes of South
Africa. This would then be a true realisation of the aspirations of those
men and women who stood outside the gates of that police station in
Sharpeville.

The hon Godi has been shaking his head, disagreeing with me. There was a
historic contribution, but I believe we must recognise it as a contribution
of all the people of our country, and not limited to one particular entity.
We do this when we speak of the liberation movements and the historic role
that they have played, the sacrifice that Solomon Mahlangu made, and his
statement: “My blood will nourish the tree that will bear the fruits of
freedom.” The next ten years must ensure full access to that freedom.
[Applause.] Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 16:43.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 16 March 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:

         (i)     Convergence Bill [B 9 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)

2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 17 March 2005:
         (i)     Sterilisation Amendment Bill [B 12B – 2004] (National
              Council of Provinces – sec 76)
         (ii)    Convergence Bill [B 9 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)



COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Annual Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works

MAY – NOVEMBER 2004


1. NAME OF COMMITTEE:

Portfolio Committee on Public Works.
Chairperson:  Mr F Bhengu

2. MANDATE OF THE COMMITTEE:

   The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa mandates the Parliament
   through House Committees to exercise the oversight function over the
   Executive, pass legislation and monitor the implementation of such
   legislation and encourage public participation.


Mission:
Guided by the Rules of Parliament promulgated in terms of the Constitution
to play an oversight role on the ministry and the Department. To this end
it will exercise a rigorous monitoring role in such a way that it
contributes towards the improvement in the quality of life of all South
Africans.

Vision:
   To deliver services by enabling people to provide for themselves, their
   communities and to better life for all.


a) List of Entities reporting to the Committee:

Independent Development Trust (IDT)
Construction Industry Development Board (CIDB)
Council For Built Environment (CBE


3. CHAIRPERSON’S OVERVIEW:

The Committee in its initial oversight role, with specific focus on the
Programme of Action as outlined in the Department’s Strategic Plan for
2004/5 financial year made the observations and concluded that:

    • More focus will be given on the capacity building and effective
      service delivery on all spheres of government and the National Public
      Works Programme i.e.

        a) Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP)
        b) Construction Industry Development (CID) and
        c) Property Industry Programme
        d) State Entities

Engagements with National and Provincial departments:
    • The Committee in the next phase will engage further with and monitor
      the core departments that are coordinated by the Department of Public
      Works at National and Provincial respectively in the implementation of
      the EPWP
    • Coupled with that, and as an ongoing process the Committee will
      tirelessly interact and monitor the process in addressing the
      challenges faced by the department at National and Provincial level in
      assert and property portfolios.
    • The Committee will continue to promote corporative governance.
    • The Committee will strive to strengthen the constructive engagement
      with the National and Provincial Departments of Public Works.
    • The Portfolio Committee must strengthen working relations with the
      NCOP as prescribed by the Constitution and Rules of Parliament.
    • To monitor and oversee the role of the entities that are directly
      accountable to the department and
    • To vigorously and constantly monitor the adherence of financial and
      fiscal discipline by the department.

4. CORE OBJECTIVES:

To pursue its MISSION, the Portfolio Committee on Public Works has five
overriding goals namely:

    • To cover a greater volume of work which is of relevance to its
      MISSION.

    • To strengthen the qualitative aspects of its investigative work.

    • To understand and respond to existing areas of financial management
      weaknesses and under-performance.

    • To increase consistency, regularity and assertiveness of follow-up
      actions where corrective actions are deemed necessary.

    • To creatively and assertively influence improvements in financial
      management, whenever it is
      necessary in the broader public sector.

 4.1 Legislation:

No legislation has been passed for this current year

4.1.1 Matters other than mandated legislation:
4.1.1.1 International Agreements and Protocols:
None of the above comes to Committee

4.2  Oversight:

4.2.1 Institutional Oversight:

The Committee was briefed on the Budget Vote of the Department of Public
Works .The Committee also conducted an oversight work on the Strategic Plan
of the Department.

4.2.2 International / National Visits:

The Committee held a two-day strategic planning workshop with the
Department of Public Works in Johannesburg on 7 and 8 September 2004.
The delegations that attended the workshop mentioned above are as follows:

Mr F Bhengu: Chairperson
Mr NJ Gogotya
Mr NE Maluleka
Mr HP Maluleka
Mr K Moonsamy
Ms MM Ntuli
Ms CPM Ramotsamai
Mr PS Sekgobela
Mr S Siboza
Mr JPI Blanche
Mr SE Opperman
Mr BC Ngiba
Ms NM Mdaka
Mr MT Likotsi
Mr J Leburu – Committee Secretary

4.2.3 Conferences

The following members attended a conference on Construction Industry
Development Post graduate Programme at the University of Cape Town:

Mr LD Maduma
Mr K Moonsamy
Mr NE Magubane
Ms PS Sekgobela
Mr SE Opperman

4.2.3.1 The Chairperson Mr F Bhengu attended the NEDLAC Conference in
Sandton, Johannesburg.
4.2.3.2 Mrs TLP Nwamitwa-Shilubana attended the Launch of the IDT Report in
Mpumalanga
4.2.3.3 Mr P Maluleka attended the Launch of the Property Industry Charter
in Pretoria
4.2.3.4 Ms CPM Ramotsamai attended the launch of Youth of the Programme in
Atlantis
4.2.3.5 Ms CPM Ramotsamai, Mr PH Maluleka, Mr JPI Blanche, Mrs TLP Nwamitaa-
      Shilubana, Mr F Bhengu attended World Summit on Sustainable
      Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg
4.2.3.6 Ms PS Sekgobela and Ms CPM Ramotsamai attended the summit on
Creating Black women in Property Industry


5. OTHER COMMITTEE ACTIVITIES:

The Committee engaged in following activities:


   1. Establishment of Ad hoc Committee on Public Works and election of the
      Ad hoc Chairperson May 12, 2004.
   2. Adoption of Committee programme and discussion of Committee’s Business
      Planning and budgeting process May 19, 2004
   3. Briefing by Department of Public Works (DPW) on DPW Strategic plan May
      26, 2004
   4. Briefing on the budget vote June 2,2004.
   5. Briefing by DPW on the Status of the Parliamentary Villages June 9,
      2004
   6. Establishment of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works and election
      of the Chairperson June 24, 2004
   7. Visit to Parliamentary villages July 14, 2004
   8. Preparation for the strategic plan workshop with the DPW and
      consideration of report on the visit to Parliamentary villages August
      5, 2004.
   9. Consideration of report on the visit to Parliamentary villages August
      10, 2004
  10. Adoption of report on the visit to Parliamentary villages August 18,
      2004
  11. Briefing by Committee Section Management on Committees’ budget and
      Business plan August 25, 2004
  12. The Committee attended the World Summit on Sustainable Development
      September 1 to 3, 2004
  13. The Committee attended the launch of Extended Public Works Programme
      September 2, 2004
  14. Preparation for the Strategic-planning workshop with DPW: briefing by
      UWC School of Governance September 6, 2004.
  15. Strategic workshop with the DPW September 7 to 8, 2005
  16. Information sharing with MECs and Provincial Chairpersons of Public
      Works September 14 to 15, 2004
  17. Chairperson attended the NEDLAC Conference in Johannesburg October 2,
      2004
  18. The Committee was invited to attend the Construction Industry
      Development Programme Conference from 10 to 11 October 2004
  19. Preparation to engage with the DPW on the SCOPA public hearings 12
      October 2004
  20. Information sharing with MECs and Provincial Chairperson of Public
      Works October 19, 2004
  21. Meeting with SCOPA on the public hearings with the DPW October 20,
      2004
  22. Deliberations on the strategic workshop, public hearings with SCOPA
      and information sharing with provinces October 25, 2004
  23. Division of Committee into two clusters to look at consolidating the
      reports on Information sharing session, strategic workshop and SCOPA
      hearings October 27, 2004.
  24. Briefing by the DPW on its annual report November 2, 2004
  25. Meetings of Portfolio Committee Clusters to consolidate the Committee
      report November 3, 2004.
  26. Adoption of the Committee minutes November 10, 2004.
  27. Meeting of Portfolio Committee Financial Cluster November 12, 2004.
  28. Meeting of Portfolio Committee Clusters November 16, 2004.
  29. Briefing by the Department of Public Works on Construction Industry,
      Construction Seta and BEE November 16, 2004.
  30. Adoption of consolidated committee report and Committee ‘s annual
      report November 23, 2004
  31. The Committee attended the Summit on Creating Black Women in the
      Property Sector on November 29, 2004

6. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS:

Budget allocated to Committee:  R366, 635.00

Expenditure:           As on 20 October 2004


Catering:        R9 430.70
Workshops:       R81 267.00
Conferences:           R4 500.00

Total Expenditure:     R 95 197.70


7.  OUTSTANDING MATTERS: No outstanding matters

|The Committee has included:                                            |
|A. Annual report of the Department of Public Works                     |
|B. MTBPS                                                               |
|C. MTEF and                                                            |
|D. Quarterly Financial Statement                                       |


      FORMAL ADOPTION OF ANNUAL REPORT BY THE COMMITTEE

The Annual Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public  Works,  having  been
put to the Committee, was adopted on 19 January 2005.


Joey                                                                  Leburu
                                    19 January 2005
COMMITTEE                                                          SECRETARY
                      DATE

N                                                                  Nonkelela
                                      19 January 2005
CONTROL                         COMMITTEE                          SECRETARY
             DATE


F    Bhengu                                                               19
January 2005
COMMITTEE                                                        CHAIRPERSON
                       DATE


                                 APPENDIX I


COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE:

|MEMBER                          |APPOINTMENT DATE                |DISCHARGE DATE                  |
|                                |                                |                                |
|African National Congress:      |                                |                                |
|Mr TG Anthony (alt)             |May 2004                        |                                |
|Mr F Bhengu                     |May 2004                        |                                |
|Mr C Gololo (alt)               |May 2004                        |August 2004                     |
|Mr NJ Gogotya                   |August 2004                     |                                |
|Mr Z Kotwal                     |May 2004                        |                                |
|Mr LD Maduma                    |May 2004                        |                                |
|Mr NE Magubane                  |May 2004                        |                                |
|Mr LB Mashile                   |August 2004                     |                                |
|Mr HP Maluleka (alt)            |August 2004                     |                                |
|Mr K Moonsamy                   |May 2004                        |                                |
|Ms MM Ntuli                     |June 2004                       |                                |
|Mrs TLP Nwamitaa-Shilubana      |May 2004                        |                                |
|Mr SN Nxumalo                   |August 2004                     |                                |
|Mr JP Phungula                  |May 2004                        |August 2004                     |
|Ms CPM Ramotsamai               |May 2004                        |                                |
|Ms PS Sekgobela                 |May 2004                        |                                |
|Mr S Siboza                     |May 2004                        |                                |
|                                |                                |                                |
|Democratic Alliance             |                                |                                |
|Mr JPI Blanche                  |May 2004                        |                                |
|Mr SE Opperman                  |May 2004                        |                                |
|                                |                                |                                |
|Inkatha Freedom Party           |                                |                                |
|Rev KM Zondi                    |May 2004                        |                                |
|Mr BC Ngiba*                    |October 2004                    |                                |
|United Democratic Front         |                                |                                |
|Ms NM Mdaka                     |                                |                                |
|                                |May 2004                        |                                |
|Independent Democrats           |                                |                                |
|Mr VC Gore                      |May 2004                        |                                |
|African Christian Democratic    |                                |                                |
|Party                           |August 2004                     |                                |
|Rev S Khumalo                   |                                |                                |
|Pan Africanist Congress of      |                                |                                |
|Azania                          |August 2004                     |                                |
|Mr MT Likotsi (alt)             |                                |                                |




SUPPORT STAFF:

Control Committee Secretary: Ms N Nonkelela
Period from June 2002 to date.

Committee Secretary:              Mr J Leburu
Period from January 1996 to date.

Committee Assistant:              Mr S Makeleni
Period from Jan 2001 to date.

Secretary to Chairperson:         Ms P Kakaza
Period from October 31 2004 to date.

Researcher (Research Unit):  Dr F Khan
Period from Jan 2002 to date.






                                 APPENDIX II




REPORTS TABLED:
                                                                    Date of
ATC
|                                      |                                 |                                  |
|Report visit to Parliamentary         |Adopted of 23 June 2004          |9 August 2004                     |
|Villages.                             |                                 |                                  |
|                                      |                                 |                                  |
|Report on workshop held with the      |Adopted on 24 November 2004      |To be tabled                      |
|Department of Public Works, Public    |                                 |                                  |
|hearings with MECs and SCOPA hearing  |                                 |                                  |
|on the Department of Public Works.    |                                 |                                  |
|                                      |                                 |                                  |
|Committee’s annual report             |                                 |                                  |
|                                      |Adopted on 19 January 2005       |To be tabled                      |
|                                      |                                 |                                  |
|                                      |                                 |                                  |


2.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS ON THE WORKSHOP
      HELD WITH:


THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS

INFORMATION SHARING WITH MECS
SCOPA PUBLIC HEARINGS ON THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT
THE BUDGET COMMITTEE PUBLIC HEARINGS WITH THE DEPARTMENT
DEPARTMENT (ANNUAL REPORT) AS ADOPTED ON 24 NOVEMBER 2004:

VENUE: M46
DATE: 24 NOVEMBER 2004

COMMITTEE MEMBERS PRESENT
African National Congress
Mr TG Anthony
Mr F Bhengu (Chairperson)
Mr NJ Gogotya
Mr LB Maduma
Mr NE Magubane
Mr HP Maluleka
Mr SN Nxumalo
Ms CPM Ramotsamai
Ms PS Sekgobela
Mr S Siboza

Democratic Alliance
Mr SE Opperman

United Democratic Movement
Ms NM Mdaka




                              TABLE OF CONTENTS



Content:                                     Page

Glossary                                     2
Presenters                                   2
Members in attendance                        2
Introduction                                       3
Workshop                                     3
NDPW Challenges                              3-4
Challenges of EPWP                                 4
Challenges in Property Development Policy          4-5
Challenges in HR and Legal Services                5
Challenges on maintains Plan and delivery
Improvement programme                        5
Provincial briefings
Eastern Cape                                       5-7
Mpumalanga                                   7
KwaZulu-Natal                                7-9
North West                                   9-10
Northern Cape (Written presentation)               10
Limpopo                                      11
Free State                                   12
Western Cape (Written presentation)
Gauteng (Written presentation
Audit and Financial Statements
Of the DPW                                   12-14
Conclusion                                   14
Recommendations                              14-16
Reporting framework on
Recommendations                              16
Annexure
Draft SCOPA Report                                 17-25



                                  GLOSSARY
Black Economic Empowerment (BEE)
Construction Education and Training (CETA0
Director-General (DG
Emerging Contractor Development Programme (ECDP)
Extended Public Works Programme (EPWP)
Head of Department (HOD)
Independent Development Trust (IDT)
Members of Executive Council (MECs)
National Department of Public Woks (NDPW)
Department of Public Works, Roads and Transport (DPWRT)
Public Financial Management Act (PFMA)
Property Policy Development (PPD)
Provincial Steering Committee (PSC)
Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOAP)

                                 PRESENTERS
Mr J Maseko: The Director-General (DPW)
Mr S Phillips: Chief Operation Officer (COO)
Ms L Bici: Deputy Director Property Holdings
Mr Z Ntsaluba: Chief Financial Officer (CFO)
Mr S Kwelita: MEC for Eastern Cape Public Works
Ms M Masego-Dlamini: MEC for Mpumalanga Public Works
Mr MB Gwala: MEC for KwaZulu-Natal Public Works
Mr BM Cele: MEC for KwaZulu-Natal Transport and Roads
Dr K Mbanjwa: HOD Department of Transport KwaZulu-Natal
Mr C Chabane: MEC for Limpopo Public Works
Mr R Shingange HOD Department of Public Work Limpopo
Mr H Yawa: MEC for North West Public Works
Dr H Sebego HOD Department of Public Works North West
Mr S Mohai: MEC for Free State Public Works
Mr S Maganedisa: Deputy Director Department of public Works

               MEMBERS OF PROVINCIAL LEGISLATURE IN ATTENDANCE




Ms P Majodina: Chairperson Standing Committee on Public Works Eastern Cape
Mr R Tsikwe: Chairperson Standing Committee on Public Works Northern Cape
Mr N Hantiso: Member of the Standing Committee on Public Works Free State
Mr T Gwabeni Chairperson Standing Committee on Public Works North West


National Assembly

Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on its strategic workshop
held with the Department of Public Works, information sharing with the
Provincial MECs of Public Works and SCOPA hearings with the Department of
Public Works took place on 8 and 9 September, 14, 15, and 19 September and
20 October 2004 respectively dated 23 November 2004.

      The Portfolio Committee on Public Works, having embarked on the above-
      mentioned processes on those dates, reports as follows:




1. INTRODUCTION

This report will summarise the main points  of  the  workshop  held  between
representatives of the  National  Department  of  Public  Works  (NDPW)  and
members of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on  7-8  September  2004,
as well as two briefings held between representatives  from  the  Department
of Public Works and Department of Transport in  the  Provincial  Governments
and members of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works. The  first  briefing
was held on 14 September 2004 with representatives from Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-
Natal and the Eastern Cape; while the second was held  on  19  October  with
representatives from the Northern Cape, North West,  Limpopo,  KwaZulu-Natal
and the Free State. To date, reports from the  departments  responsible  for
public works issues in the Western Cape  and  Gauteng,  have  not  yet  been
received.

In addition to providing a summary of the main points of  the  workshop  and
the briefings, this report will provide an overview  of  the  progress  made
thus far,  while  highlighting  any  obstacles  in  the  path  of  delivery.
Finally, the report will conclude with a set of recommendations.

Members at present: Mr F Bhengu Chairperson, Mr TG Anthony, Mr  NJ  Gogotya,
Mr NE Magubane, Mr HP Maluleka, Mr SN Nxumalo,  Ms  CPM  Ramotsamai,  Ms  PS
Sekgobela, Mr S Siboza, (all ANC) Mr S Opperman (DA) and Ms NM Mdaka (UDM)



2. THE WORKSHOP1

The main aim of the workshop was to discuss  the  programmes  informing  the
core business of the NDPW.

NDPW Challenges

Clarification of the NDPW’s mandate.
Transformation.
Service delivery improvement.
Contribution to the land reform process.
Black economic empowerment (BEE).
Corruption.
Asset management.
HIV and Aids programmes.
Backlogs.
Equity.

Challenges of the Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP)

The following challenges confront the EPWP:

The EPWP is still not widely understood among stakeholders and communities.
Lack of co-ordination of projects among provinces.
There is difficulty in obtaining progress reports  from  the  provinces  and
the social sector.
Directors-General (DGs) does not attend steering committee meetings  -  this
impacts on the co-ordination of projects as well as  on  the  completion  of
progress reports.
There are problems around the acceptance of  CETA-accredited  standards  and
the low numbers of training providers applying for accreditation.
Programme management support for participating provinces and municipalities
urgently needs to be put in place.
Additional learnerships and training provider mentors  need  to  be  secured
from CETA.
There is a lack of personnel, especially in the  social  sector  departments
allocated to the EPWP, as well as a lack of high-level drive to expand  EPWP
programmes in this sector.
The consolidation of existing programmes is progressing very slowly.
Progress in securing the support and co-operation  of  Eskom,  Transnet  and
the National Road Agency is rather slow.

A number of specific actions to  deal  with  these  challenges  are  in  the
process of being taken. Timeframes were given for various  actions  and  all
target dates reached were noted – for example, all EPWP launches  have  been
completed.


Challenges in Property Policy Development (PPD)

The following challenges confront the PPD:

Inadequacies relating  to  the  Emerging  Contractor  Development  Programme
(ECDP).
Inadequacies relating to  procurement  guidelines  and  the  involvement  of
previously disadvantaged communities in the construction industry.
Problems relating to leased properties.
Insufficient information on the state of the construction industry.
Inadequacies in the management of immovable assets and  in  the  maintenance
of the Asset Register.

A number of specific actions to  deal  with  these  challenges  are  in  the
process of being taken. These  actions  (including  those  relating  to  the
Asset Register, the Incubator  Programme,  the  issue  of  ‘fronting’  etc),
together with their target dates, were noted.

Challenges in Human Resource Management and Legal Services :

The following challenges confront this programme:

Finding, hiring and retaining top talent.
The development of employees.
Transitioning of employees.
Business processes/work flow.

A number of ongoing strategies and actions are in  place  to  address  these
challenges.

Challenges in the Maintenance Plan  and  the  Service  Delivery  Improvement
Programme:

The following challenges confront this programme:

Poor quality of service and lack of a customer-driven culture.
Low morale among staff.
Lack of professionalism among staff.
Management of the maintenance programme.
The provision of support to provincial sphere of government.
The funding of a multi-year maintenance programme by National  Treasury  and
sale of redundant properties to finance maintenance.

A number of ongoing strategies and actions are in  place  to  address  these
challenges. Current and future actions, together with  their  target  dates,
were also noted.

PROVINCIAL BRIEFINGS



EASTERN CAPE 2

Socio-economic conditions:

High rural population.
Widespread unemployment and poverty.
Dominance of low-wage sectors (commercial agriculture and domestic work).
Dependence on subsistence agriculture and the informal sector.
Acute backlogs in access to potable water, sanitation and healthcare.

The Expanded Public Works Programme

The EPWP was launched in the province on 3 September 2004.
Publicity material and information packages on the EPWP are  being  produced
in order to publicise the programme.
The EPWP is being driven by:  the  MEC  for  Roads  and  Public  Works;  the
Provincial Executive Council; the Provincial  Steering  Committee;  and  the
Cabinet Cluster on Economic and Infrastructure Development.
The Provincial Steering Committee (PSC):
The Committee is chaired by the Head of the Department of Roads  and  Public
Works, and will report to both the Director-General and the  MEC  for  Roads
and Public Works on a monthly basis.
The function of the PSC is to ensure that  all  departments,  municipalities
and state-owned enterprises contribute towards the success of the EPWP.
The PSC reports to the national EPWP Unit on a quarterly basis.
The EPWP is divided into three sectors (viz.  Infrastructure  and  Economic;
Social; and Environment  and  Culture),  each  consisting  of  a  number  of
provincial departments, with a specific department nominated  to  lead  each
sector:
The Infrastructure and Economic Sector is led by  the  Department  of  Roads
and Public Works.
The Environment and Culture Sector is led  by  the  Department  of  Economic
Affairs.
The Department of Social Development leads the Social Sector.
Each of the three lead departments is responsible for setting targets and
performance standards, as well as monitoring and evaluating the performance
of each sector.
Challenges

There are a number of challenges that exist,  all  of  which  are  currently
receiving attention:

Given the challenges involved in establishing the EPWP, the province
recognises the need to establish an EPWP Unit within the Public Works
Directorate. However, lack of human resources precludes this from taking
place at present. Clearly, the need to create additional capacity is
urgent.
There is a problem with lack of co-operation with line Departments.
Co-ordination with local spheres of government is weak.
There is lack of understanding of the programme by managers.

MPUMALANGA 3

The Expanded Public Works Programme

The EPWP was launched in the province on 30 August 2004.

Thus far, 1001 projects in various sectors have been  identified,  including
gravelling rural roads and renovating or building schools.
It is anticipated that these projects will result in 10 000 jobs.
It is projected that an  amount  of  R377,  602m  will  be  spent  on  these
projects.
A number of strategies have been identified and/or launched in order to
prepare the way for the implementation of the EPWP. These include:
The re-launching of an  existing  project,  Land  care,  according  to  EPWP
principles.
The identification of 45 learnerships.
Under a road construction project, individuals in learnerships have been
given two-year contracts via a relaxed tender procedure. The intention is
that after the two-year period, these individuals will have been enabled to
tender for projects on their own.
The provincial  Cabinet  has  been  requested  to  increase  infrastructural
projects by 5%.
Learner contractors will not need collateral to bid for projects  up  to  R5
million.
A deal has been struck with ABSA Bank, whereby  contractors  will  be  given
access to overdrafts, service and investment accounts.

Challenges

In view of problems experienced in the past, attention needs to be given  to
redirecting the Municipal Infrastructure Grant.
The issue of corruption, with specific regard to councillors  who  are  also
building contractors, is a major problem.
Another aspect of the problem of corruption is the possible  use  of  public
works funding for other purposes.

KWAZULU-NATAL 4

The Expanded Public Works Programme

The EPWP was launched in the province on 28 September 2004.
The general Provincial Public Works Programmes are done  by  the  Department
of Public Works but the EPWP done by the Department of Transport
One third (viz. R320m) of the total amount of R960  million  set  aside  for
the next financial year, has been earmarked for EPWP projects
Types of projects that are ongoing and to be included in the EPWP are:
Construction, e.g. roads and school building projects.
Maintenance, e.g. landscaping of public facilities, painting and  renovation
of public buildings.
The social targets set are and will be in accordance with those set  by  the
Code of Good Practice for Special Public Works Programmes, viz.  60%  women,
20% youth; and 2% disabled.
A number of targets with regard to jobs, projects and skills  training  have
been set. 5
Budgeting arrangements to underpin these targets have been made.6

The Zibambele programme:
This is a labour-intensive  road  maintenance  programme  that  allocates  a
length of road to one household.
The programme focuses on woman-headed households.
24 000 Zibambele contracts have been budgeted for this year.

The Vukuzakhe programme:
This is a staged advancement emerging contractor programme
Over the past five years, contractors on this programme  have  created  more
than 100 000 jobs.
Over the past year, two new road construction programmes, with a  budget  of
R25 million, have been launched
Institutional arrangements:
The Department is a member of the PSC, which  is  responsible  for  the  co-
ordination of provincial EPWP projects.
A Business Unit responsible for the implementation of the EPWP programme  is
represented at Head Office, and also has sub-units in all  four  regions  of
the province. However, the Unit has not yet been fully capacitated.

Provincial Public Works Programme



Challenges
Government properties and provincial assets accommodation are dilapidated.
There is a illegal occupation of state property and vandalisation  of  these
properties
Occupants of properties are defaulting on payment of rents and rates.

NORTH WEST PROVINCE 7

The Expanded Public Works Programme

The EPWP was launched in the province on 2 April 2004 under the brand  name,
‘Semelela ’.

A pilot project has been launched and  aims  to  be  completed  by  December
2005.
The following departments are participating in the  project:  Public  Works;
Roads and Transport; Agriculture, Water Affairs and  Conservation;  and  the
Central District Municipality.
The project comprises three labour intensive aspects: road  maintenance  and
upgrading; agricultural projects and construction.
Employment:
11 small contractors will be appointed to work on the projects.
275 labourers will work on construction and maintenance.
30 families will earn a living from farming.
About 100 permanent jobs and 200 temporary jobs will be created.
Additional income of about R1, 92 m per  year  will  be  generated  for  the
target communities.
Training will provided to contractors, farmers and labourers
Institutional arrangements:
The (provincial) Department of Public Works is the overall  co-ordinator  of
the EPWP.
The EPWP  Steering  Committee  comprises  all  provincial  departments,  all
municipal managers and the Office of the Premier.
Technical Committee of the Steering Committee comprises  the  Department  of
Public Works, the Department of Local Government and Housing, the Office  of
the Premier, plus two municipal managers.

Challenges

Misunderstanding of the role of other departments.
Insufficient reporting.
Commitment to EPWP targets.
Commitment and co-operation of targeted beneficiaries.
Monitoring systems.
Co-ordination at local and provincial levels.
Financial constraints for emerging contractors.

NORTHERN CAPE PROVINCE8
The Expanded Public Works Programme

Implementation dates for Social Cluster learnerships have been set.
The lead  department,  Education,  is  in  the  process  of  allocating  the
remaining 73 interns to the departments.
An additional R1 million is required to reach the  targeted  number  of  job
opportunities to be created for this year.
An additional R14 million is  required  to  reach  the  targeted  number  of
volunteers this year.
A ‘learnership on roads maintenance’ programme with  30  learners  has  been
launched.
15 learnerships (for small contractors) have been approved.
Joint ventures on road maintenance with other departments have been  entered
into.
Special  projects  have  thus  far  created  hundreds  of   jobs   in   road
construction projects. The main beneficiaries have been women and youth.
Future projects  on  the  construction  and  upgrading  of  roads  and  road
infrastructure are planned.
Technical teams  have  been  re-aligned  in  accordance  with  the  national
sectors, viz:
Infrastructure Sector.
Social Sector.
Economic Sector.
Environmental Sector.



Challenges

The vastness  of  the  province  causes  difficulties  with  regard  to  the
supervision and monitoring of projects.
Budget constraints.
Lack of availability of training service providers.
Lack of  sustainable  opportunities  after  qualifying  as  contractors  and
learners.



LIMPOPO9



The Expanded Public Works Programme

A number of projects have been identified for implementation, including  the
following:
Labour-intensive Rural Roads programme (Gundo Lashu).
The ECDP.
The Electromech Contractor Development Programme.
The Mechanical Mobile Units Contractors.
Labour Intensive Maintenance.
The Gundo Lashu Programme:
Has been developed in consultation  with  26  local  municipalities  in  the
province.
24 contractors and 6 engineering consultants have been trained in Lesotho.
It has been proposed that a training centre for  contractor  development  be
established in the province, as it will be impractical to  continue  sending
trainees to Lesotho.
Institutional arrangements:
The (provincial) Department of Public Works is the overall  co-ordinator  of
the EPWP.
The Infrastructure Sector is co-ordinated by Public Works.
The Environmental Sector is co-ordinated by the Department of Agriculture.
The Social Sector is co-ordinated by the Department of Health and Welfare.
The Economic Sector is co-ordinated by the Department of  Finance,  Economic
Affairs and Development.

Challenges

Limited understanding of the conceptual framework of the EPWP among
stakeholders.
Budget constraints.
Lack of skills within the country to assist in developing business plans.
Inherent conflicts with ongoing conventional projects.
Unfair labour practices.
Delays in finalising the business plans of the different spheres of
Government and the timing of the financial years.
Shortage of properly accredited training providers for the various sectors.
Lack of clarity on training requirements.

FREE STATE 10

The Expanded Public Works Programme
The EPWP was launched in the province on 28 September 2004.
An amount of R52 million has been budgeted for  the  implementation  of  the
EPWP.
It is estimated that a total of 17 340 jobs will be created in  the  current
financial year.
30 learnerships are targeted for the Infrastructure Sector.
A number of projects have been launched thus far:
Road construction.
Construction of 1 000 low-cost houses – it is estimated that more  than  500
people will be employed during the construction phase.
A hydroponics project.
A waste management project.
Institutional arrangements:
The province’s Department of Public Works, Roads and Transport (PWRT) is  in
the process of establishing an EPWP Unit to be led by a Chief Director.
The current Executive Council Cluster will co-ordinate the work of the  EPWP
until a  comprehensive  approach  to  institutional  arrangements  has  been
decided upon.
A  Steering  Committee,  comprising  provincial  departments  and   district
municipalities chaired by the head of the PWRT, has been established.
The Steering Committee is responsible for the overall co-ordination and
management of the EPWP in the province.
Sector EPWP Management Committees are being established to co-ordinate
projects at sector level.

Challenges

Co-ordination of the various  structures,  departments,  municipalities  and
State-owned enterprises needs to be tightened up.
There is insufficient training.
Monitoring and evaluation – there should be more comprehensive reporting
and consistency of representation.
Audit and financial Statement of the Department of Public Works: Financial
Cluster Group Discussions

Introduction:

The core functions of the Department make effective, efficient and  economic
11  financial  management  the  key  drivers  or  success  factors  for  the
Department to implement and achieve  its  objectives.  Such  core  functions
are:

the provision and management of state property and
the implementation of National Public Works Programme.

On the provision  and  management  of  state  property  core  function,  the
implementation activities entail:

the provision, development and maintenance of accommodation
acquisition and disposal of state asset and
the management and maintenance of state property portfolio.

The  implementation  activities  on  the  national  public  works  programme
entails:
creating assets through the community public works programme
influencing and stabilising the construction and property industries and
ensuring the  infrastructure  is  provided  in  a  way  that  creates  jobs,
empowers communities and develops human resources.

Although,  there  could  be  integration  and  sharing  of  experiences   at
different levels of implementation, the two  programmes  are  different  and
the point of reference in the  strategic  framework  and  implementation  is
different.  However,  the  question  of  assets,  creation  and  influencing
asserts and maintenance of assets and property for  job  creation,  economic
development and empowerment is central for both programmes.

The  skills  required  and   the   financial   management   capacities   and
capabilities needed for the continuously successful  implementation  of  the
programmes are  of  central  importance.  The  Department’s  challenges  and
limitations with the implementation of the Public Finance Management Act  No
1 of 1999 requirements in the past appear to make this a conditionality  12.
The  same  as  most  public  institutions,  the  Department  use  of  public
resources and conditions that such resources are  properly  spent  and  that
there is value for money becomes important.
Audit and Financial Statement

The idea perhaps should not be reinvent the will on the  work  done  by  the
work of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts  (SCOPA).   Based  on  the
Departments financial statements, Auditor General  Report,  the  Departments
Audit  Committee  Report,  the  Standing  Committee  goes  through  evidence
gathering process or hearing to identify and measure  the  Department  level
of progress in the implementation of the PFMA. The Department makes  certain
observations and recommendations. For now, it would  be  a  logical  process
for the Portfolio Committee to ‘pick up’ issues at that level  in  order  to
monitor the integrated implementation of policies and their successes.

Fruitless expenditure

Note 12.4, p65 of the Departments financial statements discloses  amount  of
R167, 000 in respect of fruitless expenditure. The amount has declined  from
R16, 547 million in the previous financial year and the  Standing  Committee
has commended this.

The Department is also engaging with other Departments and relevant  clients
on conditions and consequences  of  vacating  buildings  before  the  rental
contract expires. A system of user chargers is  being  introduced  in  about
two years that will force user departments to budget for rental charges.

CONCLUSION

Based on the presentations  at  both  national  and  provincial  level,  the
Portfolio Committee has noted the numerous positive actions undertaken  with
regard to the core business of the NDPW, as well as the launch of  the  EPWP
in the all the provinces and the projects  initiated  under  this  programme
thus far. Notwithstanding the progress made up to this point,  it  is  clear
that a number of significant shortcomings, problems and obstacles remain  at
both national and provincial levels (see sections on Challenges).
Recommendations13

It is therefore recommended that:

   1. National (see pp.2-3) -  The  NDPW  urgently  addresses  the  specific
      challenges relating both to its core business and the EPWP (p.2).
   2. The NDPW should prepare guidelines  that  would  enable  provinces  to
      report comprehensively upon the monitoring  and  evaluation  of  their
      projects.
   3. The challenges faced by the PPD must be urgently addressed (p.2).
   4. The challenges faced by Human Resource Management and  Legal  Services
      must be urgently addressed (p.3).
   5. The challenges faced by the Maintenance Plan and the Service  Delivery
      Improvement Programme must be urgently addressed (p.3).
   6. The Department should monitor tenders and  their  implementation  more
      closely, as it is important to ensure that tendering process is a fair
      one and that it is free of corruption.
   7. A range of support services (including financial  support)  should  be
      made available to emerging contractors, as a supportive environment is
      empowering and also prevents corruption.
   8. The Department must review  its  current  guidelines  to  prevent  the
      practice of “ fronting”
   9. Provincial (see pp.4-10) - The successful implementation of  the  EPWP
      at local and provincial level is critical to the ultimate  achievement
      of job creation and poverty alleviation in South Africa.  It  is  thus
      essential that the provinces urgently address the specific  challenges
      relating to the implementation of the EPWP (pp.5-10).
  10. The lack of co-operation with  line  departments  should  urgently  be
      addressed.
  11. There should be co-ordination with local spheres  of  government,  for
      example,  through  the  South  African  Local  Government  Association
      (SALGA) - the latter’s role should be strengthened.
  12. The issue of ‘fronting’ should be addressed otherwise  the  objectives
      of Black Economic Empowerment will not be met.  Many  black  companies
      fail because they do not have access to the  necessary  resources  and
      are then vulnerable to offers of fronting.
  13. A range of support services (including financial  support)  should  be
      made available to emerging contractors.  For  example,  the  agreement
      reached with ABSA Bank in  Mpumalanga,  whereby  contractors  will  be
      given access  to  range  of  services,  should  be  published  in  all
      provinces. This type of support is closely linked to the promotion  of
      BEE  and  the  genuine  empowerment  of   historically   disadvantaged
      communities. In particular, access to finance and the ability to  draw
      up a proper tenders are essential  to  eliminate  the  practice  of  “
      fronting’.
  14. The issue of corruption should be urgently addressed – an  example  is
      that of the conflict of interest created  by  councillors  responsible
      for decisions on  public  works  projects  and  who  also  tender  for
      building contracts.
  15. The issue of insufficient numbers of training service providers should
      be addressed.
  16. It is crucial and urgent for the Department to upgrade its debtor sub-
      system before the end of the  current  financial  years  in  order  to
      capture incoming receipts, as this was not done previously.
  17. It has been established that no interest  is  charged  on  outstanding
      amounts, and monthly invoicing and submission of statements to debtors
      is not  done,  therefore  it  recommended  that  the  Department  must
      implement initiatives that include an “interest clause” in  all  lease
      agreements, late payments and a market related annual rental  increase
      should be implemented.
  18. Discrepancies on rates and services on different properties under  the
      Department must urgently be streamlined and the billing system of  the
      Department must be upgraded.
  19. The valuation policy and  systems  used  by  the  Department  must  be
      clearly defined in line with norms and standards as  required  by  the
      law. Seeing that the Department has no  valuers  of  its  own,  it  is
      recommended that the Department must utilize tertiary institutions and
      interns who will be supervised by experts in  order  to  minimize  the
      costs and to address unemployment in terms of EPWP.
  20. On issues of fruitless expenditure, governance and lack of independent
      checks in the Department,  it  is  a  matter  of  grave  concern  that
      policies and procedures are not  followed.  The  Department  therefore
      must urgently put in place mechanisms  to  ensure  that  the  internal
      audit its work. This must be reported as per SCOPA recommendations and
      adhered to in terms provisions of the PFMA.

REPORTING FRAMEWORK
   1. By the beginning of the next financial  year,  a  progress  report  is
      required on how the challenges facing the NDPW are being met.
   2. Future reports to Parliament should contain full details  on  how  the
      NDPW’s challenges are being met, and whether the targets  set  by  the
      Department are being reached and report to the Committee quarterly.
   3. The Department should establish a task team inclusive  of  Departments
      of Local Government,  Land  Affairs,  Housing,  SALGA  and  any  other
      relevant  departments  led  by  the  Department  of  Public  Works  to
      investigate and assist with the completion of the Asset Register. This
      team should report on progress to the Portfolio Committee  on  a  six-
      monthly basis and complete their work within two years.
   4. The Department with continued interaction  and  involvement  with  the
      private sector should address the issue on procurement,  BEE  and  job
      sustainability. The possibility of tax incentives could be  considered
      to businesses, which successfully addressed this issue.
   5. An audit of vacant buildings, a disposal policy  including  any  other
      information on property and land must be provided to the Committee  on
      quarterly basis.
   6. In promoting interdepartmental cooperation, it is recommended that the
      Department  must  consult  with  the  Department  of  Public  Services
      regarding central bargaining chamber in order to resolve the issue  of
      annual  review  tariffs  for  official   housing,   which   has   been
      outstanding, and report to the Committee before  end  of  the  current
      financial year.
   7. The Department must as a matter of urgency  address  the  question  of
      lack of management skills and provide  full  disclosure  of  plans  on
      skills development programme, strategy on recruitment  and  employee’s
      retention at all levels. The Department  must  provide  the  Committee
      with its organogram before the end of the current financial year.
   8. The Department must provide report on progress made on the filling  of
      the vacant posts of the DDGs: EPWP and Asset  management  in  February
      2005.


Report to be considered.


                              DRAFT RESOLUTION
                                 (1ST DRAFT)

                                PUBLIC WORKS
                      VOTE 6 (YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2004)





The Standing Committee on Public Accounts  (SCOPA),  having  considered  the
Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the  Department
of Public Works (DWP) for the year ended 31 March 2003 and 2004:




1.    General observations, including previous SCOPA recommendations


Background:   The Auditor-General reported that progress had  been  made  in
respect of eight of the fourteen recommendations made by SCOPA in its  112th
Report  for  2003.    However,  to  date   no   formal   response   to   the
recommendations as adopted by the House has been provided to Parliament.


SCOPA hearing: During the hearing, the Committee  probed  the  four  matters
that  remain  unresolved,  as  well  as  various  other  matters  and  where
appropriate, made recommendations for the House to consider.

The Committee wishes to commend the  Accounting  Officer  for  the  progress
made in a number of areas.  However,  the  Committee  is  disappointed  that
certain matters remain unresolved, especially the completeness and  accuracy
of the state-owned property register. The Committee also wishes  to  express
concern about the new matters dealt with during the hearing, especially  the
high number of vacant positions within the DPW.


Recommendation:  The Committee recommends that Parliament  ensure  that  the
recommendations contained in this Report, once adopted  by  the  House,  are
transmitted to the relevant executive authority for response by the DPW.
Debtors

Background:   The  following  weaknesses  were  reported  regarding   rental
debtors:
the debtor sub-system (Property Management Information System  or  PMIS)  is
not fully utilised;
no interest is charged on outstanding amounts,  and  monthly  invoicing  and
submission of statements to debtors are not being done;
receipts are not captured on the debtors subsystem; and
NO debtors’ age analyses are made available for management purposes.

SCOPA hearing: The Accounting Officer  reported  to  the  Committee  that  a
number  of  corrective  steps  had  been  implemented.   This  included  the
establishment of property management units, and implementing  best  practice
standard lease agreements with  client  departments.  Lease  agreements  now
include an interest clause that did not previously exist.  An  age  analysis
module has  also  been  incorporated  into  the  PMIS  and  the  information
generated is discussed at management meetings.


Recommendations: The Committee recommends that:

 the debtor system at the Department should be evaluated by the  IT  Section
to determine whether the current system complies with all the needs  of  the
DPW; and

progress made regarding the  weaknesses  of  the  debtor  system  should  be
reported, on  a quarterly basis, to the Audit  Committee  of  the  DPW,  who
should monitor and  evaluate the progress in order to report thereon in  the
next annual report of the Department.



3.    Revenue


Background: In terms of Section  38  (1)  (c)  of  the  Public  Finance  and
Management  Act  (PFMA)  an  accounting  officer  must  take  effective  and
appropriate steps to collect all money due to the Department.  The  controls
over rental revenue were reported to be ineffective. A lack of  training  of
officials was also  reported.  An  investigation  into  married  and  single
quarter official housing highlighted that tariffs was last updated in  1995.
In terms of Treasury Regulation 7.3.1 the accounting officer must  at  least
annually review these tariffs if they are under his or her control.


SCOPA hearing: The Committee was informed  that  an  annual  review  of  the
tariffs for official housing had not been carried out in about  nine  years.
The Accounting Officer indicated  that  the  tariffs  were  part  of  public
service central bargaining chamber negotiations on service  conditions,  and
that the DPW had little choice  but  to  implement  the  bargaining  chamber
agreements.  It was further argued that the  loss  to  the  State  owing  to
lower than market related rental should not be regarded as  a  loss,  seeing
that it is part of service conditions of essential services.


Recommendation:
The Committee recommends that this matter be  taken  up  by  the  Accounting
Officer with the Department  of  Public  Service  and  Administration  as  a
matter of urgency and reported on to Parliament by the end  of  the  current
financial year as the Committee is convinced that the position  with  regard
to official housing could be better managed.

4.    Asset management

Background: The fixed asset register for  moveable  assets  was  incomplete.
This was due to the implementation of a computer  software  program  started
in the previous year aimed at maintaining a register of item  identification
codes and locations.
In addition, a "proof on concept" on the requirements for a complete,  valid
and accurate national fixed property register to meet accounting  disclosure
requirements still has to be  developed.   An  evaluation  by  the  Auditor-
General of the proof of concept revealed that:

the PMIS database was not sufficient or updated to form the basis for a
fixed asset register;
the Department of Land Affairs database was found to be largely accurate,
but did not disclose valuation details necessary for DPW purposes; and
differences existed in the calculation of municipal valuations which, may
impact on the apportionment of rates and taxes between government and
private landowners in terms of the new Property Rates Act.

SCOPA hearing:  The Accounting Officer  indicated  that  progress  has  been
made with respect to the database in question. He also  indicated  that  the
information  system  was  intended  to  also   produce   useful   management
information. However, he pointed out that the  Department  of  Land  Affairs
was responsible for  the  overall  inventory  of  land,  and  that  the  DPW
register was only part of such a bigger inventory.

Regarding confirmation of ownership, this was a  Land  Affairs  project  for
which funding seemed imminent. The DPW would participate in such  a  project
and would utilise information resulting from such a project for purposes  of
a fixed property register.

Indications were that a project to ensure a  proper  valuation  model  would
require about R250 million over approximately five years. Funding was  being
discussed with National Treasury. The DPW was considering  various  options,
including obtained international advice. However, SCOPA  observed  that  the
action plan seemed weak.  It  was  also  noted  that  it  might  lead  to  a
qualified audit opinion in future years if not addressed  sooner  than  five
years.

Recommendations:

 The Committee recommends that:

the Accounting Officer urgently attend to the finalisation  of  a  valuation
model.
  an action plan should be tabled at the next meeting  of  the  Department's
Audit Committee for review and comment to the  Accounting  Officer  and  the
Minister.  The Committee should report thereon in the next annual report  of
the Department.


5.    General and application controls - computer environment

Background:  A general control  review  by  the  Auditor-General  identified
certain significant system control weaknesses, including the  absence  of  a
disaster recovery plan.



SCOPA hearing:  The Committee was informed that a proper disaster recovery
plan was being finalised coupled with related improvements such as a
service level agreement between the IT division and the departmental users.


Recommendation:  The Committee recommends that:

the Accounting Officer ensure the urgent finalisation of a proper disaster
recovery plan;
the Audit Committee evaluate the adequacy thereof and report thereon in the
next annual report of the Department; and
the Accounting Officer and Audit Committee review the relevance of the last
risk assessment exercise, as well as the adequacy of the current risk
management strategy, and report thereon in the next Annual Report.


6.    Property Management Information System (PMIS)

Background:  An information system audit of the application controls  within
the PMIS,  conducted  by  the  Auditor-General,  found  that  although  some
controls were in  place,  significant  weaknesses  existed  in  the  general
control environment as a whole.

SCOPA hearing:  The Chief Information  Officer  indicated  in  her  comments
that various corrective measures have been taken or envisaged.

Recommendation: The Committee recommends that:

the Audit Committee evaluate the adequacy of corrective  steps  implemented,
and report thereon in the next annual report of the Department.
the Accounting Officer and the Executive Authority take cognisance that  the
responsibility for  implementing  basic  controls  such  as  these  was  the
obligation of all accounting officers in terms of section 38 of  the  Public
Finance Management Act, and  that  failure  to  effectively  implement  such
controls constitutes financial misconduct.


7.    Vacancies and Skills development
Background:   The  Auditor-General  indicated  that  a  lack  of  management
reviews  seemed  a  likely  underlying   cause   of   financial   management
weaknesses.
SCOPA hearing:  The Accounting Officer maintained that the DPW was a  highly
technical department with core functions for which it was  not  always  easy
to procure the required staff.  In spite  of  this,  the  DPW  had  recently
managed to fill over 300 posts at highly skilled supervisory  level  and  at
middle management level.  In addition, an extensive recruitment  drive  will
continue.

Recommendation: The Committee recommends that:

in view of the incorrect information contained on page 90 of the Annual
Report, the Accounting Officer provide SCOPA and the Portfolio Committee on
Public Works with a correct and updated skills development plan; and
the Portfolio Committee on Public Works monitor progress with the filling
of all vacancies, especially financially related vacancies, and
specifically the critical top management positions such as the Deputy
Director General: Extended Public Works Programme.

8.    Unauthorised expenditure

Background:  The appropriation statement reflects  overspending  of  R30,360
million on one main  division,  which  is  also  disclosed  as  unauthorised
expenditure in  Note  12  to  the  financial  statements.  In  the  previous
financial year, unauthorised expenditure amounted to R227,088 million.

SCOPA hearing :  The DPW argued that it was obligated to honour  all  rental
contracts, even though adequate funds were not provided for  in  the  annual
national budget.  The same applied to property rates  and  taxes.   The  DPW
argued that both these categories constituted unavoidable  expenditure.  The
DPW admitted, however, that the  quality  of  its  motivations  to  National
Treasury could improve.
However National Treasury disputed this and  attributed  it  to  inefficient
planning and lack of expenditure reprioritisation.

The Committee further noted that the disclosure of information in the  notes
to the annual financial statements seemed inadequate, as no information  was
provided on the appropriateness or otherwise of disciplinary  steps  against
relevant officials, or of other processes that have been instituted.



Recommendations:

The Committee recommends that -

 The Accounting Officer, in future ensure –

better quality budget submissions to National Treasury; and

pro-active budgetary management as provided for in the PFMA to avoid over-
expenditure.


9.    Fruitless and wasteful expenditure

Background:   The notes to the annual financial statements (note 12.4,  page
65) disclosed an amount of R167, 000 in respect  of  fruitless  expenditure,
which has declined from R16,547 million in the previous financial year.

SCOPA hearing:  The Accounting Officer  indicated  that  the  DPW  has  been
educating user-departments on the consequences of vacating buildings  before
the expiry of  a  rental  contract.   A  system  of  user  charges  will  be
introduced in about two years and will force user departments to budget  for
rental charges.
Recommendation:
The Committee wishes to commend the DPW on the decline in the  total  amount
of fruitless expenditure.

The Committee recommends, however, that:
the DPW ensure that all user-departments are contractually  bound  to  carry
the cost of  any  fruitless  expenditure  arising  from  early  vacating  of
rented properties; and
the Department expedite the implementation of user charges.


10.   Account balances

Background: The following items, which originate from prior to  2002  remain
unresolved due to a lack of supporting documentation:

transactions not accounted for through the income statement, originating  on
or before 1999-2000; as well as R12.6 million  in  respect  of  receivables;
R19,3 million for other debtors;  R2 million for  payables  (current);  R0,2
million for staff debtors, and R0,19 million for advances.

The DPW  has  reportedly  met  with  the  Accountant-General  and  presented
information supporting the write-off of these transactions. At the  time  of
the publication of the Annual Report, finality on the possible write-off  of
these amounts was still outstanding.

The resolution of irreconcilable debts  and  debt  inherited  from  regional
structures is currently being addressed  as  a  government  wide  initiative
with all relevant stakeholders. The DPW has disclosed the various  items  in
notes 11.2 and 11.3 to the financial statements.

SCOPA hearing:   The  Accounting  Officer  assured  the  Committee  that  in
future, no documents will be destroyed before a  period  of  five  years  or
before audits have been completed. He argued  that  the  pre-2002  situation
was a historic situation  beyond  the  control  of  the  DPW,  and  that  he
believed that the amounts should be written off.

The Auditor-General indicated that a prerequisite for the write-off  of  the
amounts  in  question  was  that  proof  would  have  to  be  provided  that
sufficient attempts  had  been  made  to  either  recover  the  amounts,  or
retrieve the relevant documentation.  The  department  would  also  have  to
have a surplus from which such amount can be written off against.

National Treasury indicated that it required a consolidated  figure  of  all
departments, who were in a  similar  position,  before  the  Treasury  could
consider approving its write-off.

Recommendations:

The Committee recommends that:

National Treasury consult all national  departments  who  are  in  the  same
position, and clearly indicate what is required for  this  long  outstanding
matter to be resolved; and

the DPW continue its discussions with the  Accountant-General  in  order  to
determine what more is required to resolve this matter.

11.   Financial Management

Background:  There is a reported lack of independent checks  and  management
reviews within the DPW resulting in policies and procedures  as  implemented
by management not being fully adhered to.

In its 112th Report of last year, the Committee noted the lack  of  capacity
within the internal audit unit within DPW,  and  the  Committee  recommended
that the Accounting Officer consider outsourcing part of the internal  audit
function.

SCOPA hearing:  The Accounting Officer  indicated  that  management  reviews
had to be addressed by recruiting the right quality and  number  of  skilled
staff.

Regarding internal audit, DPW contracted in a consortium  of  private  audit
firms to assist with  the  internal  audit  function  during  the  2003-2004
financial year. The capacity in the internal audit has  also  been  expanded
at regional level. However, the training and skills transferring was  raised
as a matter of concern  even  at  Audit  Committee  level.   The  Accounting
Officer assured the Committee that measures have been taken to  ensure  that
training and proper skills transfer take place.


Recommendations:



Having considered the evidence and steps taken by the Accounting Officer to
ensure that all weaknesses as indicated by the Auditor-General have been
addressed.  The Committee recommends that:


a target date be set for the total independent functioning of  the  internal
audit section throughout the Department;
the Audit Committee should assess the feasibility of the target date, and
monitor progress towards the final date agreed between the Audit Committee
and the Accounting Officer; and
the Audit Committee monitor management responses to the weaknesses reported
in the audit management letters of the Auditor-General.


12.   The reconciliation of the PMIS to BAS

Background:  In SCOPA’s 112th Report  of  2003,  the  Committee  recommended
that:

the DPW should perform regular reconciliation's (i.e. monthly) that will  be
reviewed by the Director-General on a quarterly basis; and
monitoring mechanisms should be in place to ensure proper reconciliation.

During the 2003-2004  audit,  the  Auditor-General  Office  brought  to  the
attention of the DPW the fact that reconciliation between PMIS and  BAS  was
only carried out annually and not on a monthly basis.

SCOPA hearing:  The Accounting Officer provided assurance to  the  Committee
that reconciliations between PMIS and BAS were now being done on  a  monthly
basis.


Recommendation:  The Committee recommends that the Audit Committee review
the adequacy of the monthly and quarterly reconciliations, and report
thereon in the Annual Report for 2004-2005.

1 See ‘Report on the workshop between the NDPW and the Portfolio Committee
on Public Works, 2-8 September 2004’ for full details.


2  See Briefing Report on the EPWP of the Eastern Cape Province to the
Portfolio Committee.

3 See Briefing Report on Expanded Public Works Projects, Mpumalanga.

5 See Draft Asisebenze Plan, 2005-2008, KwaZulu-Natal, p.3.

6 See Draft Asisebenze Plan, 2005-2008, KwaZulu-Natal, p.6.

7 See Presentation by the North West Province to the Portfolio Committee on
the EPWP.

8  See Presentation by the Northern Cape Province to the Portfolio
Committee on the EPWP.

9 See Presentation by the Limpopo Province to the Portfolio Committee on
the EPWP.


10 See Presentation by the Free State Province to the Portfolio Committee
on the EPWP.


11 These are requirements and values embodied in the Public Finance
Management Act 1 of 1999 and the Municipal Finance Management Act.

12 The continuous distinction between financial management capacities and
capabilities and policy implementation, for example, on job creation,
poverty reduction is not helpful. If an integrated understanding is
developed continuous monitoring of the Department’s financial management
capabilities and implementation will go a long way in making sure that
policy implementations and successes are reliably measured.




