---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 September 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-09-15
---

THURSDAY, 15 SEPTEMBER 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.


ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.



                         CHANGES IN PARTY MEMBERSHIP


                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I have to announce that the following
changes in party membership have occurred as a result of floor-crossing: Mr
M Diko and Ms N M Mdaka have today left the United Democratic Movement and
joined a new party called United Independent Front.


                MOTIONS ONE AND TWO ORDER PAPER TO STAND OVER


                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that
motions one and two, printed in my name on the Order Paper, stand over.
Thank you very much.

Agreed to.

MEMBERS’ STATEMENTS




                  CLOSING DOWN OF FARM SCHOOL IN THABAZIMBI


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P R MASHANGOANE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, a school on a farm in
Thabazimbi was destroyed a few days before the reopening of schools in
July. The name of the school is Deo Gloria, which is the Latin for “Glory
to God”.

The farmer, Mr Pienaar, burnt down the school, Deo Gloria, putting the
education of more than 200 farmworkers’ children in a predicament. This
right to education of children was taken away because of the right to
private property of the farmer.

The ANC government expresses praise and appreciation for the efforts taken
by the MEC, Dr Aaron Motswaledi, in ensuring the restoration of the right
to learn by swiftly taking legal action to restrain the conduct of the
farmer, and further causing structures to be erected for the school.

More praise goes to the courts in their decision, which clarified that
individual rights cannot take precedence over national interest. We take it
that this case will send a message to South Africans that the Constitution
firmly supports individual rights, but that these are always subject to and
limited by matters of national and public interest, and that this includes
even the right to private ownership.

Let us not do Deo Gloria without glorifying humanity, created a symbol of
that glory. I thank you.


               THE ROLE OF OPPOSITION PARTIES IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): The DA today reaffirms its commitment to
strong-principled nonracial opposition in South Africa; observes that now,
more than ever, the need for a united and effective opposition has been
both clear and urgent, and is keenly aware of the needs and interests of
South Africa’s 4,7 million opposition voters.

Furthermore, the DA notes that the bedrock of the South African
Constitution is multiparty democracy and not a one-party state. It declares
that today, with the decimation of certain smaller parties in Parliament, a
two-party alignment is the best guarantee of freedom in South Africa going
forward. [Interjections.]

The DA understands that the future of the African continent depends in no
small measure on the success of the South African democracy, which in turn
depends on building an opposition and cutting the ANC down to size.
[Interjections.]

We in the DA therefore dedicate ourselves with renewed energy, purpose and
hope to the cause of extending the reach and influence of opposition in
South Africa and forming an alternative government in the future.
[Applause.]


                 INDUSTRIAL ACTION AT SOUTH AFRICAN AIRWAYS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, it was unfortunate that South
Africa’s air service workers were not categorised in the Labour Relations
Act as essential service workers in order to effectively control industrial
action, such as those experienced in recent months.

SA Airways, being our national carrier, was grounded at many airports
within South Africa and abroad, causing huge financial losses to both
passengers and trade. The country’s credibility and confidence to control
delicate situations have been dented in the eyes of foreign carriers. We
hope the captains of industry will do everything possible to remove the
threat by pilots that they may consider the same action in the future.

The essential services clause in the Labour Relation Act was included to
avoid the interruption of vital services, such as personal safety and the
lives of our nationals. Air service workers are people whose individual
rights must not be strangled by legislative red tape while other workers
enjoy the right to strike. However, we call for protection when journeying
through the skies. I thank you.

                   RESPONSE TO THE DELMAS TYPHOID OUTBREAK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr A N LUTHULI (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC condemns the irresponsible
actions of a Johannesburg transport company, which is alleged to be
responsible for the typhoid outbreak in the town of Delmas in Mpumalanga
province.

The outbreak of this life-threatening disease has already led to one
fatality, and left almost 300, mostly poor people, infected. I must add
that these figures will change as the outbreak unfolds. In fact, as we
speak, there was another death last night.

However, we are heartened by the efforts of the joint operation command of
the province, municipality and sector departments that have, since 7
September, inspected, created awareness and deployed experts to Delmas to
arrest the situation. Since then, health facilities have been operating 24
hours a day. Water purification in the community, at schools and mines is
being improved. In addition, extra ambulances have been provided, and
environmental surveillance and veterinary support to dairy and vegetable
farms have been bolstered to contain any further deterioration.

As the ANC, we are indeed encouraged by the joint response of Ministers,
MECs and councillors. It certainly pronounced, in no small measure, that we
are proactive in the face of disasters at a micro-level. [Interjections.]

Furthermore, it demonstrates the commitment by the ANC to the poor, and
more so to the poor in far-flung rural areas. Also, we recognise the co-
operation by the three spheres of government and the involvement of other
agencies. We have no doubt that the lessons learnt in this experience and
the mechanisms put in place will be sustained for any similar eventuality.
I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                   RECENT ARREST OF WHITE-COLLAR CRIMINALS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G T MADIKIZA (UDM): Deputy Speaker, the UDM welcomes the arrest
yesterday of three senior officials from the former Saambou Bank. These
three men face 13 charges, including fraud, theft and contravention of the
Company’s Act, involving approximately R640 million.

We hope that this will set a new precedent when it comes to the prosecution
of so-called “white-collar” crimes. The implication that white-collar crime
is less damaging to our society, or deserves a lesser punishment, should be
dispensed with once and for all. White-collar crime undermines our ability
to grow the economy and attract investments. It causes untold social harm
to its victims.

White-collar crime is not a harmless crime. When Saambou collapsed,
thousands of people watched their life savings and their livelihoods go
down the drain. Far from being a mere transaction theft, this crime had a
dire impact on thousands of households and law-abiding citizens.

We believe that this case must be only the first of many to demonstrate the
special skills and capacity of the Scorpions to bring the perpetrators of
sophisticated crimes to book. I thank you very much.

The UDM is still alive! [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is very clear.

               ACTS OF VANDALISM AGAINST KING MAKHADO’S STATUE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Madam Deputy Speaker, without respect for
communities’ histories we will never attain peace and co-operation in South
Africa between communities. For this reason, the damage to the statue of
King Makhado cannot be condoned. The FF Plus is in favour of a win-win
solution where all communities’ histories and heroes are respected and
honoured. In this instance, it applies to the Venda and Afrikaner
communities. With wise leaders on all sides, such solutions are possible
and easy for South Africa.

King Makhado was a hero to the Vhavenda as Louis Trichardt was a hero to
the Afrikaners. A lack of sensitivity for the emotions involved in
communities’ histories and their heroes has led to this unacceptable
situation. For this reason, the FF Plus condemns the damage to the Makhado
statue as strongly as it has condemned the insensitive removal of Louis
Trichardt’s bust, as well as the unilateral name change of Louis Trichardt.

The removal of Louis Trichardt’s bust is as unacceptable and insults the
Afrikaner as much as the present vandalism of the Makhado statue. Up to
which point do the authorities want to drive these issues before we find
sensible solutions which will help to address actions and reactions?

The Afrikaner leader, Louis Trichardt, and King Rasithu Ramabulana, the
father of Makhado, had a special friendship after Trichardt had helped him
retain his throne against his subordinates - and that was before you were
in South Africa. Why do we not rather learn from this history of co-
operation, instead of polarising communities against each other by removing
statues or painting them? I thank you.

                           BUILDING LASTING PEACE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D A A OLIFANT (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, as we celebrate Heritage
Month, let us once again acknowledge that our commitment to conflict
resolution and to building lasting peace is a fundamental part of our
heritage as South Africans. The Nobel Peace Prize has always been awarded
to a single individual and organisation, or else shared amongst individuals
or groups, but the committee has never given recognition to a group that
has been expressly formed for this particular purpose.

Organisers of the One Thousand Women for the Nobel Peace Prize of 2005 have
searched the world looking for women who perform the vital task of building
peace in their homes, communities, countries and the world at large.
Therefore the organisers have nominated them as a group for consideration
by the Nobel committee in Oslo.

Die volgende 14 Suid-Afrikaanse vroue is genomineer vir dié gesogte prys:
Nosandla Malindi, Nikiwe Nyamakazi, Edith Matshikiza, Regina Makunga,
Miriam Malala, Adelle Potgieter, Lesley-Anne Foster, Janet Dlamini,
Busisiwe Hlomuka en Veronica Khoza.[The following 14 South African women
have been nominated for this sought-after prize: Nosandla Malindi, Nikiwe
Nyamakazi, Edith Matshikiza, Regina Makunga, Miriam Malala, Adelle
Potgieter, Lesley-Anne Foster, Janet Dlamini, Busisiwe Hlomuka and Veronica
Khoza.]

We are also honoured to have four of these women from the Western Cape here
with us today, and they are there in the gallery. They are Lorna Philander,
Daphne Jansen, Cordelia Nozukile Tshaka, and Rolene Miller. [Applause.] We
are also honoured to have their co-ordinator, Nomvuyo Skota-Dayile, who has
worked tirelessly in developing and making the work of these women
recognised, with us. [Applause.]
The Freedom Charter promised us that there shall be peace and friendship,
and that the doors of learning and culture shall be open. We honour and
congratulate these women in furthering the opening of these doors. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Olifant. I wish to welcome to the
National Assembly the four women from the Western Cape who have been
nominated for the 2005 Nobel Peace Prize. You are welcome. [Applause.]

        MINISTER NQAKULA’S REFUSAL TO ANSWER PARLIAMENTARY QUESTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R JANKIELSOHN (DA): Deputy Speaker, while the DA welcomes the decision
of Cabinet to commit itself to fulfilling its constitutional obligation to
provide Parliament with accurate answers regarding parliamentary questions,
it appears that this message has yet to reach Minister Nqakula.

Not only has the Minister of Safety and Security refused to answer a series
of parliamentary questions, because the answers would expose managerial
shortcomings in his department and his failures in the fight against crime,
it now appears in his latest answers that he is prepared to resort to
sarcasm, which reveals his clear contempt for parliamentary oversight.
[Interjections.]
We hope that the Deputy President will be able to impress the meaning of
the phrase, “legislative oversight and accountability” on her colleagues.
In the meantime, the Minister can rest assured that the DA will not stop
asking questions. We firmly believe that the public has the right to the
information about the fight against crime that he is so desperate to hide.
I thank you. [Applause.]

                CRIME SITUATION IN EASTWOOD, PIETERMARITZBURG

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Madam Deputy Speaker, the MF expresses its concern
regarding the crime situation in the suburb of Eastwood, in
Pietermaritzburg, after two men were gunned down in separate incidents in
the same road.

The first victim, Mr Aldin Gouws, was shot in the neck after being
approached by a stranger whilst walking down Tarentaal Road. Similarly,
later that evening, Kevin Johnson was walking down the same road when he
was approached by two men who shot him several times before fleeing. Both
Gouws and Johnson died from injuries sustained during these horrid attacks.

It is shameful how criminals show no regard for the value of our lives. We
extend our sincere condolences to the families and friends of Gouws and
Johnson. May their souls rest in peace!
We seek the intervention of the Eastwood community, police and the
formation of an effective anticrime campaign to swiftly deter crime and
criminals in our area. A working relationship between the local police and
the communities will serve to cripple crime in our community and South
Africa. I thank you very much. [Applause.]


                       BUILDING A BETTER LIFE FOR ALL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S HUANG (ANC): Deputy Speaker, South Africans enjoy better conditions of
peace and dignity. We have started to build a united nation without regard
to race, colour and gender. Each of our communities is free at last to
express its language, culture and identity in the conditions of diversity.
We can truly say that South Africa belongs to all who live in it.

Our country enjoys the respect of all the nations of the world. We have, as
a country, better relations and friendship with the international community
in search of a better world. The local government has been faced with many
difficulties. Challenges include backlogs in the provision of municipal
services and infrastructure, transforming nationally, divided local
government, the culture of nonpayment by residents and the demand for
better services by the communities. This is a clear indication that our
people will continue trusting that it is only the ANC-led government that
can bring a better life for all. Vote ANC! Amandla! [Interjections.]
[Applause.]


                VISIT TO CULTURALLY SIGNIFICANT HERITAGE SITE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S E OPPERMAN (DA): Deputy Speaker, on 21 June I visited maghia, the
dancing place, on a high hill situated on the fringe of the Moordenaars
Karoo to watch the dying sun on the shortest day of the year, that is
winter solstice, from a litaku – a small stone temple.

To the Otentottu or the Quena it was the end of the year, and they used the
maghia, the dancing place, near this small temple to welcome the new year -
the birth of the sun. This occurrence takes place during December in the
northern hemisphere, where some people many years ago mistook the birth of
the sun as the time of the birth of the Son – God’s Son.

Daar is ’n kulturele en godsdienstige geskiedenis wat geskrywe lê in klip
(in lüί) op die vlaktes van die Karoo, die Kamdeboo, Mpumalanga en die
hange van Quthlamba met ’n ongelooflike en sover ongeëwenaarde
verskeidenheid oriëntasies en sterk verbindinge met onder andere
Stonehenge, die Piramides in Egipte en die groot Zimbabwe-ruïnes.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)
[There is a cultural and religious history which lies written in stone on
the plains of the Karoo, the Kamdeboo, Mpumalanga and the slopes of
Quthlamba with an incredible and so far unmatched variety of orientations
and strong connections with, inter alia, Stonehenge, the Pyramids in Egypt
and the great Zimbabwe ruins.]

It is a culture fixed in stone, waiting to be discovered by more and more
people. There is evidence that we can follow in order to know and
understand more about a group of people who once used these structures
during specific times and seasons for religious activities.

Dis ’n onontginde erfenis waarvan die Minister van Kuns en Kultuur moet
kennis neem en wat nie langer geїgnoreer kan word nie. [It is an
unexploited heritage site of which the Minister of Arts and Culture must
take note and which can no longer be ignored.]


             JUDGE BIZOS’S CRITICISM OF ZIMBABWE’S LEGAL SYSTEM


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Madam Speaker, we congratulate Adv George Bizos for
speaking out so courageously about the disappearance of democracy in
Zimbabwe and for criticising strongly the one-sided amendment of the
Zimbabwean constitution to prohibit the judiciary from reviewing or judging
any property alienation.
We call on the South African government to break its silence on this
serious matter and to support Adv Bizos in his lone and brave crusade. I
thank you. [Applause.]


               GOVERNMENT’S FIGHT AGAINST CORRUPTION AND CRIME


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu S MAHOTE (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, urhulumente osezintanjeni, okhokelwa
ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC, uya kuthi gqolo ukulwa norhwaphilizo nokunyoluka
kwamalungu athile asebenzela urhulumente. Kutsha nje amalungu amahlanu
esipolisa apha eNtshona Koloni athe aphoswa kwesimnyama isisele ngezithyolo
zokuthengisa nokushishina ngeziyobisi.

Omnye umsebenzi osebenzela iSebe lezoBulungisa naye uthe wavalelwa ngenxa
yokuba ethe wathengisa ngamadokethi enkundla. Amalungu amabini oluntu
ekuhlaleni andyondya emjiva ngenxa yokusebenzisana nale migulukudu.

Le mpumulelo ibonakalisa ngokuthe gca, okwekati emhlophe ehlungwini, ukuba
urhulumente we-ANC akalinyamezeli inyala kunye nobuqhophololo. Sihlaba
ikhwelo kumalungu ethu kunye nabahlali ukuba basebenzisane namasebe
karhulumente ajongene nokulwa ulwaphulo-mthetho. Ndiyabulela.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa member’s statement follows.)
[Mr S MAHOTE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led government will always lead
the fight against corruption and greed, which seems to be common among
government officials. Recently five police officers in the Western Cape
were convicted for dealing with drugs.

One employee of the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
said that he was also convicted for having removed court dockets for money.
Two members from the community were sentenced for conspiring with these
criminals.

Our success indicates clearly that the ANC-led government does not tolerate
corruption and unethical practices. We call on all our members and
communities to work together with government departments in their fight
against crime and corruption. I thank you. [Applause.]]


                      SERVICE DELIVERY AND HEALTH CARE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Chief M NONKONYANA (ANC): Madam Speaker and hon members, the ANC-led
government can provide more resources and introduce quality health care.
For this programme to succeed, it requires public servants who serve the
people with respect, dignity, efficiency, active citizenship and a spirit
of responsibility and voluntarism among all of us.
Some members of this House and some sections of the media always complain
about things getting worse under this government, all the time apportioning
blame and demanding retribution.

Given the enormous challenges facing our health services, however, it is
heartening to see and hear stories of dedication and hard work by our civil
servants.

As Mr Andre Hendricks of Johannesburg said, and I quote:

   Today I want to shout praise from the rooftops about the Kalafong
   hospital. They took such good care of my mother during her last 70 days.
   She was treated with such love, care and compassion that words cannot
   express my innermost feelings.


   The dedication of all the medical staff and the post-operation service
   provided by the staff disproves all the prophets of doom, including the
   DA.


We, the members of the ANC, recommit ourselves to redoubling our efforts,
in partnership with our people, to deliver better services. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                            MINISTERS’ RESPONSES





     COURT RULING ON FARM SCHOOL IN LIMPOPO WELCOMED; SAA REGAINS EDGE;
  GOVERNMENT EFFORTS TO ADDRESS TYPHOID INFECTIONS WELCOMED; CRIME IS BEING
 ADDRESSED; FOUR WOMEN COMMUNITY WORKERS CONGRATULATED; RESPECT FOR HISTORY
                   OF COMMUNITIES; HERITAGE SITES IN KAROO


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Deputy Speaker, there were a large number of
statements and I will try and respond to one or two of the more significant
statements that I can comment on. Firstly, with respect to the school on
the farm in Limpopo, clearly the action was unwarranted and I think the
court ruling is welcomed. I believe that the whole structure of farm
schools and policy in this regard needs rethinking and requires new
approaches to the education of rural-based children.

On the matter of SA Airways, I think the matter is now resolved. The
members, obviously, read the papers just today. You should have read them
six weeks ago. Suffice it to say that the airline has restored its leading
edge in international travel service and remains one of the leading
providers of air services in the world, recognised by international
travellers from many different parts of the world as well as regular
commentators on travel facilities and world airlines.
On the typhoid infections, we certainly welcome the efforts the government
is making to address the infections that have occurred. Much more will be
done with the support of provincial and local government to address the
sanitation needs that clearly exist in that community because they are a
strong part of the reason for the infections that we have seen. We urge
greater action in terms of ensuring clean and safe facilities for all
communities.

I think on the matter of crime and corruption, it is clear that action is
being taken. Therefore, the comments about Minister Nqakula are totally
misplaced and unwarranted. We are dealing with crime and we are serious in
acting against corruption, and the arrests that have been referred to
indicate that we are acting against crime - very, very clearly so.
[Interjections.]

I am very pleased to join in the congratulations to the four women from the
Western Cape, that is Ms Jansen, who has been doing sterling work, and her
colleagues. We thank you for the contribution that you make towards the
upliftment and development of our communities.

I do not quite know what the FF Plus meant in its statement on respecting
the history of all communities. There was an aside, “it was before you came
here”. I couldn’t quite understand what that was referring to, but
certainly the respect for the history of all communities is something all
of us must acknowledge. We must also recognise that the history of some
parts of our community were never recognised and that action has to be
taken to acknowledge this and act accordingly.

Finally, I think it is important to say that we certainly will communicate
to our colleague in tourism and environmental matters about the maghia in
the Karoo and the other areas that were mentioned by the hon member from
the DA. These are things that we should certainly look at in terms of the
tourism routes that we’re trying to build in our country. Have I exhausted
my time?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but you have responded to quite a number of
questions.

An HON MEMBER: All five of them.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not all five of them.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: We do keep a very
careful check on responses from Ministers, and according to our record,
which is accurate, the hon Minister of Education spoke on five topics,
which means there is no more time for Ministers’ responses.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Deputy Minister.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: I have just raised
a point of order and you ignored it completely.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not a point of order.

Mr M J ELLIS: It is, Madam Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not a point of order, because we allocate 10
minutes to Ministers, and the Minister of Education took only two and a
half minutes.

Mr M J ELLIS: The rule says quite clearly . . .

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I understand the rule as much as you understand it. I
read the Rules, Mr Ellis, and you are not going to give me a lecture on the
Rules. There is still time for Ministers, as long as they have not
exhausted the 10 minutes allocated for responses. When they exhaust the 10
minutes, I will stop them.

There were 14 statements, and she responded to about four of them.
[Interjections.] Okay, she may have responded to five of them, but there
are nine other statements that need to be responded to and there are seven
and half minutes that can still be used by Ministers for that.

Mr M J ELLIS: We will discuss this, Madam Deputy Speaker.

                 The DA SHOULD NOT IMPOSE ITS WILL ON OTHERS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, that is typical of
the arrogance of the DA.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are also taking your time.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Perhaps the first difficulty that the hon
leader, Tony Leon, has is that the Constitution describes him as the Leader
of the Largest Minority Party and not of the opposition party.

We have a proud tradition in the Constitution of our country and the
convention in Parliament is that every voice must be heard. That is what
multiparty democracy is all about.

There is an attempt by the DA today to impose their will on other parties.
Mr Leon wishes to speak on behalf of Mr Mulder, Ms Rajbally and other
members of the opposition. We celebrate our diversity and we say to the DA:
If you cannot succeed in retaining what you have gained, do not try,
through the stroke of a pen, to suggest a variation or a deviation from the
Constitution.

We believe that like many other things in the past, what they are
suggesting now is the betrayal of the spirit of the Constitution. They do
so in terms of their opposition to affirmative action, representivity and
diverse society that we celebrate. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.
[Applause.]


                 THE BEAUTY OF SOUTH AFRICA AND ITS HERITAGE


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Madam Deputy Speaker, is he still
troubling you?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he was just helping Mr Leon, telling him that there
are still five minutes left.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: It is indeed a pleasure, and we do
appreciate it that some of our colleagues are now beginning to appreciate
our heritage after so many years during which we have been struggling and
have been stifled. They are now beginning to discover the beauty of this
country and our heritage.

I just want to also say to the member of the FF Plus - is it still plus?
[Laughter.][Interjections.] - that we strongly condemn the destruction of
the Makhado statue, as much as we would condemn the destruction of any of
our statues and any of our heritage. We strongly condemn that and we would
like to tell all our people that if they have got hang-ups or problems with
anything, there is a platform where we can discuss these issues, rather
than going and destroy our heritage.

Perhaps the call is for all of us, not just the Minister of Arts Culture,
to begin to look out for these areas of beauty and heritage in our country.

Apparently, yesterday members of a portfolio committee were taken on a tour
of Cape Town and they were informed about the places of importance and
heritage around Cape Town. They said that they really appreciated that
tour. That is important.

Perhaps the hon member could extend an invitation to some of the members of
Parliament to also go and see that beautiful place that he described to us.
Thank you. [Applause.]


                        EDUCATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like to begin by
reading a brief extract from a story that appeared in the Mail & Guardian
on 16 June 2005:

  A mother who was slow to pay school fees ended up with a bill from
  lawyers that was more than her initial debt. Maria Mokgotsi, not her real
  name, works as a domestic worker in Johannesburg and is responsible for
  the education of seven children, five of her own plus two of her deceased
  brother’s children. While Mokgotsi is determined that all seven should
  get a decent education, the total monthly school fees bill takes a huge
  chunk of her salary. Mokgotsi found herself even deeper in debt in
  February this year. Having finally paid off the outstanding R400 that she
  owed in fees for two of her children at Tsukudu High School in Thekwane
  village in North West province, she received a series of legal bills from
  Van Velden-Duffy Incorporated based in Rustenburg. With interest and
  other charges Mokgotsi ended up parting with another R1 000 in lawyers’
  fees.

As you would agree hon members, there are many outstanding challenges that
we must still address by way of legislation in the education sector. The
Education Laws Amendment Bill supports action on a number of important
issues that confront the sector.

Hon members will be fully aware that our President presents South Africa’s
report on the millennium development goals at the United Nations this week,
and he will indicate positive progress on our education goals. We have
reached universal enrolment in primary level schooling; and in fact, unlike
many developing countries, we have very high enrolment rates of nearly 90%
at the postcompulsory school level. Thus, in South Africa, our promise of
increased access to educational opportunities is being given firm practical
effect.

Beyond universal access we have achieved equality of access for girls in
our schools and are increasing our efforts at improving science and maths
performance by female learners. At the higher education level, females are
the majority, and many of our adult education initiatives increasingly
target and benefit women. In fact, in terms of higher education, you can
observe in the gallery many female higher education students from the
University of Stellenbosch who are journalism students visiting us today.
[Applause.] However, all of us know that despite this positive progress
there is still much to do.

This Bill introduces three important changes to current law in school
education, changes that will assist us in promoting and accelerating this
positive progress. The first change concerns school fees and Ms Mokgotsi.
Hon members will recall that there was a 2003 cost of education study,
which recommended several changes in the model of education financing. The
findings of the report assisted the education department in compiling an
implementation plan directed at strengthening compulsory education.

The plan said the following about free and compulsory education:

  Our most urgent goal is to ensure that no poor school should need to
  charge school fees owing to inadequate public funding. We believe that in
  the period 2004-06 we can take major strides towards achieving this goal.
  Poor schools with improved public funding will have to provide sound
  reasons for continuing to charge school fees in order for this to be
  approved. Our fee exemptions policy will be strengthened with the aim of
  ensuring that no parent should be charged school fees that are not
  affordable.

The most significant and revolutionary aspect of this Bill is that of the
introduction of free education in schools located in our poorest
communities. For the first time in South Africa, we will be introducing no-
fee schools. [Applause.] For the first time we will be relieving poor
parents of the pain of having to search for money to fulfil their ambition
of giving their children a good education. For the first time we will be
relieving poor parents of the indignity and embarrassment of being mocked
and derided by school principals who refuse to make use of the exemption
framework, even when it is patently clear that families are poor.
[Applause.]

The Bill also improves the administration and implementation of the fee
exemption policy. We need to clearly state at the outset, that it is not
the intention of this law to restrict poor parents to no-fee schools.
Children will still be able to attend any public school, and those in need
of an exemption will still be able to apply for this.

In addition to declaring no-fee schools, we will also improve the funding
norms that will determine the school funding allocation. Members are aware
that often costs such as uniforms, textbooks, stationery and other
nonpersonnel, noncapital costs are prohibitive and pose a barrier to
education for many of our children. Our new funding norms and this Bill
will steadily and surely erode that situation.

As a department, we are fully alert to the fact that we will have to do a
great deal more to ensure that no-fee schools do not become ghettoised into
poor, low performance schools. The net effect of the Bill is that it
improves funding for schools and it creates the possibility for targeted
interventions that enhance the quality of resources available for education
and extracurricular activities.

The second change that the Bill introduces is support to schools in acting
speedily against learners who are ill disciplined and who pose a threat to
other learners, teachers or the school. Recently, as members would have
seen in the press, there have been horrifying examples of negative conduct
by learners, and even by educators, and schools have been unable to act
because our laws tend not to allow for action against severely disruptive
learners.

Clearly, not all matters of discipline can be addressed through
legislation. Communities, parents and governing bodies will have to work
closely together in devising strategies that promote positive values and
disciplined conduct among learners. I believe that we do need stronger
action in our schools and this Bill will assist in this. We will also act
on other areas of concern, such as preventing the carrying of weapons to
and in schools and stronger collaboration with the Police Service in
confronting criminals who make our schools their playground.

The third change provides for amendments to the current procedure for
recommending candidates for employment as teachers. The Bill maintains the
important and necessary improvements that we made early in our democracy.
The important role of school governing bodies in selecting quality
candidates and recommending them for appointment to the provincial
departments of education is maintained. This partnership between school
governing bodies, the departments of education and professional teachers is
essential to providing quality education to our children.

The change introduced by the Bill is that instead of recommending only one
of the interviewed candidates, school governing bodies will be required to
present three in order of preference. This has been labelled a threat to
the powers of the school governing bodies. It is not a threat. School
governing bodies will continue to shortlist, to interview and to recommend
– the difference is that now the head of department, as the employer, will
select the appointee from a list of three. [Applause.]

There are of course many people who believe that our government is crass
and inadequate, who believe that it is in the interest of the heads of
department to select unprofessional, incompetent candidates as teachers for
our children. They believe that we will do this because it is an ANC
government, because they believe we are ignorant and not interested in
ensuring that we have professional teachers in our schools.
[Interjections.]

These persons reject our resolve to promote unity in diversity at school
level, in terms of both learners and employees. [Interjections.] This Bill
assists us in addressing these important principles and in promoting the
imperatives of our Constitution. [Interjections.] Any person who rejects
this Bill will be admitting that they do not have the interests of our
children or of quality education, as part of the national agenda, at heart.
[Interjections.]

I thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms H ZILLE: Deputy Speaker, until the day before yesterday I had planned to
acknowledge from this podium that public submissions and debates in the
portfolio committee had resulted in significant improvements to this Bill.
In particular, I was hoping to say that I’d been wrong in describing the
Minister’s stated priority of quality education as empty rhetoric. I can do
neither.

Although some clauses in this Bill improve current legislation, it remains
rotten to the core. Unless we accept the DA’s amendments as tabled today,
we will one day look back on this Bill as a significant marker in the
ongoing decline of public education. Ironically, this Bill is being rushed
through Parliament in the very week that the United Nations Development
Programme exposed the extent to which education for the majority in South
Africa has declined over the past 10 years, contributing significantly to
our plummeting 35 points on the human development index.

After the last portfolio committee meeting on Tuesday, I asked myself how a
co-operative process had, at the final hurdle, managed to snatch defeat
from the jaws of victory. The answer is: because literally at the eleventh
hour, an ANC study group met and overturned the consensus reached with its
own enlightened members and rejected key amendments already drafted by the
state law advisers. [Interjections.] This makes a mockery of the public
participation process and the debate in the committee.

There are elements of this Bill that we, in the DA, do support. We support
the first tentative steps towards a system in which we hope the state will
eventually fund learners rather than institutions. We support the
streamlining of disciplinary procedures. We support the introduction of fee-
free schools on the basis of an adequate threshold of funding for
individual learners.

But we fundamentally reject a funding model in which money moves in the
opposite direction to that in which poor learners wish to go. Their parents
often seek admission to schools that have lost almost all their state
subsidy and must therefore rely on fees to survive. The DA supports a fee-
exemption system, coupled with state subsidies to learners so that poor
families can exercise choice and so that schools that do the right thing
and admit these learners do not run the risk of financial collapse as a
result.

The DA’s amendments are designed to ensure that these pupils are admitted
and that the schools can continue to deliver quality education in
everyone’s interests. Furthermore, despite a useful amendment, the Bill
still encourages chancers, who can afford fees, to avoid paying them, and
puts an enormous burden on governing bodies which wish to enforce the duty
of fee payment on parents who do not qualify for exemption.

In particular, we reject the Bill’s clause 7 that will govern the
employment of teachers. The ANC, as the Minister did today, presents this
as a minor change. The Minister says that instead of a governing body
presenting one name to the head of department, they will now present three
from which he will choose one. “What’s the big deal?” she asks.
The big deal is as follows: until now the Employment of Educators Act has
required the governing body to apply certain criteria before recommending a
person for appointment. The provincial head of education can only turn down
this recommendation on one of five clearly specified grounds. If he rejects
the nomination, he must refer it back to the governing body. This system
has worked very well in schools where governing bodies take their
responsibility seriously. It has actually, and you know that because your
children go to one school where it works extremely well. [Interjections.]

The ANC says that some schools have made bad recommendations. That is true.
Some schools have made bad recommendations, but not the school to which you
go, Cronin. That is true, but the head of the education department
currently has the power to reject these recommendations. If incompetent
teachers are appointed, it is because the HOD is not doing his job.
[Interjections.]

So, why is the ANC trying to correct this problem by further undermining
the powers of governing bodies? The reason is that the ANC actually has
another agenda. It tries to hide behind another red herring: that the
current system can result in delays if governing bodies must make a new
recommendation. That, too, is nonsense.

Delays are almost invariably the department’s fault. You don’t have to be a
rocket scientist to unearth the ANC’s real purpose here. It is called
representivity, a Verwoerdian concept of racial percentages and ethnic
matching. It obsesses about the race of the person appointed to deliver a
service, rather than the needs of the persons requiring that service.

This policy has caused chaos everywhere - most recently in local government
where it has resulted in the virtual collapse of service delivery in every
ANC municipality. [Interjections.] The ANC now wants to adopt the same
policy in schools. Stripped of the padding and rhetoric, clause 7 is saying
that the skin colour of a teacher is more important than any other
attribute.

We, in the DA, believe that equity and excellence can be compatible, and
this is what our amendments today seek to promote. But the ANC obviously
does not believe these concepts can go together and that race therefore
must trump quality.

How else does one explain the ANC’s insistence on removing the concept of
quality from the specific list of representivity principles that have been
lifted above all other criteria, when a governing body shortlists three
candidates and when the head of department makes a final decision for which
he will not have to give any reasons and from which there is no appeal? So,
he is not answerable to anybody, except the ANC and their representivity
policy.

Reading the Bill, one would think, Minister, that the most serious problem
in education is the lack of racial transformation. If it were, you wouldn’t
send your children to a school where there is zero racial transformation.
Of course, this is not the problem. The only really good public schools are
those that are becoming increasingly racially integrated.

Those that remained untransformed and uniracial are often also at the
bottom of the quality pile. The real problem is an insufficient supply of
quality, Minister. You pay lip service to quality, but in most things the
ANC does and that you promote, particularly this Bill, you show that
quality comes far behind the ANC’s obsession with race. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Prof S M MAYATULA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, could I start off by
highlighting some technical corrections when this Bill was transcribed from
the portfolio committee version to the version that we have. On line 21,
page 3, it reads: “one week followed by seven school days”. We are
proposing that that “one week” is redundant. We’ll just take it away – it’s
a technical change. On line 30, it reads “a governing body may suspend of
extend”. It is supposed to be “or extend”. I’m just proposing that those
technical changes be implemented.

I have never been so happy when debating a Bill as I am today. Hon Zille
started off . . . Maybe, let me not start there. This Bill has gone through
everything that it was supposed to have gone through. We started with this
Bill when the department briefed us on 5 August. On 14 August, adverts went
to the three national newspapers. The hon Zille was so concerned about this
Bill but she couldn’t find them. She wrote to the Secretary to Parliament
to ask where they were.

On 30 August, we had public hearings on which 19 submissions were made. I
want to believe that those submissions are reflected in the changes that
I’m going to go through here. We had our informal considerations; we had
our formal one; and we allowed the parties, including the DA, to say
something on that day. Suddenly, the hon Zille is telling this House that
decisions were taken before the formal consideration when it was the stance
throughout that we would take no decisions. The decisions were going to be
taken on the last day.

She goes on to say that concessions were made. Let me go to representivity.
When I have to respond to representivity, I’m happy because it is taken
directly from the Constitution of this country. Allow me to quote it. It
says in clause 195 that the representivity of all public servants is
important. The only difference here is that when you see the word
“representivity”, despite clause 9 of our Constitution which talks about
race, gender, disability and all those things, the DA interprets
representivity to mean race. That is their problem.
Fortunately, if I go to that section in particular, they don’t want to have
anything to do with clause 7 that has to do with this representivity, and
they are deliberately confining . . .

 . . . bathi masicinge ngezikolo zee-Model C. u-MEC waseLimpompo uyijikile
loo nto kula komiti, esithi iingxaki esinazo azikho kwizikolo zabelungu
kuphela(ii-model C) kodwa sinazo kwizikolo zethu. Apho ukuba ungumama
ungavunyelwayo ukuba ube yinqununu. Apho kwezinye iindawo(communities)
kuthiwa awuzukuqashwa ngaphandle kokuba uzalelwe kulo ndawo. Uthi ke lo
Mthetho uyilwayo siza kukwazi silisebe ukuthi: Hayi tata, hayi mama ukuze
sikwazi ukuba imfundo yethu ibheke phambili masibathathe ukwenzela ukuba le
mfundo isulungeke.

Mandiye kweyona nto ibalulekiyo, konwatyiwe ezilalini, konwatyiwe
ezilokishini kuba okokuqala bazakufumana le nto kuthiwa yimfundo
engabhatalelwayo. Kwaye sithi, imali mayibheke ezikolweni ingalandeli
isiqu. Ukuba umntwana uhambe nesiqu waya kwezi zikolo zee-model C sithetha
ngazo, apho babiza i-R 10 000 ne- R 11 000, apho imivuzo yabo ihamba
kwizigidi ezibini zeerandi, yeyakhe leyo. Kuthiwa masilandele, sithathe
imali siyise apho, singayisi apho abantwana bakhoyo. Sithi asokuze siyenze
loo nto.

Le mali izakujika iimeko kwizikolo zabazali abanga thathi ntweni. Okokuqala
kwimbali uthi lo rhulumente umntwana oya kweso sikolo endaweni yokuba
abhatalelwe i-R100 uzakubhatalelwa iR703 . Kha ufane ucinge kwisikolo apho
bekubizwa iR50 emali yomrhumo wesikolo ngonyaka, ithi urhulumente
ungayikhuphi loo mali, kodwa yigcine engxoweni. Uthi hamba uyokuthenga enye
into ngalo mali ndizakunika i-R703 ngomntwana. Loo nto izakwenza izikolo
zethu ezilokishini zijike.

Okokuqala ezimbalini abantwana abazi kubaleka ezilalini nasezilokishini
babheke kwezi zikolo, ngoba noorhulumente uyakube ebalungiselele. Andothuki
xa isithi iDA into eyimeleyo apho ayingobantu abahluphekileyo, kodwa  imela
abanezinto. Bandenza ndisabele ngelinye ixesha. Abantu abavela kwiilali
ezilambileyo bahlala kwa-DA bengenasazela, bathi bahleleleni?

Kuthiwa le mali masiyithathe kwisikolo esine R100 000 siyise kwisikolo
esinezigidi ezimbini zeerandi. Ngawufane ucinge. Uthe esakoyiswa uNksz
Zille ohloniphekileyo ebeke ezi zinto phaya kwikomiti, wasebenzisa igatya
loMthetho u-254, esithi masivote, sivotele la nto eboyiswe kuyo phaya.
Ukuba bekusiyiwa ngam bekufanele into yokuba ikhatywe ingazi nalapha, kwaye
ngethamsanqa abantu abalambileyo basinikile iivoti.

Kulo Mthetho uyilwayo nokuba niyathanda okanye anithandi abantu bakuthi
bazakufumana imfundo engabhatalelwayo. Xa sisiya kulo mba wokuqashwa
kwabafundisi-ntsapho, nokuba ungaya kweliphi na ilizwe akukho nelinye
elibasebenzi balo baqeshwa luluntu(community). Sithi thina, apha kwiSebe
leZemfundo: Bazali esi sikolo sesenu. Sincediseni niye kukhangela umntu
olungele lo msebenzi. Bathi uMgaqo-siseko awuyivumeli loo nto, kodwa
ngethamsanqa siyawazi uMgaqo-siseko.

Ukuba nithi lo mba nizakuwusa kwinkundla yoMgaqo-siseko sizakube silapho,
ngoba ithi le nto (lo Mthetho) abaqashi abasemthethweni lisebe eli. Akukho
qumrhu lolawulo lwesikolo (SGB) liqashayo.  La maqumrhu(i-SGB), kumaxesha
ngamaxesha anenkqubo zokunqanda utshintsho (transformation) wona ngokwawo.
Ze bathi bakugqiba basithathe basise enkundleni yamatyala. Kuthiwe: Uthini
uMthetho? Sifike uMthetho ulibophe isebe izandla neenyawo ngasemva. Lo
Mthetho usayilwayo uthi asoze iphinde yenzeke loo nto. Sizakuzisa iinguqu
sitshintshe imfundo kweli lizwe. [Kwaqhwatya.] (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[ . . . us to Model C schools. The Limpopo province MEC has rectified that
during a committee meeting. He said that the problems we encountered were
not from Model C schools only but also from our schools. In those schools
if you are a woman you are not allowed a post as a principal. In other
areas people from other communities are not employed. In terms of this Bill
the department will be able to justify the employment of women for better
education.

Let me focus on what is important. People in rural and urban areas are very
happy because for the first time they are going to enjoy free education. We
are saying money must be allocated to schools, not individuals. If a child
chooses to attend a Model C school, where the fees are incredibly high  –
ranging from R10 000 to R11 000, and salaries amounting to R2 million – it
is up to the individual. We will never pay for individuals, because the
money has to benefit those in need.

The money will be paid to schools where pupils are in need of financial
assistance. Government is proposing to give R703, instead of R100 per
child. Imagine that in a school where a child used to pay school fees of
R50 per year the child is now asked not to pay anything - instead the
school will get R703 per child. This will definitely improve the quality of
schools in our communities.

Now pupils will no longer attend Model C schools simply because they are
running away from poor resources in government schools. I am not surprised
when the DA says it represents the haves. But sometimes that makes me
wonder. There are people who are from poor rural areas who join the DA -
what for?

It is said that the money should not be given to schools that have R100
000, but that it should be allocated to schools that have R2 million. Just
imagine! After hon Zille lost her battle with regard to the proposals she
submitted to the committee, she used clause 254 of the Constitution in
order to exercise her right to vote. My wish would be not to support this;
nevertheless we have support from the people who voted for us.

According to this Bill our people will enjoy nonpayment of fees. With
regard to the issue of employing teachers, there is no country where
communities appoint workers. The Department of Education maintains that the
schools belong to the communities, but it is willing to get help in head-
hunting. The opposition says the Constitution does not allow that, but we
know what the Constitution stipulates.

We will be present in the Constitutional Court if this issue is taken
there. The rightful employer is the Department of Education. No SGB is
allowed to employ teachers. SGBs sometimes have programmes that impede
transformation. Nevertheless, they take the Department of Education to
court, where it will be accused of working against the law. This Bill will
prevent that. We will change and transform the education system of this
country. [Applause.]]

We are going to change and transform the education of this country.
[Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Sekela likaSihlalo, kuyacaca ukuthi ngeke ngize ngifike
ezingeni logqozi lukasihlalo osuka lapha. [Deputy Chairperson, it is clear
that I will not be able to reach the level of enthusiasm of the chairperson
who has just spoken.]

In evaluating this important piece of legislation I have considered whether
this Bill meets the test of the IFP common sense approach to public policy-
making.

This Bill does four things: It clarifies disciplinary procedures, it
creates no-fee schools, it gives the education department more say in the
appointment of educators and it prevents the attachment of homes when
parents cannot pay school fees.

In so far as disciplinary procedures go, the hand of school-governing
bodies is strengthened when dealing with wayward learners. The SGB can now
suspend a learner while waiting for their provincial head of department or
the MEC to reach a decision on permanent suspension. It also sets down the
rules governing such disciplinary hearings and the IFP welcomes all these
changes.

As far as changes to the norms and standards of school funding are
concerned, the IFP supports the funding of the whole school, not the
individual learner. We believe that the most important thing is for the
department to provide quality education, and it can only provide quality
education by funding schools, especially those previously disadvantaged
schools, and bringing them to the same level as the former Model C schools.

We are excited that poor schools across the country will be treated the
same through the creation of national, rather than provincial, quintiles.
This will greatly benefit our constituency, the IFP constituency, the
poorest of the poor, in poverty-stricken provinces such as KwaZulu-Natal
and the Eastern Cape.

We are worried, though, that schools may run into trouble because they
cannot charge registration fees. A school needs cash in hand to get the
school year going and we foresee the unintended consequence that education
will be hamstrung in January every year. Sometimes, Madam Minister, the
road to hell, as we all know, is paved with good intentions.

We are in favour, however, of no school fees, but we are worried about the
capacity of the Education Department to implement these new
responsibilities. All too often we see this department taking on more than
it can handle. It starts with great schemes, but makes a huge mess because
of a lack of capacity.

The clause which generated the most controversy and the most heat is clause
7, read together with clause 8, which deals with the appointment of
teachers. At face value, these clauses appear to be taking the powers away
from governing bodies, and by default destroying the pockets of education
excellence that still exist in the system.

I wish to emphasise, though, that the appointment of educators has always
rested with the department, with the recommendation of governing bodies. I
accept the fact that the employment of educators has often been cumbersome
and, at worst, problematic.

The involvement of teacher unions has sometimes bedevilled the entire
process. All too often the employment of teachers has become mired in union
disputes. Our concern is, therefore, not so much with this legislation but
with the implementation. We cannot afford not to get our children’s
education right.

I just want to extend an invitation, Madam Minister, as a gesture of
commitment and solidarity with this Bill and its intentions, we ask every
member in this House with school-going children and grandchildren in their
care, to commit themselves to placing these children into the very township
schools that this Bill is intended to assist.

We support this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr B G MOSALA: Chairperson, I stand here with a very clear conscience. I am
at peace with myself, because I am here to support the truth and to support
justice.

Sound discipline and good conduct are reliable indicators for a successful
institution. I will be talking about misconduct in our schools. A school
with ill-disciplined learners is more likely to be characterised by low
morale, chaotic programmes and a generally negative attitude. The educators
in such a school will be uninspired, unco-operative and unproductive. The
principal will probably be all of the things listed above. The determinant
for success must therefore be good discipline, good conduct, as opposed to
misconduct.

The challenges that face parents and educators in our schools are indeed
immense and the need for enabling legislation, such as is contained in this
Bill, is very great indeed. The amendments provide more explicit procedures
on how cases of misconduct should be handled by school authorities. This
amendment, especially of the relevant clause on misconduct, has the
following implications. I just want to give a brief outline of the
implications.

The governing body may, on reasonable grounds and as a precautionary
measure, suspend a learner suspected of serious misconduct. What is further
very critical is that this is done after the learner has been granted a
reasonable opportunity to make representations to the governing body. The
governing body must then conduct a disciplinary hearing within seven school
days after the suspension. If the governing body is unable to conduct the
hearing within the stipulated period, it must get the permission of the
provincial HOD to extend the suspension.

In the event of the learner being found guilty, the governing body may
either impose a suspension, not exceeding 14 days, or make a recommendation
to the head of department to expel the learner. If the HOD agrees to expel,
the learner, or his or her parents, has the option of appealing to the MEC
within 14 days of receiving the notice of expulsion.

An elaboration of the process detailed above demonstrates the strides that
our ANC-led government has made to democratise education in this country. A
reflection on the kind of system we inherited leaves one in awe of the
ability of our government to initiate and pass legislation that respects
and promotes the rights of individuals.

The rights of learners in our schools must be respected so that they can
value and respect the rights of others. Learners need to know that
misconduct is punishable, but educators must also know that punishment is
not punitive, but should serve the purpose of educating young people that
none of us in society is allowed to deviate from generally accepted
societal norms. The role of discipline, therefore, becomes very important
in this respect.

Hlooho ya lefapha la thuto e lokela ho ba hlokolosi haholo mabapi le hore
ha e fana ka kahlolo e se ke ya bontsha leeme. Diqeto tse fihlellwang ke
yena ebe tse ka kgotsofatsang mahlakore ohle. Ho se etswe diqeto tse tla
dumella hore ditlokotsebe di rene le ho sasanka mabaleng a dikolo tsa rona.

Batswadi ba lokela ho hlokomediswa hore ba na le boikarabelo bo boholo
mabapi le boitshwaro ba bana ba bona dikolong tsa rona. (Translation of
Sotho paragraphs follows.)

[The head of the Department of Education has to be very careful when
punishing those who have violated the code of conduct with regard to
impartiality. The decisions reached by the HOD must be fair and
satisfactory to all affected. Such decisions must not leave loopholes that
can be exploited by certain unruly elements at school and in school
playgrounds.

It must be impressed upon parents that they have a great responsibility
with regard to the conduct of their children at school.]

Our shared commitment as proud South Africans must be to work diligently,
collectively and collaboratively to turn our schools into centres of
excellence. We must create safe schools that are socially responsible, as
well as responsive to community needs. All of us in government, schools,
the church, police, business and various community agencies must work very
hard to achieve the ideal of safe and productive schools that we can be
proud of.

There are a range of issues in our schools begging to be addressed. Topping
the list, as far as misconduct is concerned, are the acts of violence that
are reported to be happening in our schools with nauseating frequency.
There are also reports about the peddling of drugs and other forms of what
constitutes serious misconduct. These are challenges that cannot simply be
wished away. They need our attention, and serious attention at that.

May our schools enjoy safety and security, as espoused in the Freedom
Charter. This Bill must remind us that we aim to achieve an ideal, the
ideal of having perfect and performing schools in our country. It will not
be easy because we inherited an inhuman society, which we are vigorously
transforming in keeping with our lofty aims and the objects of the historic
Freedom Charter.

Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, the amending Bill
before us addresses various matters, such as the procedure for the
appointment of educators and the procedure for the expulsion of a pupil
from a school. The most important aspect of the Bill before us is the
financial scheme being introduced to protect and promote the education of
pupils from poor households.

We all agree that poverty should not be a barrier to public education,
since that would be an utter contradiction of the democracy that we are all
committed to. We all realise that where poverty is a barrier to proper
education, such poverty will be replicated, for generation after
generation.
The question is: How can we provide adequately for poor students without
prejudicing other students, or the entire education system?
The scheme introduced by this Bill is suitably refined to address this
issue. The test will be whether it can be implemented fairly and properly.
Education already takes a massive slice of the national budget, but without
further increases the scheme in this Bill will fall to pieces. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, Chair. The issue of discipline in schools has
become a very worrying factor, and has been worsened by the fact that
principals and teachers have been severely restricted in terms of available
methods of disciplining learners. The ACDP supports measures in this Bill
to provide for suspension as a precautionary measure when a learner is
suspected of serious misconduct.

Measures provided in the Bill will protect both the learner being
disciplined and the other learners and educators at the school. The ACDP
has often called for increased funding for education and for subsidised
education, in particular for those who are not in a position to pay fees.
Too often principals and teachers in schools find themselves focusing on
financial issues and fundraising, instead of being able to concentrate on
teaching.

The ACDP is not opposed to no fee schools in principle, although we are
concerned that there may be unintended consequences if these schools are
labelled as poor schools and rejected by parents and learners as inferior.
The ACDP’s proposals for government to subsidise the individual and not
just the school were, however, dismissed.

The ACDP believes subsidies should extend to individual learners, whether
they choose to be educated in an independent or a public school. The main
concern that the ACDP has with the Bill is that it makes provision for the
department to override recommendations for the appointment of teachers by
school governing bodies. It also does not require the HOD to give reasons
for doing so, and this the Minister omitted to mention.

The ACDP’s proposals that the Bill qualify equity, redress and
representivity in terms of the context and needs of the community, were
rejected. This means that communities with a Muslim, Christian, or even
traditional ethos will have teachers imposed on them by the HOD, without
the need to give valid reasons.

The ACDP’s proposals that criteria be specified to ensure quality education
by including the words “relevant qualifications” were opposed. The ACDP
will oppose this amending Bill, which unfortunately undermines parents in
their say through school governing bodies in their child’s education. I
thank you.

Dr P W A MULDER:  Geagte Voorsitter, die VF is ongelukkig nie ’n voltydse
lid van die portefeuljekomitee nie, maar ons het van tyd tot tyd die
sittings bygewoon. Vier sake is hier ter sake, naamlik die kwessie van nuwe
maatreëls vir die skorsing van leerders, die posisie van ouers wat
skoolgeld skuld, inspraak van beheerliggame en die skep van skole waar daar
nie skoolgeld betaal hoef te word nie.

Die indruk word gewek deur uitsprake van die departement, van die ANC-
politici en ander mense, dat die regering voortdurend net op sekere skole
fokus – of dit reg of verkeerd is, kan ons argumenteer. Ek verwys hier
spesifiek na die model C-skole waarvan daar eintlik minder as twee of drie
persent oor is. My probleem hiermee is dat ouers van dié skole – en ek
praat spesifiek van Afrikaanse ouers - het nie ’n tradisie van privaatskole
nie. Die boodskap wat hierdie ouers kry deur die voortdurende inmenging in
die skole is dat die ryker ouers al sterker begin oorweeg en argumenteer om
hulle kinders uit staatskole te haal.

Soos die finansiering van skole tans werk, sal so ’n onttrekking van die
vermoënde ouers daardie skole vernietig. Die VF Plus het begrip daarvoor en
steun dit dat armer leerlinge deur die staat gehelp moet word. U kan ons
geskiedenis bestudeer. Ons kom uit ’n groep armer mense wat onderwys
betref. Om skole te help en nie arm, individuele leerlinge nie, gaan nie
die probleem oplos nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Hon Chairperson, unfortunately the FF Plus is not a full-
time member of the portfolio committee, but we did attend the sittings from
time to time. Four matters are relevant in this regard, namely the question
of new measures for the suspension of learners, the position of parents who
owe school fees, the powers of governing bodies and creating schools where
there is no need to pay school fees.

The impression has been created through statements from the department, ANC
politicians and other people, that government is continually focussing on
certain schools only – whether this is right or wrong is debatable. In this
regard I am referring specifically to the Model C schools, of which there
are actually fewer than two or three per cent left. My problem with this is
that parents from these schools  – and I am referring specifically to
Afrikaans parents – do not have a tradition of private schools. The message
that these parents get through constant interference in the schools is that
the wealthier parents are considering and debating more and more whether
they should take their children out of government schools.

As is currently the case with regard to the financing of schools, the
removal of their children by wealthier parents will ruin those schools. The
FF Plus empathises with and supports the fact that poorer learners be
assisted by the state. You can study our history. We come from a group of
poorer people as far as education is concerned. Assisting schools instead
of poorer, individual learners will not solve the problem.]
Let’s rather help poor learners or parents, than so-called schools in that
sense.

Van die rykste skole kan ek u noem, het baie arm leerlinge en dit gaan ’n
totale skewe ding afgee. Kom saam met my na Vereeniging, Vanderbijlpark,
Pretoria-Wes, en ek sal u wys hoe lyk die situasie daar. Ons verkies dat
leerlinge gesubsidieer word, eerder as wat skole gesubsidieer word. Die VF
Plus het van die begin af ook beswaar gehad teen die inperkinge van die
magte van beheerrade. Die rede waarom die departement nie die magte op
hierdie wyse kan kry nie, het niks te doen met, soos gesê is deur die
Minister, die bekwaamheid al dan nie van die departement nie.

Dit is ’n algemeen aanvaarde bestuursbeginsel dat die beste besluite geneem
word deur eers riglyne daar te stel, en dan die besluit te neem so naby as
moontlik aan daar waar dit ter sake is. Dit is hoe bestuursliggame tans
werk binne die riglyne. As hier verskuilde agendas is – en ek vermoed so –
kan ek nou reeds voorspel dat dit gaan misluk. In ons geskiedenis was daar
talle pogings om in die verlede, soos Milner gedoen het, ons skole vir
politieke agendas te misbruik. Dit het nie geslaag het nie. Die VF Plus sal
teen die wetgewing stem. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I can mention that some of the wealthiest schools have many poor learners,
and this will result in totally distorted outcomes. Come with me to
Vereeniging, Vanderbijlpark, Pretoria West, and I will show you what the
situation is like there. We prefer that learners are subsidised, rather
than schools. From the outset the FF Plus also had objections to limiting
the powers of governing bodies. The reason the government cannot obtain
powers in this manner has nothing to do with, as the Minister said, the
competence or incompetence of the department.

It is a commonly accepted management principle that the best decisions are
taken by first putting guidelines in place and then taking the decision as
close as possible to where it is relevant. That is how governing bodies are
currently working within the guidelines. If there are any hidden agendas
here – and I suspect as much – I can already predict that it is going to
fail. In our history there have been countless attempts in the past, as
Milner did, to exploit our schools for political agendas. They were not
successful. The FF Plus will vote against the legislation.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, if for you advancing means
standing still; if for you changing means resisting transformation; if for
you perpetuating homogeneity means diversity; if for you representivity
means diminishing ability; if you fail to grasp that a ray of light
refracted sheds brilliant colours; and colours united infuse into a
brilliant light, beware, you may be confined to permanent darkness.

The introduction of the Education Laws Amendment Bill has quite expectedly
been accompanied by a fair amount of public interest. It is, after all, a
groundbreaking piece of legislation that will make provision for schools to
be declared no fee schools, and permits intervention in decisions of school
governing bodies, where teacher appointments are made without regard to the
constitutional principles of equity, redress and representivity.

Unfortunately, some of the public comments made on the Bill have been of a
negative nature, focusing on narrow political interests, and losing sight
of its real purpose. It nonetheless demonstrates the vibrancy of our
democracy, and the space it provides for parties with divergent views to
argue and contest ideas.

True to their nature, the DA responded with the usual empty transformation
rhetoric, and called the Bill the most profound betrayal of quality
education in public schools since 1994. Far from being a betrayal of
quality, the Bill seeks to advance the spirit and purpose of the
Constitution by defining the procedure for the amendment of the appointment
of teachers, so as to redress past racial imbalances. It also seeks to
elevate the position of the Head of Department from being a mere rubber
stamp, to one that must oversee compliance with the principles of the
Constitution.

The constitutional imperatives of equity, redress and representivity, place
an obligation on us to re-examine the conduct of some school governing
bodies, in so far as it relates to the employment of certain categories of
teachers at schools. Some school governing bodies are employing all manner
of tactics to exclude those who do not speak their language, do not have
the same skin pigmentation, do not share their culture or do not adhere to
their faith.

Such conduct, by its very nature, is a direct violation of the progressive
interpretation that our high courts have given the relevant sections in the
Employment of Educators Act, dealing with the process governing bodies must
adhere to in making recommendations for teacher appointments.

Here, in particular, I wish to refer to the judgement in the Kimberley high
school case in the Northern Cape, and please, listen attentively: In this
case, the governing body advertised a vacant post for English first
language. The interviewing committee happened to be white and when short-
listing the candidates, accorded little or no attention to the excellent
academic, and more specifically English, qualifications of three black
candidates.

In contrast, full or nearly full marks were given to white candidates whose
academic qualifications were comparable to, if not lower than, those of the
black candidates. The black candidates were excluded on paper alone, and
their proficiency in English could not be objectively ascertained.

The head of department declined the appointment, and the governing body
launched an application with the high court. They did so on the basis that
in the high school case, the judge had stated that the question was not
whether the recommendation accorded with the democratic values and
principles, but simply whether the recommendation had regard to it.

This approach completely negated the positive duty of the head of
department to play his role in ensuring that he promoted the values that
underlie the Constitution. Commendably, the court, in discussing the
application, found that suitably qualified candidates must be appointed,
and importantly, that the principles of redress, representivity and equity
are central in redressing past racial imbalances.

In emphasising the need to act positively to advance the ideal of equality,
as envisaged in section 9 of the Constitution, the court relied on the
judgment of Van der Westhuizen J, who is now a Constitutional Court judge,
who said the following, and I would like Ms Zille to listen very
attentively:

  Efficiency and representivity, or equality, should however not be viewed
  as separate compelling, or even opposing, arms. They are interlinked and
  often interdependent. To allow equality, affirmative action measures to
  play a role, only where candidates have the same qualification merits,
  whether there’s virtually nothing to choose between them, will not
  advance the ideal of equality in a situation where society emerges from a
  history of unfair discrimination.

The advancement of equality is an integral part of the consideration of
merits in such decision-making processes. The requirement of rationality
remains, however, and the appointment of people who are wholly unqualified,
or less than suitably qualified, and I repeat less than suitably qualified,
or incapable in responsible positions, cannot be justified.

The effect of this judgment is that it is not good enough for school
governing bodies to argue compliance with procedural guidelines, norms,
criteria, regulations and prescripts in the selection process. What is
called for is more than a mechanical allocation of points and a mere say so
that regard has been given to the democratic values and principles.

School governing bodies must recognise and address the need to correct the
imbalances of the past, as far as recommendations for the appointment of
educators we concerned. This is the primary objective of the Education Laws
Amendment Bill. It seeks to nudge governing bodies that refuse to embrace
the value of nonracism and nonsexism embodied in our Constitution, to
accept the inevitability of change and to make our schools models of
nonracism and nonsexism.

The Bill in no way takes away the power of school governing bodies to
influence the appointment of teachers. They still have the power to make
recommendations on who should be appointed. What the Bill will prevent them
from doing, however, is to use race, gender, disability, ethnicity, and
other prohibited grounds as a means to exclude educators from being
employed at their schools.

By virtue of the values our Constitution seeks to promote, school governing
bodies are under a constitutional obligation to accommodate diversity in
the schools. Yet while significant progress has been made in terms of
diversifying the learner component at historically white schools, they have
not been able to diversify the teacher component.

The lack of transformation in this regard means that these schools, many of
which are steeped in cultural, religious, patriarchal and racist history,
will continue to face challenges in terms of transforming the value systems
and institutional culture.
From a pedagogical perspective, it is an indisputable fact that the diverse
learner populations require teachers who understand and can effectively
manage diversity. Unfortunately, this seems not to be a consideration in
the appointment of teachers by some school governing bodies. At some former
Model C schools, this tough Nsgb component has remained relatively the
same, despite significant changes in the learner population in terms of
representation.

By not transforming this tough component sufficiently, school governing
bodies fail to appreciate that students learn differently, and that the
teacher’s style of instruction risks being to the benefit of mainly those
of the same cultural background as the teacher. This, in fact, undermines
the quality of education the other learners ought to receive.

It is mischievous to argue that quality will suffer if the decision to
appoint teachers is removed from the school governing bodies. Quality is
not something that can be objectively measured, but is an output based on a
number of factors, including the ability of the teacher, a safe learning
environment, appropriate learning materials, and so forth. Quality,
therefore, has a much deeper meaning and is as such much more about what is
being taught and how it is being taught than who is teaching.

The issue of the funding following the learner has been raised. It reflects
again a lack of understanding of the historical legacy, the disparities
that we have inherited. We are aware that thousands of our schools do not
have appropriate infrastructure, are not adequately resourced, do not have
laboratories, and do not have libraries.

Yet, we who have inherited infrastructure capacity resources, now argue
that those schools must be excluded but rather the learner must be
followed.  The arrogance of that statement is that we are prepared to
accept black learners provided you compensate for them. Not to say that we
are not prepared to extend our hand to those learners there and ensure that
they are provided the opportunity.

The other fallacy is that it fails to take into account that they are
entitled to exemption, but what the school governing bodies tend to do is
that they increase the threshold of the fees to such an extent that they
become exclusive institutions that perpetuate a particular culture and a
particular composition.

I think it is perhaps pertinent to point out what sociologists and
psychologists say in this regard - and I would want Mr Douglas Gibson and
Mr Ellis to please listen so that they can learn; it is an educating
exercise. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, the Bill seeks to amend the
South African Schools Act and the Employment of Educators Act by putting in
place humane steps that need to be taken in dealing with learners. In the
current Act, there is no prescribed period within which the expulsion of a
pupil from a public school should be done. The result is that learners are
kept in limbo for too long without any action being preferred against them.
The Bill attempts to put paid to all this.

The introduction of a time limit in handling such issues will ensure that
heads of department do not rest on their laurels. Another good aspect of
the Bill is that if a learner appeals against suspension or expulsion, he
should continue to have access to tuition until the finalisation of the
appeal. Another humane aspect of the amendment is the consideration given
to the disadvantaged through the introduction of norms and standards for
schools funding. School is further made not only accessible but also
affordable through the adequacy of benchmarking that the Bill introduces.

The Bill supports the notion of a public school being an asset for the
whole community. All role-players would have access to a school. This will
sound a death knell to the practice by some school governing bodies and
principals who deny some people the use of school buildings. It is, of
course, high time that MECs and their heads of department bring into being
the tried and tested system of boards of survey in the disposal of surplus
or redundant school property.

To all intents and purposes, the amendments are meant to contribute to a
better life of schooling, save for the Draconian powers given to the heads
of department when it comes to the appointment of teachers in the event of
disputes invariably occasioned by teacher unions. We pray much for the
strength of the HODs to take up this responsibility responsibly and have
the wisdom of Solomon and not strike like colossuses to destroy other
people. I thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Hon Chair, this Bill contains a number of important
amendments that will deal with many of the real frustrations that teachers,
governing bodies, the Department of Education and pupils have experienced
in various facets of the education system. The Freedom Charter states that
there shall be universal, compulsory, free and equal education for all. I
think that we can all agree though that we are still far from achieving
this ideal, but these amendments should bring us a step closer.

In particular, the ID is happy with the provision made for no fee schools.
This should have a direct impact on many children who are living in rural
areas who, despite the exemption system, are still excluded from schools on
the basis that they cannot afford school fees. School fees are not the only
obstacles for poor children either as transport costs, uniforms and
textbooks prove to be even greater hindrances to children and lead to them
not receiving the education they are entitled to. The ID would therefore
support the introduction of a child education grant that could be
administered by schools but used by parents as a way to offset these costs.

One of the most controversial aspects of the Bill is the clause regarding
the appointment of teachers. The ID does have certain concerns. Quality was
not explicitly stipulated along with equity, redress and representivity as
one of the criteria. The ID understands that there is great suspicion on
the part of many that the education department will seek to advance an
agenda that does not necessarily have quality education as its primary
focus.

Although the ID understands the concerns that have been expressed over such
a clause, we will still support the Bill and urge the department to follow
a path that ensures quality education is delivered to all our children. I
thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, this amending Bill covers very important
concerns regarding education. Firstly, we are all entitled to education and
no one wants to see a child expelled. But, sadly, serious situations often
require that learners be expelled.

The MF is glad that this Bill makes provision for expulsion to be addressed
justly, namely the timeframe, allowing a learner to attend classes during
an appeal against expulsion and the option for the head of department to
substitute a suitable sanction for expulsion.

Poverty is one of our greatest challenges in South Africa and the MF is
really pleased that this Bill serves to introduce mechanisms to allow no
charging of school fees where applicable. This is a great benefit to our
fight against poverty and our commitment to educating our nation. It is so
important that we educate our children - they are our country’s future.

The MF is extremely pleased that this Bill overcomes the situation where
money becomes an obstacle to the child’s education and paves the way for
children to embrace the right to education and enjoy it with no
limitations. We also support the clause that provides that a dwelling may
not be attached for the settlement of school fees. This should be extended
to universities and technikons too.

The MF applauds the education department for a job well done and supports
the Education Laws Amendment Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I VADI: Chairperson, I must say that I miss the presence of the hon Mike
Ellis in the Portfolio Committee on Education regarding this debate. Mike,
there are two reasons why I am saying this. The first is that this amending
Bill completes the unfinished business of the South African Schools Bill
that we discussed in 1996. There are quite a few things which I think are
an improvement on that Bill.

However, the second reason why I miss you Mike is that, regarding the very
thing that you accused us of in 1996, that is introducing political
ideology in education, I think on this occasion the hon Zille has made
exactly the same mistake. Both she and hon Dudley have tried to insert
their ideological vision of education, one rooted in individualism and
liberalism and the other rooted in conservative Christianity, into this
particular Bill. You can’t do that in an amending Bill. You have to rework
the entire Bill if you want to insert an ideological perspective into
education.

This particular Bill is important because it clarifies and streamlines the
disciplinary procedures that a school governing body has to follow if it
wants to institute disciplinary action against a learner who is guilty of
serious misconduct. I think it is important for all the members to know
that the Bill introduces the concept of precautionary suspension. But if a
young learner in a school is caught raping a child on the school premises
or is carrying a firearm and assaults somebody, the school can immediately
institute a precautionary suspension without any disciplinary procedure. I
think that is an important step forward.

Thereafter, the governing body of the school must institute disciplinary
proceedings and can punish that child by suspension amounting to seven
school days. In addition to that, the governing body can recommend the
expulsion of a learner from the particular school. The Bill gives the head
of department in the province a 14-day period to consider whether the
expulsion should be upheld or not. In the period while we are waiting for
the decision of the head of department, the governing body has the power to
extend the suspension of the learner for a further 14 days so that the
learner is removed from the school premises and cannot be a threat to other
learners. I think this is a significant improvement in terms of the
procedures that were there before.

I think the other important thing is this: If the head of department
refuses to expel a learner, the school governing body can now appeal to the
MEC for a final decision. I think we didn’t have that foresight in 1996,
and I think it is an important correction and improvement to the
legislation.

The second important part of this Bill is the funding policy of the
government, if this Bill is passed. This particular Bill will empower the
Minister of Education to set national standards for school funding and to
declare certain schools no fee schools. This is an extremely powerful
instrument to shift educational resources from wealthy or rich schools to
poor schools in the country. In practice or on provisional figures
presented to us by the department, it means approximately 5 500 schools are
likely to be declared as no fee schools next year or the following year.
[Applause.] This means almost 2,5 million learners will not be expected to
pay any school fees over the next few years. This is a significant advance
in terms of parents who are poor.

I want to talk to Dr Mulder - he is not here! The perception is that this
is only for black children or black learners. It is critical for us to
understand that even the poor white Afrikaner child can qualify for
exemption and can attend a school that is a no fee school. It is important
to understand that it is not only about African children or black children.
[Applause.]

I pity the hon Boinamo from the DA – he has to vote against this Bill when
2,5 million children are likely to get free education from next year. And
the bulk of them are actually from his own constituency, so he has to stand
here today and vote against a piece of legislation and against his own
people. [Interjections.] It is a pity, I feel very sorry for him. How does
he face his community? How will he face the black learner or the Afrikaner
learner there who stands to qualify and benefit from this particular piece
of legislation?

I think the last point that I want to reiterate, that Prof Mayatula has
also made, is that the funding for poor learners will increase to R700 from
next year. That is a significant improvement. The basic package of
resources today that a learner gets is worth about R121. For it to shoot up
to R703 is a significant improvement and I think that we are going to see
huge changes in schools over the next few years. In fact, if we take the
threshold figure that is likely to come into effect next year, it will be
R527. It means that almost 60% of learners in the school system, almost 6
or 7 million learners, will stand to get R527 as a basic package for their
education per annum. That is a significant advance. [Applause.]

The third important thing about this Bill is that it clarifies the
procedures for exemption if a parent cannot afford school fees. It sets out
very clearly what procedures the SGB must follow. There must be a clear
paper trail before a school governing body can institute legal proceedings
against a parent who has defaulted in paying school fees.

What is very important and I think this is for all members of the House:
Once this Bill becomes law, there is only one fee that the school can
charge and that is the school fee that is determined at a public meeting of
parents. There is no registration fee, no administration fee and no
extracurricular fee. There can only be one school fee and I think this is
very important, because in many schools throughout the country, come
January when the parent is there to register a particular learner at the
school, the school says that they have to pay an administration fee of R200
or R300 on the spot, and many parents can’t pay that.

I think it is important that, as public representatives, we familiarise
ourselves with the implications of this legislation, so that we can advise
our constituency, our people out there, by saying to them: “You are not
obliged to pay anything at all, except the school fee that the school has
decided upon.”

Again, there is a very important amendment which says that if the school
governing body institutes legal action against a parent, it cannot attach
the property of a parent, or the house of a parent. We have heard of a
case, a few years ago, where the school was able to do that. That is
criminal, really, to take a home away in lieu of school fees. But more
importantly, the learner cannot be suspended from the classroom if the
parent defaults on payment. The learner cannot be subjected to physical or
verbal abuse if the parent is unable to pay. And the learner cannot be
denied involvement in any extracurricular activities of the school if the
parent cannot pay.

A learner cannot be denied a school end-of-year report or a transfer
certificate if the parent is unable to pay. [Applause.] Many schools are
doing this; they hold back the report on the last day of school and say
that the pupil has to bring his school fees in order to get his report
card. That is a form of blackmail. I know that in Lenasia, in my own
community, this is what is happening, and I think it is wrong. It is wrong.
There are enough legal measures that the school can take if it wants to
recover the money, but it can’t blackmail the child. I think, as public
representatives, we need to educate our communities about this.

Regarding the issue of employment procedures, because I think quite a few
of the opposition parties have problems with this, I would like to say that
all that is happening is that the existing procedures for employment,
promotion or transfer remain in place, except that the school governing
body now has to make three recommendations, instead of only one
recommendation, for promotion. That is the only material difference.

What is attempted in this particular legislation is to establish a healthy
balance between the right of a school governing body to recommend which
kind of teacher should be teaching their children, and set that against the
right of the employer to decide who should be employed. So, there is a
healthy tension that is being built into this particular legislation, and I
think we are establishing a balance here.

We have to prevent a situation where cronyism creeps into a school
governing body, where friends are put into posts because they are in the
principal or members of the school governing body’s good books. We have to
ensure that unfair and negative practices based on racism, ethnicity,
gender and disability do not impact on the appointments and promotions
procedure.

I think we are trying to establish a healthy balance and I don’t see why
the opposition parties actually oppose this. All in all, I think what this
Bill does is that it takes us a number of steps forward in terms of our
public education system. It empowers the school governing bodies, and it
clarifies the decision-making procedures.

This Bill will have a huge impact on the poor in our community, black and
white, English and Afrikaners. It is important to understand that
Afrikaners can benefit. The ANC supports this Bill. Thank you very much.
[Time expired.][Applause.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Mr Chairman, the DA believes that the ANC
struggled, sacrificed and survived for 93 years in order to fail at
promoting transformation, in order to hold our people back by not offering
them quality education. They are stuck in this belief and it will never be
realised. They believe that we survived for 93 years in order to betray the
promise of the Freedom Charter. We did not; we survived to give life to the
Freedom Charter and we will do so. [Applause.]

The DA does not know the ANC; the DA does not understand the ANC; the DA
will not sway the ANC from assuring that our children
enjoy opportunities, realise their potential, and live and study in a
country that advances all the children and all communities. [Applause.]
That is the system of education we will build.

The hon member of the DA has been trying for many months to make the lives
of my two younger children hell in the schools they attend, because they
are in private schools. My two elder children went to the same public
school as her children, but she doesn’t mention that. However, what she has
done is to make life hell for my children by personalising the issue. I
have told her that my husband, Sharif, is not married to Helen; he is
married to Naledi. He decides with Naledi. I, Naledi, am not married to
Tony Leon; I decide with Sharif on the children of Naledi and Sharif.
[Applause.]

Now, let me come to the matters before the House. [Interjections.] No, just
keep quiet. Keep quiet, and when my children’s hair is pulled, when they
are called names, go and help them. Keep quiet!

Now, let us deal with the matters to do with the legislation.
[Interjections.] I will never be silenced, nor will I ever make the choices
you want me to make. [Interjections.] I was part of fighting for this
freedom and I will make the choices that I wish to make.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Hon members, your noise level
is high now, and there is running commentary. Let the Minister be
protected.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chair, we fought for them to be in this House,
and all they use it for is to make useless noises. Nevertheless, this
legislation is important. We will utilise it in order to advance
educational opportunities for the children of our country. We will ensure
that indeed we address the areas that the hon Mpontshane has so
appropriately referred to. We will ensure that the systems are in place,
because clearly the matter of implementation needs to be an important
imperative that we must have regard to.

I would also want to point out that the Bill does not eliminate or remove
the issue of voluntary contributions that the hon member referred to. There
may very well be parents who might want to make such a contribution, but
this would not be a school fee. Therefore there would be no compulsion,
which has been the case for many poor parents.

With respect to the ACDP, I believe the hon Vadi has dealt with the matter.
There is no intention in the legislation to impact negatively on religious
schools. Independent schools do receive a subsidy from the state, those
that fall within parameters that are within the national norms and funding
criteria.

I think the issue of rejecting the Bill because it doesn’t refer to
qualifications is answered by section 7(1), which refers to, and I quote,
“minimum qualifications”, because, as the hon member knows, we cannot
appoint unqualified educators to teach in our schools. This is something we
fought against, and we will make sure that we continue to fight against it.

Of course the hon members from the DA have no interest in ensuring that our
schools have a diversity of staff, because they believe people who look
like me have no quality or skills to offer schools in our country.
[Interjections.] And they also believe persons with disabilities have no
skills that they can offer schools in our country. They also believe that
persons of a different orientation have no skills they can offer schools in
our country. All of these persons fall within the category of what is
referred to as representivity. The hon members from the DA have made
reference to an obsession with race. You will notice that the only party in
this debate that mentioned race was their party. It is their obsession, not
our obsession.

We believe this piece of legislation advances concerns that communities
have articulated about an inability to pay for education. For many years we
were not able fully to address this inability to pay, and we are making a
start with this - an important beginning, a necessary beginning, and we
will pursue it.

There is no country anywhere in the world that has the system of
appointment of teachers that South Africa has. Why should it be that the
government, as employer, plays no role in the appointment of teachers? Why?
The answer is not very hard to find. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

We believe the change introduced by our democracy was an important one to
ensure that parents do play a role in determining the progress of their
schools, but the exclusion of the Department of Education from exercising
its constitutional obligation is something that we have to attend to and
address. This legislation seeks to do that. The legislation also assists
governing bodies in ensuring that there is discipline in our schools.

It also helps the school governing bodies in budgeting appropriately so
that we do not have additional fees imposed on parents, where you are told
the fee is so much at the beginning of the year, and then for school trips
and other matters you have to pay so much more money that you as a parent
are actually unable to budget for. We will now have a budget where the
school fee would include all these aspects related to educational costs.

Finally, I hope that through this legislation we will begin the steps
towards completing transformation of education and the offering of
educational opportunity to our children. There is no way in which we can
detract from our resolve to ensure that all the children of our country
enjoy quality education. No Minister can refuse to attend to this
particular aspect.

I have indicated that I am committed to ensuring that we enhance quality
and opportunity for our children. And the fact that we will be providing
greater financing to schools that are poor, the fact that these schools
will become our focus schools, many of them offering science and technical
education and other areas from which they have been excluded, means we are
attending to the issue of promoting quality.

Quality doesn’t exist in just a few schools; quality has to be an attribute
of all the schools in our country, because that is what our children
deserve and that is what South Africa needs.

The challenge of government is to ensure that through our public finances
we support our schools to offer our children a quality level of education
that allows them to acquire skills that equip them to execute their role in
society, independent of any move by other persons. This legislation assists
us in this regard.

The members to my left, not surprisingly, without any left ideological
leaning, will of course vote against this legislation. Who is surprised?
Nobody! We will be able to tell the people of South Africa that the parties
that voted against this legislation did not want the poor to enjoy free
education . . . [Interjections.] . . . did not want us to have diverse
schools, did not want us to improve education, and that we who voted for
this legislation sought transformation, and made sure we had the basis to
achieve it by passing this legislation. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Hon members, the hon Zille
has submitted amendments to the Bill, which appear on the Order Paper.
There are also other amendments to the text which we will deal with later,
but for now we are dealing with those that are on the Order Paper, as
submitted by hon Zille. Are there any objections to the amendments to the
Education Laws Amendment Bill as they appear on the Order Paper?

Division demanded.

The House divided:

  AYES - 41: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, C-S; Camerer, S M;
  Coetzee, R; Cupido, H B; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer,
  A M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Gibson, D H M; Jankielsohn, R; Joubert, L K;
  Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Lee, T D; Leon, A J; Loe, S J;
  Lowe, C M; Madikiza, G T; Maja, S J; Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J; Morgan,
  G R; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Rabie, P J; Schmidt, H C;
  Selfe, J; Smuts, M; Stephens, J J M; Swart, P S; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W;
  Van Dyk, S M; Weber, H; Zille, H.


  NOES - 195: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Baloyi, M
  R; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu,
  M J; Bici, J; Blose, H M; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia,
  I M; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J; Chohan-Khota, F I; Cronin, J P;
  Dambuza, B N; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali,
  D M; Doidge`, G Q M; Fihla, N B; Gabela, L S; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E ;
  Gigaba, K M N; Godi, N T; Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C H F;
  Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hendrickse, P A C;
  Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M;
  Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J; Kekana, C D;
  Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khumalo, M S;
  Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal,
  Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M K; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T;
  Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N ; Maake, J J; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D
  C; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M
  M; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahomed, F;
  Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Malahlela, M J; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S; Mars,
  I; Martins, B A D; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Mashile,
  B L; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Matsepe-
  Casaburri, I F; Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N
  D; Meruti, M V; Mfundisi, I S; Mkhize, Z S; Mngomezulu, G P; Modisenyane,
  L J; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R;
  Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M;
  Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Motubatse-
  Hounkpatin, S D; Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E
  N; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nene, N M;
  Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele,
  N J; Ngwenya, W; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkabinde, N C; Nkuna, C;
  Nogumla, R Z; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S
  N ; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Pandor, G N M;
  Phadagi, M G; Phala, M J; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S;
  Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S
  M; Saloojee, E; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Sefularo, M;
  Sekgobela, P S; September , C C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S ;
  Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau, Sylvia N; Skhosana, W M; Solo, B M; Solomon, G;
  Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E; Thomson, B; Tsenoli, S L;
  Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Vos, S C; Wang, Y;
  Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.


Question not agreed to.

Amendments accordingly negatived.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

  AYES - 198: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
  E; Baloyi, M R; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S;
  Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J; Bici, J; Blose, H M; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S;
  Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chohan-
  Khota, F I; Cronin, J P; Dambuza, B N; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Direko,
  I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Doidge`, G Q M; Fihla, N B; Gabela, L S;
  Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E ; Gigaba, K M N; Godi, N T; Gololo, C L; Goniwe,
  M T; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A;
  Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P A C; Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ;
  Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U;
  Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J; Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E;
  Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khumalo, M S; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M;
  Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho,
  G; Lekgoro, M K; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I;
  Luthuli, A N ; Maake, J J; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Mabuyakhulu, D V;
  Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F; Madikiza, G T; Maduma, L D; Madumise, M M;
  Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahomed, F;
  Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Malahlela, M J; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M
  N S; Mars, I; Martins, B A D; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R
  J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L;
  Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M;
  Mbombo, N D; Meruti, M V; Mfundisi, I S; Mkhize, Z S; Mngomezulu, G P;
  Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J;
  Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D;
  Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G;
  Moss, L N; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S A;
  Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndou, R S;
  Ndzanga, R A; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N
  D; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A;
  Nkabinde, N C; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, S B;
  Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G
  G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G; Phala, M J; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A;
  Rajbally, S; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D
  H; Rasmeni, S M; Saloojee, E; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E
  A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J
  B; Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau, Sylvia N; Skhosana, W M; Solo, B M; Solomon, G;
  Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E; Thomson, B; Tsenoli, S L;
  Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Xingwana, L M ;
  Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.


  NOES-37: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, C-S; Camerer, S M; Coetzee,
  R; Cupido, H B; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M;
  Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Gibson, D H M; Jankielsohn, R; Joubert, L K;
  Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Lee, T D; Leon, A J; Loe, S J;
  Lowe, C M; Maluleke, D K; Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A
  H; Rabie, P J; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Smuts, M; Stephens, J J M; Swart, P
  S; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van Dyk, S M; Zille, H.


Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

DEBATE ON INTERPARLIAMENTARY UNION TOPIC:
  THE RESPECTIVE ROLES OF PARLIAMENT AND THE MEDIA IN PROVIDING THE PUBLIC
 WITH OBJECTIVE INFORMATION, ESPECIALLY ON ARMED CONFLICTS AND THE STRUGGLE
                              AGAINST TERRORISM


Ms N R MOKOTO: Madam Chair, democracy has been heralded as a prime
mechanism for societal development and conflict management. It is also
important to know that the rights to credible information and freedom of
expression are essential to ensure accountable and transparent governance,
and to make it possible for all parts of a population to have access to and
participate in the political development of a country.

These elements are also important, in order to promote constructive
communication, to decrease perceptions of threat and some zero-politics and
to create more stable and sustainable political structures and institutions
of democracy. In democratic systems, the media, as a fourth estate of
government, generally pursues the freedom to cover events and issues with
very limited restrictions. This is a recognised and observed norm and a
legally obligated right, entrenched in many constitutional democracies
across the world.

It is in this spirit that the media continues to enjoy independence and
freedom from any form of interference. However, as the ANC, we wish to
declare that this freedom and rights are not absolute and cannot be
conveniently twisted for purposes of undermining the interests of the very
people that it is supposed to protect.

This becomes particularly relevant in the case of private media, which is
not government-owned. In which case, the media decides to play along with
what can be termed as dominant forces in conflict or war. A number of
journalists covering the Iraqi war served as good examples of a media
without responsibility, commonly known as an embedded media.

I wish that this House could hear me well on this matter. If we talk about
this freedom and independence, what are we addressing? Because the media
must, at all times and costs, maintain its ethical responsibility to its
citizens and society, particularly at a time when information and
communication play an important role in the formation of personal attitudes
and the development of society and democratic lives.

The tendency of the media to conveniently harp on these issues of
independence and freedom from external influences at the expense of
people’s lives in the quest for cheap profit and high sales, will not be
condoned. Like no other guardian sector in our society, the media has an
immeasurable power to influence, reinforce, change perceptions, educate the
masses, inform and set the agenda for society. However, we should realise
that the media has a very complex role to play that, unfortunately, is
often taken for granted by political decision-makers and the military.

Statements claiming the media’s impressive effects are often heard from
some decision-makers. Political practitioners and even researchers most
often assume the effect of news media in political conflicts. An example of
the extent to which this is so, is reflected in the 1995 survey, in which
64% of the American military officers still believe that the media held the
prime responsibility for ruining the war effort in Vietnam.

The increase in instances of the scope and extent of terrorism has
coincided with the exponential spread and sophistication of the means of
communication and information to people all over the world. It is,
therefore, natural that instigators of terrorist acts, armed conflicts and
the government concerned will seek to gain the attention of the media to
get their point of view across.

In a war situation, a state is almost always militarily superior. Nonstate
actors are more dependent on psychological warfare, which entails
influencing the attitudes and perceptions of a population. As such, a
battlefield in the traditional sense is not a particularly appropriate
arena in which to compete over the ability to mobilise audiences.
Therefore, the media dimension has become increasingly important, and it is
no coincidence that media assistance emerged and has increased in
importance since the end of the Cold War.

Training personnel on how to best interact with the media has now become an
integral part, at least, of Western style military development. Today, most
defence ministries, particularly in developed countries, have public
relations and media specialists. In light of this, it is surprising and,
perhaps, very alarming that relatively little in terms of research and
resources have been allocated to improve our understanding of the media
role in conflicts and democratising states.

Another aspect that has important consequences for the media in violent
conflict pertains to the recent search for democratisation. It began before
the end of the Cold War but, since then, a fourth way of democratisation
has begun. Democratising states are involved in complex processes of the
readaptation of traditional political structures, and are attempting to
incorporate democratic institutions and norms. Incorporating an editorially
and economically independent, responsible and pluralistic media is
essential to democratisation.

Political change often stimulates hope, and it provides unique
opportunities for different and often previously marginalised groups in
society to influence political dynamics while, on the other hand, those who
have control of power may find it difficult to let go. The manner in which
the media reports those issues often leads to actual conflicts, and even
the reports that centre on the aftermath of those conflicts obviously have
a huge impact on the thinking of the people who receive the footage.

As often as it is expressed, truth, credibility, balance and even-handed
reporting of events become the first casualty of war. In this case, who is
to blame for it? Is it governments, rebels or the media itself - because of
its self-styled character of a sophisticated instigator, which often tends
to fuel conflicts rather than assist to resolve conflicts and restore
social stability?

The ANC is convinced that the media can provide various forms or platforms
to search for alternatives to armed conflict, and to create conducive
conditions for peaceful settlements. However, we must remember that our
society is also riddled with conflicts, which have a potential to cause
unrest. Whichever the case, we must ensure that journalists are also
committed to the desire for peace and democratic governance.

It has also been noted that one of the main reasons why rigorous
information, as we understand it, does not exist in certain zones of
crises, war or political authoritarianism, is not that journalists are
incompetent or lack training, but because of the political, military and
financial situation that they find themselves in. We, therefore, call for
the media to be vigilant enough to struggle with terrorism and armed
conflicts by promoting an unbiased, credible and objective reporting of
events.

It is very important that, for us to realise any attempt to promote peace
and to prevent violent conflicts, we should acquire active participation,
which will include all societal actors at a multilateral level, so that we
are able to achieve long-term commitments.

I thank you, Madam Chair. [Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Chair, the question of how Parliament and the media
can provide objective information to the public on armed conflicts and
terrorism is a complex one. Traditionally there’s no area of public policy
that is more sensitive than issues of national security such as terrorism
and armed conflicts. It is an area in virtually all states in which there
is a clear tension between the need for the public to be informed of
genuine threats to a nation’s security, as well as to be informed about the
state’s readiness to meet these threats.

Issues of national security are also an area where public debate is
restricted, and where access to information is limited to a select few. The
cloak and dagger nature of national security makes it very difficult for
parliaments worldwide to exercise effective oversight, let alone provide
objective information to the public. However, they should in no way deter
Parliament from engaging in this area, as this is a vital area of public
policy, both in terms of the importance of the subject matter itself and
also because a large proportion of countries’ budgets are often dedicated
to national security.

In the case of South Africa the amount spent on security amounts to
approximately R50 billion. It must not be forgotten that national security
measures can also restrict citizens’ freedom and liberties, which has major
consequences for democracy. Therefore, issues of national security cannot
and should not be left to the executive alone. Parliament has a critical
role to play in getting the balance right between exercising vigorous
oversight over the security establishment, without negatively affecting
national security.

The need for vigorous oversight was graphically illustrated by the abuse of
the security forces that occurred in South Africa during apartheid, and
more recently an intense debate that raged in the USA and the UK as to
whether their respective heads of state deliberately lied to their
legislatures on the question of Iraq’s possession of weapons of mass
destruction, as a pretext to go into war with that country. The ensuing
debate clearly showed the need for checks and balances over executive
action, as well as the need for as much transparency as possible, without
jeopardising the security of the state.

Parliament therefore can play a critical role in not only allocating
resources to security agencies, but also in ensuring that security policy
is relevant to the regional and international environment in which South
Africa operates. There are specific aspects of national security that
Parliament can focus on. These include the national security policy cycle,
the functions and reporting structure of each security agency and the
budget and material resources of each agency.

South Africa has a laudable oversight framework over our security agencies;
in particular the elaborate oversight mechanisms that govern our
intelligence agencies, which are arguably the most extensive in the world.
Yet, even these did not stop the previous Minister of Intelligence from
refusing to answer a question as to how much a series of departmental
hiccups cost the taxpayer, as she argued that this was a matter of national
security. This attitude is indicative of the disdain with which certain
members of the executive view parliamentary oversight.

Two important examples spring to mind: the first of which is the failure of
the national commercial arms control committee to publish its annual report
on South African weapons exports. This was contrary to the policy of
previous years and the result of this unwarranted secrecy is that the
public of South Africa cannot interrogate the government’s decision to sell
weapons to countries such as Pakistan, Colombia and China.

The Minister of Safety and Security has also started to refuse to answer
routine Parliamentary questions, on resourcing of police stations on the
flimsy grounds that this poses a threat to the operational integrity of the
SAPS. This position is highly questionable, given that his Ministry has
previously had no problem in answering precisely the same questions.

We live in uncertain times with the nature of these threats to our nation
changing on an almost daily basis. In a climate of such global uncertainty,
it is absolutely essential that our security agencies are subjected to
vigorous scrutiny, and that they operate in as transparent and open a
manner as possible. If Parliament and the media are blocked from exercising
this scrutiny, it paves the way for the abuse of power and the kind of
mistrust that has recently been illustrated in the USA and the UK.

The challenge for Parliament, therefore, is to fulfil its role without fear
and for government not to hide behind the veil of national security, simply
because it is politically expedient for them to do so. By acting in such a
manner and with the complementary assistance of the media, this will go a
long way to providing the public with the objective information that it
requires. I thank you.

Mr M J BHENGU: Madam Chairperson,  it  is  significant  that  we  have  this
debate soon after the fourth anniversary of the September 11 attacks on  the
World Trade Centre in New York and the  Pentagon  in  Washington,  where  so
many innocent people lost their lives. Through the extensive media  coverage
that they received, these attacks in particular  brought  terrorism  to  the
attention of the world, and highlighted the real  international  danger  and
threats posed by these cowardly terrorist organisations.

The role and responsibility of the media  and  Parliament  is  of  paramount
importance when dealing  with  the  issue  of  terrorism.  It  is  therefore
imperative  that  we  find  ways  of  working  together   to   combat   this
international scourge, without actually  jeopardising  the  freedom  of  our
press, which is a prerequisite for our democracy. Governments all  over  the
world need the media in their efforts to limit terrorists’ harm to  society,
and in their efforts to punish  or  apprehend  individuals  responsible  for
terrorist acts.

The media needs the freedom to cover an  issue  or  story  without  external
restraint. The media and government, therefore,  have  to  find  a  balanced
relationship when dealing with this important issue.

In many countries around the world and particularly  in  Africa,  there  has
been armed conflict and war. This has resulted in millions of  refugees  and
hundreds of people have  been  affected.  It  has  been  estimated  that  in
Angola, for example, about 500 000 people have been killed since  1989,  and
there are an estimated 3 million refugees. This is a staggering  figure  and
it is therefore very sad that all this destruction, suffering  and  loss  of
life have not received the international attention and awareness  that  they
deserve.

The media has an ethical responsibility to  citizens  and  society,  and  it
should play an important role in the development  of  society,  as  well  as
enabling  us  parliamentarians  to  make  well-informed  decisions.  It   is
important that the media provide a  balanced  and  correct  picture  of  the
events of  armed  conflicts  to  highlight  terrorist  statements  aimed  at
gaining broader publicity and inciting the people.

Therefore, we as parliamentarians can play a role in actually  disseminating
the objective and factual information about  incidents  involving  terrorism
and armed conflict. Therefore, there needs to be an international effort  by
parliaments all over the world, as well as the media, if we are  to  provide
our perspective policies  with  the  objective  information,  especially  on
issues of transformation and armed conflict.

This can be achieved in an ethical and objective manner  if  the  two  could
actually work together. There has to be that kind of  collaboration  between
the media and parliamentarians so as to help our world, which is faced by  a
lot of terrorism and the danger that is inherent in it. I thank you.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Chair  and  hon  members,  the  modern  international
landscape is characterised by  various  armed  conflicts  and  the  rise  of
organised  terrorism  with  a  truly  global  reach.  The  extent  of   this
phenomenon makes it  vital  for  citizens  to  be  provided  with  objective
information. Parliament  and  the  media  bear  a  joint  responsibility  to
disseminate such information in a timely and unbiased manner.

Unfortunately, armed conflict and  terrorism  are  often  expressions  of  a
political agenda, and where there are  political  agendas,  objectivity  and
fair distribution of information  becomes  difficult.  Liberation  movements
were  subjected  to  such  a  disinformation  campaign  from  the  apartheid
parliament, and a severely shackled local media. Besides  the  many  similar
historical  examples,  we  can  also  point  to  the  current  examples   of
misinformation and distortion that are being perpetrated by the present  day
antagonists in armed conflicts and the struggle against terrorism.

As has often been said, one man’s terrorist is  another’s  freedom  fighter.
The only realistic way to combat  this  is  to  ensure  that  the  roles  of
parliament allow for open debate, and for all views to be  heard,  and  that
the media is truly independent and not subjected to  restrictions.  In  this
regard it is a perennial danger that national security  can  be  invoked  in
order to suppress information.

The purpose of parliamentary  politics  and  democracy  in  general,  is  to
provide nonviolent and  consensus-seeking  forums,  for  the  expression  of
political agendas in order to avoid the situation where certain people  will
feel the need to resort to violence. We should constantly  remind  ourselves
and  other  democracies  that  if  we  unnecessarily  restrict  the   proper
functioning of our parliaments, and the flow of information in the  name  of
national security, then we are sowing the seeds for  future  armed  conflict
and terrorism. I thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Chairperson, thank you for the protection.  Fortunately
it is not anything controversial that needs to be discussed this  afternoon.
I refer to  point  9  of  the  report  under  discussion,  which  refers  to
Parliament’s role in communicating crucial information to the public.  There
is a common perception that armed conflict and  terrorism  are  intellectual
concepts that have no relevance to those without education.

I wish to draw attention to those sections  of  our  communities  that  have
little or no access to the most basic forms of media. These  are  people  in
the rural areas and outlying areas, some  of  whom  cannot  even  read.  One
cannot just assert that the London acts of terrorism, for  example,  are  of
no relevance to this group of people. Parliament has a significant  role  to
play in ensuring that these communities are informed  about  the  impact  of
international armed conflict on South Africa.

In this regard the municipal imbizos and ward committees can  make  a  major
contribution. As this way of government  is  closer  to  the  people,  local
government structures must prioritise the conveying of such  information  to
communities. The ACDP is particularly  appreciative  of  the  deployment  of
community development workers in local communities.  These  are  individuals
who  can  relay  information  to  the  people  in  the  languages  they  can
understand and who are  in  a  position  to  view  the  situation  from  the
perspective of the community that they are working in.

It is further of paramount  importance  that  at  international  level,  all
governments who are opposed to terrorism should form  a  united  front,  and
explore all possible avenues in  order  to  prevent  terrorist  groups  from
keeping  a  free  world  captive.  I  am  sure  that  Parliament   and   all
parliamentarians can come up with policies  to  combat  the  attacks  of  an
invisible enemy.

The media and the free press in particular  can  form  a  close  partnership
with Parliament, as the media is an important component of society  for  the
provision of impartial information. [Time expired.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Chairperson, comrades and members, over the last  50  years
the nature of armed conflict has changed  dramatically.  We  have  witnessed
more conflict taking place  during  this  time  within  states  rather  than
between states. Such conflicts, within states, have also spilled  over  into
regions, unfortunately,  due  to  the  fact  that  intruders,  refugees  and
insurgents have started to move across borders  without  being  successfully
apprehended. This situation has led to the  situation  that  more  civilians
have now been involved in conflicts.

In his book, The Security Intersection, Mills estimates that  about  50%  of
war-related deaths in the 18th century were civilian, as opposed to  90%  in
1990. It has therefore become much more difficult  to  stop  armed  conflict
within states than between countries.

Africa in particular has experienced more violent conflict during this  time
than any other continent in the last 50 years. Despite  the  fact  that  the
situation  has  improved  in  the  recent  past,  violent  conflict  on  the
continent is  still  the  biggest  obstacle  to  development.  It  therefore
remains a challenge to tackle armed conflict to  save  lives  and  money  by
building the capacity of African states and  societies  to  prevent,  manage
and solve conflicts.

Two strong pillars of democracy are Parliament and freedom of the press.  It
is the task of Parliament  and  the  media  to  strengthen  this  democratic
process and to protect it, and to root out the  negative  effects  of  armed
conflict and terrorism.

As a Parliament we can be proud of the national laws we have  put  in  place
in this Parliament to prevent or manage armed conflict and also its  related
activities. These laws include  acts  against  terrorism,  money-laundering,
organised crime, the Foreign Military Assistance Act  and  an  Act  on  arms
control, to only mention a few.

In  addition,  we  are  signatories  to  a  wide  range   of   international
agreements, treaties,  memoranda  of  understanding,  etc,  to  prevent  war
crimes, crimes against  humanity,  genocide,  terrorism  and  abuse  against
women and children, amongst others.

This is a remarkable achievement that the ANC-led  government  has  achieved
in a short span of ten years, namely to inform  the  public  with  objective
information on regional and continental armed  conflicts.  At  the  core  of
these achievements, which will intensify in years to come,  is  respect  for
public opinion.

We are succeeding in promoting peace and security on the  continent,  as  is
proved by the sterling work the SANDF is doing  in  peacekeeping  operations
in the DRC, Burundi and other countries on the continent.

In Parliament we have portfolio, select  and  joint  committees  to  oversee
government policy, including  the  defence  and  security  cluster,  and  to
prevent  armed  conflict.  These  are  ANC-initiated  policies,   mostly   –
surprisingly, but true – supported by the opposition parties, in  the  long-
term interests of government, and in the interests of society.  It  is  thus
these very committees that inform the  public  about  the  struggle  against
armed conflict.

As a case in point, the Portfolio  Committee  on  Defence  will  conduct  an
oversight visit to the DRC and Burundi early in October 2005 where  we  will
interact with our soldiers deployed  in  peace-support  operations.  On  our
return, we will compile a report and table that report in  Parliament,  with
the possibility to debate it in this House, informing the public of what  we
oversee.

Our young men and women in uniform are proudly serving our country in peace-
support operations in Africa. They  do  it  with  passion  and  with  pride.
Members will be interested to know that the first company of  reserve  force
members, that’s the citizens in uniform – part-time soldiers –  are  nearing
their first six-month service in peace-support operations  in  Africa.  This
is the first time in 40 years that  our  reserve  force  members  have  been
deployed outside the borders of this  country.  They  will  be  replaced  by
another reserve force unit, deployed for peace-support operations.

We as members of Parliament are ideally placed to supply the public with
objective information on our role in Parliament to prevent armed conflict
in our region and our continent. We have constituencies to which we can
convey objective information about our role in securing stability and peace
on the continent and reassure the public of our proactive role to prevent
armed conflict.

In this regard I want to propose that Parliament seriously considers
empowering available MPs to attend a training course on defence and
security management. An important element of such a training course will be
to improve the understanding of the global and regional security
environments, but also the institutions with which our Parliament need to
interact. Such a training course can be offered free of charge to
Parliament, as it can be funded.

Currently, a number of key policy documents on international, continental
and regional levels, to which South Africa is a key participant, exist. One
such important policy document is the Southern African Development
Community – SADC – Strategic Indicative Plan for the Organ, called Sipo.
One of the key objectives of Sipo is to protect the people against armed
conflicts within, or between, states in SADC.

It is clear that Parliament can indeed play an important role in the
prevention of armed conflict by promoting continued co-operation between
states and among states. This role can be supported by the private sector
and by civil society, as well as the day-to-day co-operation of the media.

The media, which is also a strong pillar of democracy, has the freedom to
cover events such as armed conflicts, but also the duty to present people
with an objective picture of any crisis situation. Today the power of the
media is far-reaching. The so-called televised events by CNN and other
major international stations have a marked influence on the way of thinking
of people.
While it is an obligation of Parliament to protect our freedom of speech,
including the media, it’s also our task to help the media to show
responsibility in the reporting of news.

Ek sluit af deur te sê dat dié Parlement en ons media in Suid-Afrika ’n
objektiewe, deurdagte rol speel om die publiek in te lig oor die kwessie
van gewapende konflik en terrorisme in die wêreld, op ons vasteland, en ook
in ons streek. Dít sal voortgaan omdat ons verbind is tot vrede en
stabiliteit in Afrika, en nie omdat ons soos die DA wolf-wolf skree nie. Ek
dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I conclude by saying that this Parliament and our media in South Africa
play an objective, well-considered role in informing the public on the
matter of armed conflict and terrorism in the world, on our continent, and
also in our region. This will continue because we are committed to peace
and stability in Africa, and not because we cry wolf, like the DA. I thank
you. [Applause.]]

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, comrades, hon members, parliamentarians, as
public representatives and leaders, have a burden of responsibility and
accountability. It is expected that in all matters of public interest the
greatest care be taken to project a responsible message and to support
understanding among people and promote international peace and security.

The media has a responsibility to inform the public objectively, reliably
and authentically of views, events and trends in relation to armed
conflicts. The media needs to put conflicts in their historical and social
perspective to inform and educate the public about them. The old saying
goes that in a war situation the truth or objectivity is the first
casualty. This hard truth has been confirmed in numerous instances
worldwide.

The media in the US, the UK, etc, tend to be jingoistic, and in the so-
called national interest either censor themselves or go along with
government positions, which tend to be very subjective. To them Iran or
North Korea are acceptably branded terrorist states, but when the US and
the UK illegally invade Iraq, it is excused or justified.

If Parliament and the media are to play a central role in promoting world
peace and diminishing armed conflicts, they need to strenuously strive for
objective public commentary that strengthens peaceful resolution of
conflicts, as well as an understanding of the motives and basis of all
protagonists in a conflict. Thank you. [Applause.]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Igama lamakhosikazi. [The name of women.] Chairperson,
having viewed the IPU report on the matter regarding Parliament and the
media’s responsibility to the public, especially regarding armed conflicts
and terrorism, the MF is of the view that our democracy, South Africa, that
inculcates a system of transparency and freedom of information, has the
necessary mechanics in place to ensure its citizens are well informed of
both domestic and international events and occurrences.

Terrorism is a great threat to global peace and the wellbeing of people.
The 9/11 attack and the recent London bombing, among other terrorist
attacks, the armed conflicts that took place in Afghanistan, Iraq and Sudan
and the genocide in Rwanda are a few of the terrors that have sent
continents into spasms.

Just this morning on the news another random bomb attack by Al-Qaeda was
reported. We as Parliament have often engaged in debates on terrorism and
have passed the necessary legislation.

The MF denounces all forms of terror. We feel it is important that our
people are aware of these facts and it is our duty to ensure that they are
given correct and truthful information.

The media, on the other hand, is free to deliver to the public events as
they occur, and its reports may often carry more opinion than fact. The MF
feels it our duty, as Parliament, to go beyond the normal gazettes and
televised coverage of plenaries to inform our citizenry of situations
globally and domestically.

We acknowledge that there is a parliamentary channel on DSTV, but the
majority of our people cannot afford access to this. We suggest that a
parliamentary channel be hosted by the SABC, as well as a parliamentary
radio station, that would report on various matters, including the
engagement, activities and outcomes of the executive’s, as well as
Parliament’s and the judiciary’s undertakings.

The MF once again stresses the importance of the right to information and
would like the above to be considered to ensure improved transparency and
access. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M S BOOI: Chairperson, we think it’s very important that we put history
into perspective, and it’s always important that the ANC is able to put its
work into perspective. As you say, Schmidt, we must always keep the
executive in check, and balances should be worked out. But we think that
Parliament has always been doing that, and Parliament under the ANC has
always remained vigilant.

There are things that, when you blow them out of perspective, you need to
correct, and there are things we think are worth mentioning, because for us
to define terrorism and for us to talk about experiences on terrorism are
not matters that we have reflected on outside the African continent. These
are things that have happened during the democratic process after 1994.

We have had the scenario of Pagad attacking and bombing quite a number of
places in the Western Cape, which had an effect on our tourism in the
Western Cape. That was called economic sabotage, because we were also
attacked at the Waterfront and in Camps Bay – places that are of quite
strategic importance to the growth of the economy in the Western Cape. So,
for us, the experience of terrorism is not what has been contextualised in
terms of only what happened on 9/11 in the United States. It is our
experiences that we are talking about.

The conduct of the executive and the relationship between ourselves and the
media during that period is a scenario that I will be able to give you,
because one of my colleagues and a friend of mine during the struggle,
Benny Gool, was called in by the National Prosecuting Authority, without
the interference of the executive, in terms of which the National
Prosecuting Authority used particular Acts to be able to ask him and
subpoena him to come and explain the pictures that were taken during those
scenarios.

So the role that the executive played during that period was quite
important in order for us to be able to see whether they would say to the
media: “Come, media, and tell us exactly what is actually happening,” or
would they wait until the legal processes that have been put in place were
observed.

Between the media and the NPA there was a resolution of that particular
scenario in which the media and the NPA agreed that the media would be
helpful by confiding in them some things they had been able to do. So there
was an amicable way of resolving that particular situation without the
involvement of the executive itself, without the media staying away. We say
that South Africa does have its own example. In no way did South Africans,
between the media and the NPA, act antagonistically in that they moved away
from each other.

However, the other important thing that is taking place today, which is
also contributing to what is happening, is that the United Nations has a
resolution around this particular issue, but they have not been able to
resolve and define who is a terrorist. For us that is a matter of concern -
those that deal with security matters and those that deal with national
security – the fact that the United Nations, at this particular moment, has
not been able to resolve this particular matter is an indictment against
the world itself as to how we define and say what is terrorism. That is
important, because Parliament should commit itself to that and make sure
it’s able to resolve that particular matter.

We have come to realise that it’s a very difficult matter, because dealing
with terrorism versus globalisation and the type of instruments that are
being used during those particular activities are points of concern. The
type of attacks that take place and the type of advanced technology that is
being used are issues that were raised and which we are concerned about.

However, it would have been in the interests of the United Nations to have
made sure that it did assist the African countries so that the impression
we have at this particular moment would be seen in the media. This is
because, if you look in the papers today, none of the media has even
committed itself to explaining the scenarios that say that the African
countries are at a loss at the United Nations. They have not been able to
see and feel what the unipolar system is going to be able to deliver around
fighting terrorism, because the important thing for the United States at
this particular moment is how it copes with Katrina and how it protects
it’s own citizenry. And then it calls upon the world to come and assist it
to combat terrorism on its own terms and in its own spaces.

The African countries have not gained in this particular summit. The causes
of the African countries have not been advanced, and that is what
Parliament should concern itself with. The bombings that took place in
Kenya are things that we should always talk about and not only about 9/11
and forget what really happened in Kenya and Somalia.

For us, within our political agenda of trying to unify the African
continent, that was one example of how we make sure that in terms of
resolving and combating terrorism, the First World, or the North and the
South, are able to hold hands together. But within the United Nations –
within a multilateral body – it has not been possible to create that unity
over this period where the UN was supposed to be acting decisively to help
African countries achieve their particular goals.

Now we say it’s in the interests of the media, it’s in the interests of the
African countries that such an important development is being expressed and
is being contextualised so that we understand exactly where we are heading,
because the gap between the poor and the rich is beginning to widen more
and more. As this gap widens and when there is an impact on the safety of
our own children and the safety of our people and the safety of our
citizenry, it means these are matters that we should be able to take up.

That is why we say that the unity between ourselves and the media would be
when we see them expressing this particular point of view. It does not have
ideology. It is a simple matter that asks what has gone wrong with the
United Nations.

What has gone wrong with the United States that they are not able to say:
“Let’s have a common understanding of this particular development. Let’s
involve the African continent in the Security Council.” This is because
this particular development of terrorism is undefined, something which Kofi
Annan, in his own speech he presented to the United Nations, admitted. He
says:
  We strongly condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as it
  constitutes one of the most serious threats to international peace and
  security. We welcome the Secretary-General’s counterterrorism strategy
  and will consider it in the General Assembly with a view to adopting it.
  We affirm that the targeting and deliberate killing of civilians and
  noncombatants cannot be justified or legitimised by any cause or
  grievance.

This is what Kofi Annan put before the United Nations, and nothing is being
done and nowhere does the North come to the rescue of the African
countries. So whilst the African countries have shown their commitment,
whilst they have shown their loyalty towards fighting terrorism, nothing
has come to fruition for them.

But we say our commitment, our close working relationship with the media,
our holding hands together, have been proved to happen in the history of
this country after 1994. The way we resolved the Pagad issue and the close
working relationship with the National Prosecuting Authority are issues
that we have been able to agree upon.

What I want to say to you again, Schmidt, is that there is no way that the
issue of answering questions and the issue of national security have any
relevance to the matter itself. The questions have to be answered. The
Ministers have agreed to do that.

But we are asking if it is a deliberate act on the part of the opposition
to ask very long questions – and to ask Ministers every day to enquire and
put resources aside in order to get answers to those questions. This is not
an easy question - if you ask on a daily basis about child rapes,
definitely no Minister would be in a position to answer from the podium or
answer daily how the child rape cases have been handled.

I think that is why in that context the Minister has been saying nothing
about national security, nothing that is threatening – that he is afraid
that there are some things that he has to hide from you and cannot tell the
opposition. He has explained this quite elaborately within the context of
our own committee, within the work that we are doing together in that it’s
important for him to answer questions. But let’s do this in a manner that
also gives the police an opportunity to be able to do their work.

However, most of the time when we deal with issues that are related to
child rape and child abuse, it does take up much of their time because it
means that the whole organisation has to put time aside and make sure that
they find a proper answer, because he can’t mislead Parliament. I think
it’s in that context, and not really that the executive is distancing
itself from contributing to the parliamentary processes.

This is because throughout, the ANC has given great respect to the role
Parliament plays within society. You have really seen throughout that the
executive has conducted itself in particular in that manner, or in a way
that it gives support to Parliament. So there was no way that he has raised
this matter as a matter he would want to move away from Parliament. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

 CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF INTERNATIONAL PLANT
                            PROTECTION CONVENTION


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): The acting chairperson of the
Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, the hon Ngaleka, will
introduce the reports. [Applause.]

Ms E NGALEKA: Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, the Portfolio
Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs agreed unanimously that South
Africa should accept the new revised text of the International Plant
Protection Convention of 1997.

The committee believes that South Africa will benefit enormously from
participating in the IPPC if it accepts the revised text. The IPPC is a
multilateral treaty for international co-operation in plant protection. The
purpose of the IPPC is to secure common and effective action to prevent the
spread and introduction of pests of plants and plant products, and to
promote appropriate measures for their control.

It gives the right to countries to regulate the entry of plants and plant
products and any other objects or materials capable of harbouring plant
pests. Also, countries have the right to take emergency action on the
detection of pests posing a potential threat to their territories.

The convention was adopted by the conference of the Food and Agriculture
Organisation, the FAO, of the United Nations in 1951. It was revised in
1977, and again in 1997. The aim of the revision was to bring it into line
with the agreement on the application of sanitary and phytosanitary
measures of the World Trade Organisation. It is mainly to reflect and meet
the changing needs of plant protection and international trade.

South Africa ratified the 1952 convention, and accepted the 1977 text in
1981. What it needs to do now is accept the new revised text of 1997.

What are the benefits of this ratification for South Africa? The benefits
that South Africa will realise by participating in the convention through
accepting the new revised text include the following. South Africa will be
protected from the introduction and spread of harmful pests, which is
essential for food security. Also, since most major trading partners and
World Trade Organisation members are contracting parties to the IPPC, it
will open up trading opportunities for South Africa. In addition, it will
increase the credibility of South Africa as a trading partner since South
Africa and other countries trading with South Africa will have to adhere to
standards set by the IPPC and this will create access to international
markets for South Africa.

This convention will also provide South Africa with the opportunity to
participate in and shape international standards on plant protection. South
Africa will gain from the technical assistance given to countries,
particularly developing countries, by the convention, which includes
capacity-building and the strengthening of plant-protection infrastructure
through projects.

The International Plant Protection Convention will also assist with
reviewing and updating. It will provide a platform for the exchange of
information as the publication and dissemination of relevant information is
both an obligation and part of the co-operative action of the convention.

Yes, indeed, South Africa will be able to get assistance in dispute
settlement in instances in which some of the protective measures for plants
that are put in place by a trading partner are challenged as unjustified
barriers to trade. Thus, this will encourage safe and fair trade.

If South Africa decides not to accept the new revised version of the IPPC,
it will suffer the following disadvantages. South Africa will suffer from
an inability to contribute to the largest international forum that
discusses and sets norms and standards for plant protection and it will
become a standard-taker instead of a standard-maker. South Africa will miss
out on the opportunity to share information and to co-operate with major
trading partners on issues of plant health if we don’t ratify this
convention.

Therefore, it is in the interests of South Africa that we ratify this
convention. Another disadvantage to South Africa if we don’t ratify the
convention is that we will miss out on an opportunity to participate in
safe and fair trade.

It should be noted that South Africa will not bear any financial costs by
taking the decision to accept the new revised version of the IPPC. As a
member of the Food and Agriculture Organisation, South Africa could join
the IPPC at no additional cost.

In conclusion, based on the benefits that South Africa will enjoy if it
participates in the convention and on the disadvantages it will suffer from
or opportunities it will miss out on if it does not, the committee
therefore recommends that South Africa accept the new revised text of the
IPPC.

It is important that South Africa . . .

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wrap up now, hon member.

Ms E NGALEKA: . . . participate fully in norm-setting and standard-setting
for plant protection to ensure food security and to fight against the
dumping of agricultural products that may be harmful to our environment and
our production. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, this long day doesn’t seem to want to end,
and we are very, very tired now. Hon members, I have to announce the
following further changes … Oh, excuse me, I first have to establish if
there are any objections to the approval of the request of the
International Plant Protection Convention as it appears on the Order Paper.
No objections; agreed to.

International Plant Protection Convention approved.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have an objection, hon member? [Interjections.] Mr
Lee, please! We are very tired. Don’t call for a division now. [Laughter.]

Mr T D LEE: I do not object to what transpired here, but to the long
speech, Chair. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I have no control if Ms Botha and the speaker, Ms
Ngaleka, made arrangements, because I came in here and she was speaking
forever and there was nothing on the clock. [Laughter.] I didn’t know if
she had 20 minutes, or five minutes, or whatever. So, if anybody is out of
order, it is Ms Botha. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Ms Botha apologises, but considering
the announcement that’s coming, you can understand why I wanted to delay
it. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, okay. You are so intelligent, you want me to make
the announcement.


                     FURTHER CHANGES IN PARTY MEMBERSHIP


                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have to announce the following further changes in
party membership in terms of Schedule 6A to the Constitution.

The following members have, on 15 September 2005, left the Democratic
Alliance and joined the African National Congress. [Applause.] These hon
members are Mr B J Mnyandu, Dr E Nkem-Abonta, Mr R S Ntuli and Mr D K
Maluleke. [Applause.]

Order, hon members! Order! Further, Mr C M Morkel has, on 15 September
2005, left the Democratic Alliance to form a new party called the
Progressive Independent Movement. [Applause.]

The House adjourned at 17:11.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS





ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly (floor-crossing)

    Membership status of the following members has in terms of Schedule 6A
    of the Constitution (floor-crossing) changed, as follows:


      ▪ Mr M Diko and Ms M N Mdaka have, on 15 September 2005, left the
        United Democratic Movement (UDM) and joined the United Independent
        Front (UIF), a new party in the National Assembly.
      ▪ Mr B J Mnyandu, Mr E Nkem-Abonta, Mr R S Ntuli and Mr D K
        Maluleke have, on 15 September 2005, left the Democratic Alliance
        (DA) and joined the African National Congress (ANC).
      ▪ Mr C M Morkel has, on 15 September 2005, left the Democratic
        Alliance (DA) and joined the Progressive Independent Movement
        (PIM), a new party in the National Assembly.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


 1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of  the  Financial  and  Fiscal
         Commission for 2004-2005, including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
         General on the financial statements for 2004-2005 [RP 67-2005].


 2. The Minister of Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of National  Student  Financial
         Aid Scheme for 2004-2005, including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 179-2005].
 3. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
    (a)     Proposed exclusion of Portion 89 (a portion of Portion  63)  of
         the farm Groenkloof 358 J.R., in extent 4484m2 from the  Groenkloof
         National Park situated in the administrative district of  Pretoria,
         Gauteng Province, tabled in terms of section 2(3) of  the  National
         Parks Act, 1976 (Act No 57 of 1976).

 4. The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Limited  for  2004-
         2005, including the Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the
         Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

 5. The Minister of Transport

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National Roads
        Agency Limited for 2004-2005, including the Report of the  Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and the Performance Information
        for 2004-2005.


     b)  Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail Commuter
        Corporation Limited for 2004-2005,  including  the  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP  148-
        2005].

     c) Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company of South
        Africa and the Air Navigation Services Company for 2004-2005.

     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Airports  Company  of  South
        Africa  Limited  for  2004-2005,  including  the  Report   of   the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.          Report of the Joint Budget Committee on National and Provincial
    Expenditure for the period April to June 2005, dated 31 August 2005:


    Part A: National Expenditure



    Departments started the current financial year with a low expenditure
    of 5% in April 2005, increasing sharply to 11.13% in May and decreasing
    to 7% in June 2005.


    The most notable difference between this report and the reports of  the
    previous three financial years is the shift in  expenditure  trends  of
    the  Departments  of  Communications   and   Foreign   Affairs.    Both
    Departments  had  been  the  lowest  spenders  for  three   consecutive
    financial years.  However, the trend  has  changed  in  this  financial
    year.



    Lowest Spending Departments as at 30 June 2005




   Table 1



|R'000       |Total    |Expenditur|%           |Total    |%        |
|            |Budget   |e for the |Expenditure |Expenditu|Expenditu|
|            |         |Month     |for the     |re to    |re to    |
|            |         |          |month (June)|date     |date     |
|Land Affairs|3 881 513|204 562   |5.27%       |453 407  |11.68%   |
|Statistics  |691 257  |27 740    |4.01%       |93 663   |13.55%   |
|South Africa|         |          |            |         |         |
|Minerals and|2 117 585|72 513    |3.42%       |300 853  |14.21%   |
|Energy      |         |          |            |         |         |
|Public      |167 726  |10 154    |6.05%       |25 787   |15.37%   |
|Service and |         |          |            |         |         |
|Administrati|         |          |            |         |         |
|on          |         |          |            |         |         |

The Department of Provincial and Local Government was  the  lowest  spending
Department at the end of the first quarter despite  the  fact  that  it  has
spent three times more than its allocated capital budget already[1].

Statistics South Africa, which has been one of the lowest spenders  for  the
preceding two financial years, was still one of the lowest spenders  at  the
end of the first quarter.


Highest spending Departments as at 30 June 2005



Table 2

|R'000         |Total   |Expenditure   |%        |Total    |%         |
|              |Budget  |for the Month |Expenditu|Expenditu|Expenditur|
|              |        |              |re for   |re to    |e to date |
|              |        |              |the month|date     |          |
|Public        |91 983  |4 934         |5.36%    |29 266   |31.82%    |
|Enterprises   |        |              |         |         |          |
|Environmental |1 723   |64 130        |3.72%    |512 455  |29.74%    |
|Affairs and   |111     |              |         |         |          |
|Tourism       |        |              |         |         |          |
|Social        |56549127|535 2459      |9.47%    |16 128   |28.52%    |
|Development   |        |              |         |907      |          |
|Housing       |5 191   |438 209       |8.44%    |1 319 947|25.42%    |
|              |712     |              |         |         |          |


Current, transfer and capital expenditure


Departments have started out with extremely low capital  expenditures.   The
following  graph  illustrates  the  expenditure  breakdown  of  Departments.
While Current expenditure has averaged 20% and Transfer expenditure  24.91%,
capital expenditure has averaged only 9.67% of Departmental Expenditure.

Figure 1 provides a  graphic  illustration  of  the  current,  transfer  and
capital expenditure of National Departments.

Figure 1

[pic]

Departments spent an average of 6.29% of their current expenditure in April
2005, increasing to 7.16% and 7.26% in May and June respectively.
Furthermore, transfer expenditure was 4.47% in April, increasing to 13.40%
in May and decreasing to 7.03% in June.    The Departments of Public
Enterprises and Correctional Services spent 61.37% and 68.15% of their
transfer budgets in April 2005, respectively.  The Department of
Correctional Services spent a further 72% of its transfer budget in May
2005 and has already exceeded its transfer budget.

Spending  on  capital  payments  has  been  very  slow.   In   April   2005,
Departments  spent  an  average  of  2.49%  of  their  capital  expenditure,
increasing slightly to 3.82% in May and 3.37% in June.

 Responses for expenditure trend


 Statistics South Africa


Statistics South Africa has provided the following reasons  for  its  delays
in expenditure:

    • The Department has R200 million budgeted for community  surveys  which
      has been delayed by technical procedures.  The  Minister  of  Finance,
      who is also the political head of Stats SA, has instructed that  Stats
      SA agree with the Statistics Council regarding the  logistics  of  the
      survey.   The two organisations have met several times to discuss  how
      the survey should be  conducted,  as  well  as  other  logistical  and
      demographic factors to be considered, but no formal agreement has been
      reached as yet.

    • Most of the Department’s capital expenditure  will  be  spent  on  the
      community survey on the Community Survey Administration  System.   The
      Department, therefore, expects its capital expenditure to  improve  as
      soon as this process starts.


    • The Income and Expenditure Survey, which was due to  start  in  April,
      only started on 1 August 2005.  Therefore, expenditure in this  regard
      has been delayed.

    • The Department has several vacancies that  it  is  currently  filling,
      thus the low current expenditure.


Department of Public Enterprises


The Department indicated that the high expenditure on transfers was  due  to
the restructuring of Alexander Bay Mining Corporation (ALEXCO), which  is  a
mine that is managed by the Department.   The  Department  gave  instruction
for a study to be conducted at the mine in 2004.  The purpose of  the  study
was  to  assess  the  value  of  ALEXCO,  and  to  ascertain  whether   it’s
economically favourable for the Department to keep it.  The Department  thus
had to pay for this study in this financial year.

The Department has made a once-off payment  of  R12  million  towards  legal
costs in this financial year.  The Department is involved in a legal  battle
with the Richterveldt community  for  mining  rights  of  ALEXCO.   The  R12
million was a once-off payment  and  there  will  not  be  any  other  legal
payments in this financial year.  The  department  expects  to  pay  another
R450 million in legal fees in the 2006/07 financial year[2].

The Department normally advances money to the Diabo trust  and  the  Khulisa
trust, which serve to subsidise  the  shares  of  communities,  e.g.  Telkom
shares.  The Department has, however, held back  payments  to  these  trusts
due to the fact that the financial reports of the trust have indicated  that
the trusts are now self-sustainable.


Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD)


The ICD presented the following motivation for the slight overspending in
terms of capital payments during the first quarter of the current financial
year:

1.    The building currently in use to accommodate the staff of the
   National Office of the ICD in Pretoria does not provide sufficiently for
   the increase of staff numbers, assets, equipment and information.    This
   prompted a request to the Department of Public Works during the 2004/05
   financial year to obtain alternative office space.     Prescripts allow
   the latter Department to provide for the additional accommodation, whilst
   the user department is expected to incur the expenditure of such
   additional accommodation for the first three years of occupation.   A
   payment of approximately R 575 000 was thus made to the Department of
   Public Works to defray the lease expenditure of the additional office
   space, for the current financial year.

2.    The ICD catered for the payment of the accruals from the previous
   financial year during the first quarter but did not budget for the
   expenditure in terms of the additional accommodation.


   In the past, the Department of Public Works catered for the procurement
   of accommodation for all departments from its budget.   The Department
   however, experienced difficulties in coping with the increasing needs for
   accommodation by the various departments.  In dealing with this issue,
   the Department introduced guidelines that departments had to follow when
   additional or new office accommodation was required in the 2004/05
   financial year in order to manage the process more effectively. The ICD
   was thus compelled to incur the payment from savings created in the
   budget, without having budgeted for it.

3.    At the onset of the current financial year, The ICD was aware of this
   expenditure from the beginning of the financial year and planned
   accordingly.  The next and last payment in this regard, will be effected
   in the first quarter of the next financial year, which will also be a
   once off payment.

4.    The ICD makes use of its cash flow projections and spends
   accordingly.    In this regard, the ICD expects to remain within its
   budgeted allocation and will not overspend its budget.     This once-off
   payment will only be repeated in the first quarter of next year (2006/7).

Provincial and Local Government (DPLG)


The Department confirmed that the total expenditure up to 30 June  2005  was
9,2% of the total appropriation. However, it also highlighted  that  it  was
necessary to analyse the DPLG budget in two elements.

    • the operational budget  includes  transfers  to  public  entities  and
      associated institutions. This  relates  to  Programmes  1  to  5  plus
      Programme 7 of the Department. In this regard the figures are:

           Appropriation                                 R301 275 000
           Expenditure to 30 June                  R  84 958 154
           Less: Misallocation                       R  18 482 538
           Actual Expenditure                         R  66 475 616
           % Expenditure                                22,1%

The Transfers to Local Government which  appear  in  Programme  6.  In  this
regard the figures are:

           Appropriation                                  R15 279 502 00
           Expenditure to 30 June                   R1 325 560 085
           Plus: Misallocation                          R18 482 538
           Actual Expenditure                          R 1 344 042 623
           % Expenditure                                 8,8%

The payments to  municipalities  are  regulated  by  the  payment  schedules
provided in terms of the Division of Revenue Act.  The  Equitable  Share  is
paid in four installments  and  the  First  Quarter  national  in  the  Last
Quarter for  municipalities.  There  is  a  process  to  align  the  payment
schedules for the differing financial  years  and  to  do  this,  the  First
Quarter payment in May 2005 was at a level far below  a  pro  rata  25%.  In
addition, a  number  of  payments  were  delayed  on  instruction  from  the
National Treasury in  respect  of  municipalities  that  had  not  submitted
financial  statements  for  the  past  two  years  and  had   not   provided
satisfactory explanation.

The Department indicated that it was not aware of where the 200% capital
expenditure was coming from as its capital expenditure figures have been
derived as the actual BAS figures.  These were reported to the National
Treasury as follows:

           Appropriation                                 R5 790 000
           Expenditure to 30 June                   R1 395 740
           % Expenditure                                        24,1%

In addition, there are also transfers to Local Government in respect of the
Municipal Infrastructure Grant, which are recorded as Capital Transfer as
follows:

              Appropriation                                R5 436 161 000
              Expenditure                                  R1 027 069 323
                                      %                          Expenditure
18,9%

The Department confirmed that it has cash-flow projections and that it
tries as much as it can to follow them.

Attempts to obtain clarification regarding the  Department  of  Correctional
Services were unsuccessful.


Part B: Provincial Expenditure


Provinces had spent an average of 21.94% of their budgets at the end of  the
first quarter of the 2005/06 financial year.  The North  West  Province  was
the lowest spender, spending 17.66% of its budget.  In  addition,  provinces
spent an average on 22.79%, 21.28%  and  16.57%  on  current,  transfer  and
capital expenditure respectively.  Figure 2 provides a  graphical  depiction
of the breakdown in expenditure.


Table 3

|R'000           |Total budget    |Quarterly     |% Quarterly        |
|                |                |Expenditure   |Expenditure        |
|                |                |              |                   |
|Eastern Cape    |33 989 039      |7 697 396     |22.65%             |
|Free State      |14 541 544      |3 269 009     |22.48%             |
|Gauteng         |33 408 077      |7 140 795     |21.37%             |
|Kwazulu-Natal   |45 573 056      |10 232 177    |22.45%             |
|Limpopo         |27 958 070      |6 087 989     |21.78%             |
|Mpumalanga      |15 075 353      |3 595 992     |23.85%             |
|Northern Cape   |5 047 696       |1 258 792     |24.94%             |
|North West      |17 458 762      |3 083 937     |17.66%             |
|Western Cape    |20 627 849      |4 508 316     |21.86%             |
|                |                |              |                   |
|Average         |213 679 446     |46 874 403    |21.94%             |


Figure 2

[pic]


Recommendations


   1. The Committee should invite Chairpersons of  Portfolio  Committees  to
      hearings with departments, as well as work hand in hand with Portfolio
      Committees  in  monitoring  departments  through   their   cash   flow
      projections and strategic plans.
   2. The Joint Budget Committee should request clarity from departments  on
      their cash flow projections in order to ascertain that these speak  to
      the departments’ strategic plans.



Appendix 1: Total expenditure of National Departments as at 30 June 2005



Table 4



|R'000        |Total    |Expenditu|%        |Total     |%         |
|             |Budget   |re for   |Expenditu|Expenditur|Expenditur|
|             |         |the Month|re for   |e to date |e to date |
|             |         |         |the month|          |          |
|Voted Amounts|221 405  |15 508   |7.00%    |51 225 311|23.14%    |
|             |759      |050      |         |          |          |
|             |         |         |         |          |          |
|Central      |27 593   |1 383 319|5.01%    |3 669 877 |13.30%    |
|Government   |328      |         |         |          |          |
|Administratio|         |         |         |          |          |
|n            |         |         |         |          |          |
|The          |213 463  |12 265   |5.75%    |43 551    |20.40%    |
|Presidency   |         |         |         |          |          |
|Parliament   |677 255  |55 396   |8.18%    |166 188   |24.54%    |
|Foreign      |2 595 071|240 077  |9.25%    |470 574   |18.13%    |
|Affairs      |         |         |         |          |          |
|Home Affairs |2 972 711|274 559  |9.24%    |646 996   |21.76%    |
|Provincial   |15 580   |462 299  |2.97%    |1 410 517 |9.05%     |
|and Local    |777      |         |         |          |          |
|Government   |         |         |         |          |          |
|Public Works |5 554 051|338 723  |6.10%    |932 051   |16.78%    |
|             |         |         |         |          |          |
|Financial and|15 329   |880 287  |5.74%    |2 981 584 |19.45%    |
|Administrativ|901      |         |         |          |          |
|e Services   |         |         |         |          |          |
|Government   |249 130  |11 179   |4.49%    |57 789    |23.20%    |
|Communication|         |         |         |          |          |
|s and        |         |         |         |          |          |
|Information  |         |         |         |          |          |
|Services     |         |         |         |          |          |
|National     |13 990   |813 949  |5.82%    |2 744 770 |19.62%    |
|Treasury     |708      |         |         |          |          |
|Public       |91 983   |4 934    |5.36%    |29 266    |31.82%    |
|Enterprises  |         |         |         |          |          |
|Public       |167 726  |10 154   |6.05%    |25 787    |15.37%    |
|Service and  |         |         |         |          |          |
|Administratio|         |         |         |          |          |
|n            |         |         |         |          |          |
|Public       |82 050   |7 580    |9.24%    |19 038    |23.20%    |
|Service      |         |         |         |          |          |
|Commission   |         |         |         |          |          |
|S A          |57 047   |4 751    |8.33%    |11 271    |19.76%    |
|Management   |         |         |         |          |          |
|Development  |         |         |         |          |          |
|Institute    |         |         |         |          |          |
|Statistics   |691 257  |27 740   |4.01%    |93 663    |13.55%    |
|South Africa |         |         |         |          |          |
|             |         |         |         |          |          |
|Social       |81 371   |7 192 562|8.84%    |25 023 459|30.75%    |
|Services     |732      |         |         |          |          |
|Arts and     |1 082 699|63 867   |5.90%    |245 954   |22.72%    |
|Culture      |         |         |         |          |          |
|Education    |12 397   |931 398  |7.51%    |6 094 660 |49.16%    |
|             |064      |         |         |          |          |
|Health       |9 825 237|748 752  |7.62%    |2 253 054 |22.93%    |
|Labour       |1 313 977|87 506   |6.66%    |267 127   |20.33%    |
|Social       |56 549   |5 352 459|9.47%    |16 128 907|28.52%    |
|Development  |127      |         |         |          |          |
|Sport and    |203 628  |8 580    |4.21%    |33 757    |16.58%    |
|Recreation   |         |         |         |          |          |
|South Africa |         |         |         |          |          |
|             |         |         |         |          |          |
|Justice and  |65 272   |4 214 552|6.46%    |13 240 279|20.28%    |
|Protection   |095      |         |         |          |          |
|Services     |         |         |         |          |          |
|Correctional |923 4085 |576 681  |6.25%    |1697 479  |18.38%    |
|Services     |         |         |         |          |          |
|Defence      |22 459   |1233262  |5.49%    |4 436 903 |19.76%    |
|             |432      |         |         |          |          |
|Independent  |49 522   |3 670    |7.41%    |11 343    |22.90%    |
|Complaints   |         |         |         |          |          |
|Directorate  |         |         |         |          |          |
|Justice and  |5 072 061|346 570  |6.83%    |985 139   |19.42%    |
|Constitutiona|         |         |         |          |          |
|l Development|         |         |         |          |          |
|Safety and   |28 456   |2 054 369|7.22%    |6 109 415 |21.47%    |
|Security     |995      |         |         |          |          |
|             |         |         |         |          |          |
|Economic     |31 838   |1 837 330|5.77%    |6310 112  |19.82%    |
|Services and |703      |         |         |          |          |
|Infrastructur|         |         |         |          |          |
|e Development|         |         |         |          |          |
|Agriculture  |1 684 738|94 769   |5.63%    |309 082   |18.35%    |
|Communication|1 017 503|113 647  |11.17%   |175 980   |17.30%    |
|s            |         |         |         |          |          |
|             |         |         |         |          |          |
|Environmental|1 723 111|64 130   |3.72%    |512 455   |29.74%    |
|Affairs and  |         |         |         |          |          |
|Tourism      |         |         |         |          |          |
|Housing      |5191 712 |438 209  |8.44%    |1 319 947 |25.42%    |
|Land Affairs |3 881 513|204 562  |5.27%    |453 407   |11.68%    |
|Minerals and |2 117 585|72 513   |3.42%    |300 853   |14.21%    |
|Energy       |         |         |         |          |          |
|Science and  |1 986 639|139 962  |7.05%    |429 145   |21.60%    |
|Technology   |         |         |         |          |          |
|Trade and    |3 076 331|166 224  |5.40%    |565 357   |18.38%    |
|Industry     |         |         |         |          |          |
|Transport    |7 602 159|401 376  |5.28%    |1 553 315 |20.43%    |
|Water Affairs|3 557 412|141 938  |3.99%    |690 571   |19.41%    |
|and Forestry |         |         |         |          |          |

Appendix 2: Current Expenditure of National Departments as at 30 June 2005










Table 5

|R'000        |Current|Current  |% Current|Current  |% Current   |
|             |Budget |Expenditu|Expenditu|Expenditu|Expenditure |
|             |       |re       |re for   |re to    |to date     |
|             |       |         |the month|date     |            |
|Voted Amounts|71 110 |5 162 660|7.26%    |14 726   |20.71%      |
|             |801    |         |         |137      |            |
|             |       |         |         |         |            |
|Central      |7 761  |683 135  |8.80%    |174 156  |22.43%      |
|Government   |070    |         |         |         |            |
|Administratio|       |         |         |         |            |
|n            |       |         |         |         |            |
|The          |188 986|12 087   |6.40%    |36 296   |19.21%      |
|Presidency   |       |         |         |         |            |
|Parliament   |527 756|42 938   |8.14%    |12 8814  |24.41%      |
|Foreign      |2 014  |228 355  |11.34%   |431 996  |21.45%      |
|Affairs      |234    |         |         |         |            |
|Home Affairs |1 299  |104 617  |8.05%    |302 384  |23.28%      |
|             |059    |         |         |         |            |
|Provincial   |229 018|21 131   |9.23%    |49 040   |21.41%      |
|and Local    |       |         |         |         |            |
|Government   |       |         |         |         |            |
|Public Works |350    |274 007  |7.82%    |792 626  |22.63%      |
|             |2017   |         |         |         |            |
|             |       |         |         |         |            |
|Financial and|3 257  |200 009  |6.14%    |616 663  |18.93%      |
|Administrativ|125    |         |         |         |            |
|e Services   |       |         |         |         |            |
|             |       |         |         |         |            |
|Government   |170 351|10 932   |6.42%    |32 910   |19.32%      |
|Communication|       |         |         |         |            |
|s and        |       |         |         |         |            |
|Information  |       |         |         |         |            |
|Services     |       |         |         |         |            |
|National     |2 074  |138 593  |6.68%    |434 133  |20.92%      |
|Treasury     |879    |         |         |         |            |
|Public       |72 698 |4 846    |6.67%    |16 346   |22.48%      |
|Enterprises  |       |         |         |         |            |
|Public       |163 971|10 087   |6.15%    |25 499   |15.55%      |
|Service and  |       |         |         |         |            |
|Administratio|       |         |         |         |            |
|n            |       |         |         |         |            |
|Public       |80 138 |7 215    |9.00%    |18 612   |23.22%      |
|Service      |       |         |         |         |            |
|Commission   |       |         |         |         |            |
|S A          |30 996 |2 216    |7.15%    |4 226    |13.63%      |
|Management   |       |         |         |         |            |
|Development  |       |         |         |         |            |
|Institute    |       |         |         |         |            |
|Statistics   |664 092|26 120   |3.93%    |84 937   |12.79%      |
|South Africa |       |         |         |         |            |
|             |       |         |         |         |            |
|Social       |2 768  |188 021  |6.79%    |522 194  |18.86%      |
|Services     |390    |         |         |         |            |
|Arts and     |168 770|20 880   |12.37%   |54 717   |32.42%      |
|Culture      |       |         |         |         |            |
|Education    |463 424|23 780   |5.13%    |67 942   |14.66%      |
|Health       |699 810|43 236   |6.18%    |125 899  |17.99%      |
|Labour       |891 039|69 249   |7.77%    |183 969  |20.65%      |
|Social       |432 763|24 648   |5.70%    |77 134   |17.82%      |
|Development  |       |         |         |         |            |
|Sport and    |112 584|6 228    |5.53%    |12 533   |11.13%      |
|Recreation   |       |         |         |         |            |
|South Africa |       |         |         |         |            |
|             |       |         |         |         |            |
|Justice and  |51 437 |3 732 319|7.26%    |10 829   |21.05%      |
|Protection   |910    |         |         |333      |            |
|Services     |       |         |         |         |            |
|Correctional |7 858  |557 700  |7.10%    |1 585 694|20.18%      |
|Services     |725    |         |         |         |            |
|Defence      |1283717|925 519  |7.21%    |2 623 855|20.44%      |
|             |5      |         |         |         |            |
|Independent  |48 293 |3 027    |6.27%    |9 990    |20.69%      |
|Complaints   |       |         |         |         |            |
|Directorate  |       |         |         |         |            |
|Justice and  |3 949  |269 627  |6.83%    |777 644  |19.69%      |
|Constitutiona|180    |         |         |         |            |
|l Development|       |         |         |         |            |
|Safety and   |26 744 |1 976 446|7.39%    |5 832 150|21.81%      |
|Security     |537    |         |         |         |            |
|             |       |         |         |         |            |
|Economic     |5 886  |359 176  |6.10%    |1 016 791|17.27%      |
|Services and |306    |         |         |         |            |
|Infrastructur|       |         |         |         |            |
|e Development|       |         |         |         |            |
|Agriculture  |790 689|51 848   |6.56%    |120 710  |15.27%      |
|Communication|247 141|15 978   |6.47%    |44 856   |18.15%      |
|s            |       |         |         |         |            |
|Environmental|481 988|24 966   |5.18%    |108 928  |22.60%      |
|Affairs and  |       |         |         |         |            |
|Tourism      |       |         |         |         |            |
|Housing      |240 851|12 282   |5.10%    |31 001   |12.87%      |
|Land Affairs |787 380|56 331   |7.15%    |143 521  |18.23%      |
|Minerals and |462 700|28 394   |6.14%    |78 368   |16.94%      |
|Energy       |       |         |         |         |            |
|Science and  |156 607|9 809    |6.26%    |29 093   |18.58%      |
|Technology   |       |         |         |         |            |
|Trade and    |640 454|39 503   |6.17%    |107 402  |16.77%      |
|Industry     |       |         |         |         |            |
|Transport    |534 675|24 980   |4.67%    |71 429   |13.36%      |
|Water Affairs|154    |95 806   |6.21%    |281 483  |18.23%      |
|and Forestry |3821   |         |         |         |            |

Appendix 3: Transfer expenditure of National Departments as at 30 June 2005


Table 6


|R'000        |Transfe|Transfe|%        |Transfe|% Transfers to|
|             |r      |rs for |Transfers|rs to  |date          |
|             |Budget |the    |for the  |date   |              |
|             |       |month  |month    |       |              |
|Voted Amounts|144 139|10 137 |7.03%    |35 903 |24.91%        |
|             |747    |820    |         |660    |              |
|             |       |       |         |       |              |
|Central      |17 703 |649 870|3.67%    |1 777  |10.04%        |
|Government   |909    |       |         |610    |              |
|Administratio|       |       |         |       |              |
|n            |       |       |         |       |              |
|The          |19 222 |23     |0.12%    |6 776  |35.25%        |
|Presidency   |       |       |         |       |              |
|Parliament   |97 171 |8 097  |8.33%    |24 291 |25.00%        |
|Foreign      |348 927|4 254  |1.22%    |34 558 |9.90%         |
|Affairs      |       |       |         |       |              |
|Home Affairs |894 215|162 509|18.17%   |306 934|34.32%        |
|Provincial   |15 345 |441 072|2.87%    |1 341  |8.74%         |
|and Local    |969    |       |         |625    |              |
|Government   |       |       |         |       |              |
|Public Works |998 405|33 915 |3.40%    |63 426 |6.35%         |
|             |       |       |         |       |              |
|Financial and|12 024 |675 504|5.62%    |234    |19.54%        |
|Administrativ|632    |       |         |9775   |              |
|e Services   |       |       |         |       |              |
|Government   |76 469 |17     |0.02%    |24 378 |31.88%        |
|Communication|       |       |         |       |              |
|s and        |       |       |         |       |              |
|Information  |       |       |         |       |              |
|Services     |       |       |         |       |              |
|National     |11 903 |673 238|5.66%    |2 305  |19.37%        |
|Treasury     |138    |       |         |655    |              |
|Public       |18 758 |11     |0.06%    |12 817 |68.33%        |
|Enterprises  |       |       |         |       |              |
|Public       |361    |26     |7.20%    |63     |17.45%        |
|Service and  |       |       |         |       |              |
|Administratio|       |       |         |       |              |
|n            |       |       |         |       |              |
|Public       |183    |       |0.00%    |       |0.00%         |
|Service      |       |       |         |       |              |
|Commission   |       |       |         |       |              |
|S A          |24 788 |2 255  |9.10%    |6 765  |27.29%        |
|Management   |       |       |         |       |              |
|Development  |       |       |         |       |              |
|Institute    |       |       |         |       |              |
|Statistics   |935    |-43    |-4.60%   |97     |10.37%        |
|South Africa |       |       |         |       |              |
|             |       |       |         |       |              |
|Social       |78 443 |6 993  |8.92%    |24 477 |31.20%        |
|Services     |732    |922    |         |164    |              |
|Arts and     |909 567|42 983 |4.73%    |191 233|21.02%        |
|Culture      |       |       |         |       |              |
|Education    |11 889 |906 176|7.62%    |6 024  |50.67%        |
|             |082    |       |         |317    |              |
|Health       |9 097  |705 318|7.75%    |2 126  |23.37%        |
|             |514    |       |         |279    |              |
|Labour       |350 368|11 755 |3.36%    |67 029 |19.13%        |
|Social       |56 111 |5 325  |9.49%    |16 047 |28.60%        |
|Development  |169    |363    |         |315    |              |
|Sport and    |86 032 |2 327  |2.70%    |20 991 |24.40%        |
|Recreation   |       |       |         |       |              |
|South Africa |       |       |         |       |              |
|             |       |       |         |       |              |
|Justice and  |1051925|400 043|3.80%    |2 142  |20.37%        |
|Protection   |4      |       |         |497    |              |
|Services     |       |       |         |       |              |
|Correctional |38 124 |-2 288 |-6.00%   |48 770 |127.92%       |
|Services     |       |       |         |       |              |
|Defence      |9 357  |307 743|3.29%    |1 813  |19.38%        |
|             |388    |       |         |048    |              |
|Independent  |149    |7      |4.70%    |21     |14.09%        |
|Complaints   |       |       |         |       |              |
|Directorate  |       |       |         |       |              |
|Justice and  |695 622|70 413 |10.12%   |191 394|27.51%        |
|Constitutiona|       |       |         |       |              |
|l Development|       |       |         |       |              |
|Safety and   |427 971|24 168 |5.65%    |89 263 |20.86%        |
|Security     |       |       |         |       |              |
|             |       |       |         |       |              |
|Economic     |25 448 |1 418  |5.57%    |5156   |20.26%        |
|Services and |220    |481    |         |614    |              |
|Infrastructur|       |       |         |       |              |
|e Development|       |       |         |       |              |
|Agriculture  |864 993|36 565 |4.23%    |176 393|20.39%        |
|Communication|763 882|96 700 |12.66%   |129 443|16.95%        |
|s            |       |       |         |       |              |
|Environmental|1 190  |3 1065 |2.61%    |389 595|32.73%        |
|Affairs and  |330    |       |         |       |              |
|Tourism      |       |       |         |       |              |
|Housing      |4 947  |425 613|8.60%    |1 287  |26.02%        |
|             |840    |       |         |328    |              |
|Land Affairs |3 058  |146 163|4.78%    |306 747|10.03%        |
|             |267    |       |         |       |              |
|Minerals and |1 647  |44 100 |2.68%    |222 396|13.50%        |
|Energy       |942    |       |         |       |              |
|Science and  |1 829  |129 994|7.11%    |399 733|21.85%        |
|Technology   |227    |       |         |       |              |
|Trade and    |2 424  |126 558|5.22%    |457 688|18.88%        |
|Industry     |187    |       |         |       |              |
|Transport    |7 057  |375 753|5.32%    |1 480  |20.98%        |
|             |209    |       |         |876    |              |
|Water Affairs|1 664  |5 970  |0.36%    |306 415|18.41%        |
|and Forestry |343    |       |         |       |              |


Appendix 4: Capital expenditure of National Departments as at 30 June 2005


Table 7


|R'000       |Capital    |Capital  |% Capital   |Capital  |%       |
|            |Budget     |Expenditu|Expenditure |Expenditu|Capital |
|            |           |re       |for the     |re to    |Expendit|
|            |           |         |month       |date     |ure to  |
|            |           |         |            |         |date    |
|Voted       |6 155 211  |207 570  |3.37%       |595 514  |9.67%   |
|Amounts     |           |         |            |         |        |
|            |           |         |            |         |        |
|Central     |2 128 349  |50 314   |2.36%       |151 111  |7.10%   |
|Government  |           |         |            |         |        |
|Administrati|           |         |            |         |        |
|on          |           |         |            |         |        |
|The         |5 255      |155      |2.95%       |479      |9.12%   |
|Presidency  |           |         |            |         |        |
|Parliament  |52 328     |4 361    |8.33%       |13 083   |25.00%  |
|Foreign     |231 910    |7 468    |3.22%       |4 020    |1.73%   |
|Affairs     |           |         |            |         |        |
|Home Affairs|779 437    |7 433    |0.95%       |37 678   |4.83%   |
|Provincial  |5 790      |96       |1.66%       |19 852   |342.87% |
|and Local   |           |         |            |         |        |
|Government  |           |         |            |         |        |
|Public Works|1 053 629  |30801    |2.92%       |75 999   |7.21%   |
|            |           |         |            |         |        |
|Financial   |48 144     |4 774    |9.92%       |15 146   |31.46%  |
|and         |           |         |            |         |        |
|Administrati|           |         |            |         |        |
|ve Services |           |         |            |         |        |
|Government  |2 310      |230      |9.96%       |501      |21.69%  |
|Communicatio|           |         |            |         |        |
|ns and      |           |         |            |         |        |
|Information |           |         |            |         |        |
|Services    |           |         |            |         |        |
|National    |12 691     |2 118    |16.69%      |4 982    |39.26%  |
|Treasury    |           |         |            |         |        |
|Public      |527        |77       |14.61%      |103      |19.54%  |
|Enterprises |           |         |            |         |        |
|Public      |3 394      |41       |1.21%       |225      |6.63%   |
|Service and |           |         |            |         |        |
|Administrati|           |         |            |         |        |
|on          |           |         |            |         |        |
|Public      |1 729      |365      |21.11%      |426      |24.64%  |
|Service     |           |         |            |         |        |
|Commission  |           |         |            |         |        |
|S A         |1 263      |280      |22.17%      |280      |22.17%  |
|Management  |           |         |            |         |        |
|Development |           |         |            |         |        |
|Institute   |           |         |            |         |        |
|Statistics  |26 230     |1 663    |6.34%       |8 629    |32.90%  |
|South Africa|           |         |            |         |        |
|            |           |         |            |         |        |
|Social      |159 610    |10 619   |6.65%       |24 101   |15.10%  |
|Services    |           |         |            |         |        |
|Arts and    |4 362      |4        |0.09%       |4        |0.09%   |
|Culture     |           |         |            |         |        |
|Education   |44 558     |1 442    |3.24%       |2 401    |5.39%   |
|Health      |27 913     |198      |0.71%       |876      |3.14%   |
|Labour      |72 570     |6 502    |8.96%       |16 129   |22.23%  |
|Social      |5 195      |2  448   |47.12%      |4 458    |85.81%  |
|Development |           |         |            |         |        |
|Sport and   |5 012      |25       |0.50%       |233      |4.65%   |
|Recreation  |           |         |            |         |        |
|South Africa|           |         |            |         |        |
|            |           |         |            |         |        |
|Justice and |3 314 931  |82 190   |2.48%       |268 449  |8.10%   |
|Protection  |           |         |            |         |        |
|Services    |           |         |            |         |        |
|Correctional|1 337 236  |21 269   |1.59%       |63 014   |4.71%   |
|Services    |           |         |            |         |        |
|Defence     |264 869    |         |0.00%       |         |0.00%   |
|Independent |1 080      |636      |58.89%      |1 332    |123.33% |
|Complaints  |           |         |            |         |        |
|Directorate |           |         |            |         |        |
|Justice and |427 259    |6 530    |1.53%       |16 101   |3.77%   |
|Constitution|           |         |            |         |        |
|al          |           |         |            |         |        |
|Development |           |         |            |         |        |
|Safety and  |1 284 487  |53 755   |4.18%       |188 002  |14.64%  |
|Security    |           |         |            |         |        |
|            |           |         |            |         |        |
|Economic    |504 177    |59 673   |11.84%      |136 707  |27.11%  |
|Services and|           |         |            |         |        |
|Infrastructu|           |         |            |         |        |
|re          |           |         |            |         |        |
|Development |           |         |            |         |        |
|Agriculture |29 056     |6 356    |21.88%      |11 979   |41.23%  |
|Communicatio|6 480      |969      |14.95%      |1 681    |25.94%  |
|ns          |           |         |            |         |        |
|Environmenta|50 793     |8 099    |15.95%      |13 932   |27.43%  |
|l Affairs   |           |         |            |         |        |
|and Tourism |           |         |            |         |        |
|Housing     |3 021      |314      |10.39%      |1 618    |53.56%  |
|Land Affairs|35 866     |2 068    |5.77%       |3 139    |8.75%   |
|Minerals and|6 943      |19       |0.27%       |89       |1.28%   |
|Energy      |           |         |            |         |        |
|Science and |805        |160      |19.88%      |319      |39.63%  |
|Technology  |           |         |            |         |        |
|Trade and   |11 690     |163      |1.39%       |267      |2.28%   |
|Industry    |           |         |            |         |        |
|Transport   |10 275     |643      |6.26%       |1 010    |9.83%   |
|Water       |349 248    |40 882   |11.71%      |102 673  |29.40%  |
|Affairs and |           |         |            |         |        |
|Forestry    |           |         |            |         |        |




Appendix 5: Current provincial expenditure



Table 8






|R'000      |Current    |Current          |% Current          |
|           |budget     |Expenditure      |Expenditure        |
|           |           |                 |                   |
|Eastern    |19 501 708 |4 558 749        |23.38%             |
|Cape       |           |                 |                   |
|Free State |9 100 054  |2 088 768        |22.95%             |
|Gauteng    |20 245 842 |4 611 629        |22.78%             |
|Kwazulu-Nat|27 786 104 |6259889          |22.53%             |
|al         |           |                 |                   |
|Limpopo    |17 536 318 |3 941713         |22.48%             |
|Mpumalanga |9 552 570  |2 278 478        |23.85%             |
|Northern   |3 092 539  |737 901          |23.86%             |
|Cape       |           |                 |                   |
|North West |10 629 825 |2 364 508        |22.24%             |
|Western    |1 2942 643 |2 868 695        |22.16%             |
|Cape       |           |                 |                   |
|           |           |                 |                   |
|Average    |130 387 603|2 9710 330       |22.79%             |


Appendix 6: Transfer Provincial Expenditure



Table 9

|R'000      |Transfer    |Transfer         |% Transfer         |
|           |budget      |Expenditure      |Expenditure        |
|           |            |                 |                   |
|Eastern    |12 866 364  |2 878 710        |22.37%             |
|Cape       |            |                 |                   |
|Free State |4 897 768   |1 095 482        |22.37%             |
|Gauteng    |11 707 249  |2 252 639        |19.24%             |
|Kwazulu-Nat|14 766 630  |3 410 542        |23.10%             |
|al         |            |                 |                   |
|Limpopo    |8 928 833   |1 977 092        |22.14%             |
|Mpumalanga |4 449 330   |1 087 198        |24.44%             |
|Northern   |1 674 364   |466 425          |27.86%             |
|Cape       |            |                 |                   |
|North West |5 861 363   |584 692          |9.98%              |
|Western    |6 241 245   |1 439 477        |23.06%             |
|Cape       |            |                 |                   |
|           |            |                 |                   |
|Average    |71 393 146  |15 192 257       |21.28%             |


Appendix 7: Capital Provincial Expenditure



Table 10

|R'000      |Capital    |Capital          |% Capital          |
|           |budget     |Expenditure      |Expenditure        |
|           |           |                 |                   |
|Eastern    |1 620 967  |259 937          |16.04%             |
|Cape       |           |                 |                   |
|Free State |543 722    |84 759           |15.59%             |
|Gauteng    |1 454 986  |276 527          |19.01%             |
|Kwazulu-Nat|3 020 322  |561 746          |18.60%             |
|al         |           |                 |                   |
|Limpopo    |1 492 919  |169 184          |11.33%             |
|Mpumalanga |1 073 473  |230 316          |21.46%             |
|Northern   |280 793    |54 466           |19.40%             |
|Cape       |           |                 |                   |
|North West |967 574    |134 737          |13.93%             |
|Western    |1 443 961  |200 144          |13.86%             |
|Cape       |           |                 |                   |
|           |           |                 |                   |
|Average    |11 898 717 |1 971 816        |16.57%             |

Sources

    • Statement of National and Provincial Governments’ revenue, expenditure
      and National borrowing as at 30 April 2005; National Treasury.
    • Statement of National and Provincial Governments’ revenue, expenditure
      and National borrowing as at 31 May 2005; National Treasury.
    • Statement of National and Provincial Governments’ revenue, expenditure
      and National borrowing as at 30 June 2005; National Treasury.


   Report to be considered.


2. Report of the Joint Budget Committee on Hearing on  the  spending  trends
  in the Department of Communications, dated 31 August 2005:



  Introduction




    The Department of  Communications  appeared  before  the  Joint  Budget
    Committee on 22 June 2005 to account for its expenditure  trends.   The
    expenditure trends of the Department  of  Communications  have  been  a
    cause for concern for the Joint Budget Committee for the previous three
    financial years.






    For  the  last  three  financial  years,  the   department   has   been
    underspending tremendously, and then spending  more  that  50%  of  its
    budget in the last month of the financial year.  In  both  the  2003/04
    and 2004/05 financial years, the Department spent funds  in  excess  of
    R700 Million in the last month of the financial year.  This resulted in
    the Joint Budget Committee calling the Department to appear before  the
    Committee to present an explanation for its expenditure patterns.




    Presentation by the Department of Communications



    In response to the  Committee’s  request  to  explain  its  expenditure
    patterns, the Department indicated that in the 2004/05 financial  year,
    it made a once-off allocation of R750 million to recapitalise the  post
    office.  However, the Department did not provide the Committee with  an
    explanation for the previous two financial years.


 The Department focused attention on the following factors:


 • The Department had not recorded any material under spending in  the  past
   three years.
 • The Department started a process of restructuring during 2004  so  as  to
   ensure that it had enough  capacity  to  enable  it  to  deliver  on  its
   mandate.  In this regard, the Department has filled 352 posts.   However,
   there are 188 more vacant posts. The Department  further  indicated  that
   the issue of personnel is a challenge as it depends on  allocations  from
   the National Treasury.
 • No provision for ICT infrastructure has been made within the  Department,
   even though this is a core function of the  Department.   The  Department
   would ideally focus on improving staff and using technology to strengthen
   the State.



Discussions


The following issues were raised and discussed with the Department:

    • The Department assured the Committee that it would avail its cash flow
      projections, which are linked to its strategic plan.   The  Department
      further informed the Committee that it has  a  shareholder  management
      unit within its finance section that monitors State Owned  Enterprises
      through  the  Public  Finance  Management  Act  (PFMA)  regarding  the
      requirements of strategic plans by entities.  These lay the  basis  of
      the public entity within the year.

    • Although the strategic plan was not reviewed in the past, the National
      Treasury now requires that it be reviewed annually.  Furthermore,  the
      Department also submits  its  financial  statements  to  the  Auditor-
      General and presents to Parliament in the Annual Report.

    • The Department further indicated that there has been an improvement in
      terms of reporting as compared to the past three or four  years.   The
      Department has been behind three or four years in terms of  submitting
      its financial reports to the Auditor-General, but this is improving.
    • In terms of its expenditure trends, the Department indicated that it’s
      expenditure trends are affected by both internal and external sources.
       The Department therefore does not determine its  expenditure  on  its
      own.


Conclusion


   The Department provided an explanation  for  the  last  financial  year’s
   expenditure, but failed to provide explanations  for  the  preceding  two
   financial years.  Furthermore, the focus of the Department seems to be on
   preventing under expenditure, and not on the quality of expenditure.


   The focus of the hearing was on the expenditure planning  and  discipline
   of the Department in order to ascertain whether resources are spent in  a
   meaningful way.  However, the Department was only  focused  on  the  fact
   that it never reflects any material under expenditure at the end  of  the
   financial year.


Recommendations


   The Joint Budget Committee needs to work with the Portfolio Committee  on
   Communications to monitor the department in terms of its Strategic Plans.
    The Committees further need to follow up on the non-allocation of  funds
   to the ICT function, which is a crucial function of the department.


   The Joint Budget Committee also  needs  to  further  keep  track  of  the
   monthly and quarterly expenditure patterns of the department.

Report to be considered.

National Assembly

1.          Interim Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on
    the Convergence Bill [B 9 - 2005] (National Assembly-sec 75), dated 14
    September 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
      subject of the Convergence Bill [B 9 - 2005] (National Assembly-sec
      75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
      section 75 Bill, report that it has concluded its deliberations
      thereon.


    The Committee further recommends the following:

     1. That the House agrees to the Committee’s postponement of the
        adoption of Convergence Bill [B 9 - 2005] pending the consideration
        of the ICASA Amendment Bill, which will be introduced to the House
        possibly next term.


    2.      That, since a number of provisions of the Convergence Bill need
        to be looked at in conjunction with the coming ICASA Amendment
        Bill, and that the Committee be allowed to adopt the ICASA
        Amendment Bill before the Convergence Bill.


2.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development on the  Determination  of  the  Magistrates  Commission  to
    withhold  the  Remuneration  of  Mr  H  W  Moldenhauer,  Former   Chief
    Magistrate,  Pretoria,  whilst  he  was  Provisionally  Suspended  from
    Office, dated 14 September 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
        having considered the report on the determination by the
        Magistrates Commission to withhold Mr H W Moldenhauer’s
        remuneration, tabled by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
        Development in terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act,
        1993 (Act No 90 of 1993) reports as follows:

     1. The Portfolio Committee noted that on 10 March 2003 the Magistrates
        Commission provisionally suspended Mr Moldenhauer  from  office  in
        terms of section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993. Section  13
        (subsection (3)(a) in particular) has since,  with  effect  from  1
        November 2003, been amended to  the  effect  that  the  Magistrates
        Commission is no longer in a position to  provisionally  suspend  a
        magistrate  from  office.  Since  1  November  2003  the  power  to
        provisionally suspend a magistrate from office  is  vested  in  the
        Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development. The  power  is
        exercised on the advice  of  the  Magistrates  Commission.  Section
        13(3)(a) of the Act, as it was at  the  time  of  Mr  Moldenhauer’s
        provisional suspension is therefore no longer in operation.


     2.  The  Portfolio  Committee  further  noted  that  the   Magistrates
        Commission,  on  3  March   2005,   determined   to   withhold   Mr
        Moldenhauer’s remuneration in terms of section 13(4A) of  the  Act.
        However, in terms of section 13(4A)(a) of the Act,  the  Commission
        is only in a position to make such a determination in respect of  a
        Magistrate who is under provisional suspension in terms of  section
        13(3)(a) of the Act, i.e a provisional suspension effected  by  the
        Minister.  Since Mr Moldenhauer was provisionally suspended by  the
        Commission in terms of a former process,  the  Commission,  in  the
        Committee’s  view,  could  not  have  determined  to  withhold  his
        remuneration in terms of section 13(4A) of the Act.

     3. Alternatively, if it is argued that the reference in section 13(4A)
        to section (3)(a) of the Act, should be interpreted  to  include  a
        Magistrate suspended in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the Act, prior
        to its amendment, as the Commission apparently did when taking  its
        decision in terms of section 13(4A)  of  the  Act,  Mr  Moldenhauer
        should also have been entitled to the benefit of the provisions  of
        section 13(3)(e) of the Act, which was introduced into the  Act  by
        the Amendment affected by Parliament in  November  2003  and  which
        provides as follows:

           “The  provisional  suspension  of  a  magistrate  in  terms   of
           paragraph (a)  lapses  after  60  days  from  the  date  of  the
           suspension, unless the Commission, within that period, commences
           its inquiry into the allegation in question by causing a written
           notice containing the allegation concerned to be served  on  the
           magistrate.”

        Consequently, Mr Moldenhauer’s  provisional  suspension  which  was
        effected on 10 March 2003 should have automatically lapsed after 60
        days, i.e during  June  2003.  The  inquiry  in  terms  of  section
        13(3)(e) only commenced on 7 April 2005, more than two years later.
        In such a case the Magistrates Commission could not have determined
        to  withhold  Mr  Moldenhauer’s  salary  during  March  2005  since
        technically he would have not been under suspension at the time.

     4. In terms of section 13(4A)(c) of the  Magistrates  Act,  Parliament
        must, as soon as is reasonably possible, consider the report tabled
        by the Minister and pass a resolution as  to  whether  or  not  the
        determination made by  the  Magistrates  Commission  is  confirmed,
        either with or without  amendment,  or  set  aside.  The  Portfolio
        Committee is of the opinion that  the  Commission  could  not  have
        taken the decision in terms of section 13(4A)(a)  of  the  Act  and
        accordingly recommends that the House resolves  to  set  aside  the
        determination  by  the  Magistrates  Commission  to   withhold   Mr
        Moldenhauer’s remuneration.


    Report to be considered.


3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Labour on the Annual Report of
    the Commission on Employment Equity for 2003/04, dated 13 September
    2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Labour, having considered the Annual Report
    of the Commission on Employment Equity (the Commission) for 2003/04 on
    31 May and 1 June 2005, reports as follows:


 A.   Objectives



 1.   To receive a briefing on the 2003/04 annual report of the Commission
    on Employment Equity.


  2.  To monitor progress and establish problems relating to the
    implementation of the Employment Equity Act (Act No 55 of 1998).


 3. To determine the level of compliance and non-compliance by designated
    employers.
    The Committee agreed that a report would be compiled and tabled in
    Parliament after all the information had been collated and analysed.



    1 Background


    The Commission was established in terms of the Employment Equity Act,
    1998.  Its functions include advising the Minister on the codes of good
    practice, regulations, policy and other matters concerning the Act.


    The Department of Labour (DOL) made a presentation on the 2003/04
    annual report of Commission as the its term had already expired, and
    the DOL was the a process of appointing a new Commission.


    The Commission on Gender Equality (CGE), the Black Management Forum
    (BMF), Disabled People of South Africa (DPSA), and Business Unity of
    South Africa (BUSA) also made submissions on the Annual Report.



C.    Presentation on the Annual Report



    The Report reflected the highlights of the key achievements from
    October 2003 to September 2004, the distribution of the workforce in SA
    in terms of race and gender, employment equity trends depicted in
    employer reports received in 2001and 2003, and concluding observations.




    The highlights of the Commission’s achievements included the following:


     • The development of the Technical Assistance Guidelines (TAGs) on the
       employment of people with disabilities.
     • The development of the Code of Good Practice on the integration of
       employment equity into human resource policies and practices.
     • The workplace site visits conducted within the public and private
       sectors.
     • The development of the employment equity Award System.


    The TAGs on the employment of people with disabilities were meant to
    guide, educate and inform role players about the entitlement to fair
    treatment of people with disabilities.


    The workplace site visits were aimed at determining progress made by
    employers in implementing the Act, gathering information on substantive
    compliance at workplace level.  The report reflected that reports
    submitted to the DOL did not provide a full picture of the progress
    made by employers in implementing their employment equity Plans.



    General observations



     • Some employers struggled to distinguish between social
       responsibility and employment equity.
     • Few employers were concerned about difficulties with the reporting
       forms.
     • Employers seemed not to link skills development with employment
       equity.
     • Some employers were concerned about the difficulties with the
       reporting system.
     • There was an insufficient link between employment equity and sub-
       contracting
     • Employers appeared to see a crucial link between diversity and
       employment equity.



    Observations on race



     • Blacks were mainly in middle and lower management positions.


     • Some employers had a narrow understanding of Affirmative Action
       (AA), especially regarding the intersection of race, gender and
       disability.
     • Some private companies were struggling to recruit and retain Blacks,
       especially African women.


      Observations on gender


     • Males still predominantly occupied senior and top management
       positions.
     • Only three percent of women were accounted for in the mining sector.
     • Some employers provided an affirming environment for women in terms
       of reasonable accommodation for example, flexi-time and  childcare
       facilities and laptops to enable mothers to work from home.


      Observations on Disability


     • Employers showed a limited understanding about disabilility.


     • A number of employers seemed to think that providing reasonable
       accommodation for people with disabilities would pose a serious
       financial burden.  As a result most employers appeared to be
       uninformed about strategies to manage disability in the workplace.


      Observations on HIV/AIDS
     • Except for one employer, employers reported on programmes relating
       to the management of HIV/AIDS in the workplace.


       There was a concern that surveillance testing was not anonymous at
       some workplaces.  In some companies HIV/AIDS testing was done
       without the written consent of employees, and under the pretence of
       conducting a routine check-up.


       The presentation included an analysis of employer reports received
       in 2003 which covered the information on work profiles, the status
       of people with disabilities, workforce movement, and employment
       equity trends for 2001and 2003.


       The concluding observations were as follows:


     • Although some employers were not pulling their weight to achieve
       employment equity, others were doing their best to achieve the
       objectives of the Act.
     • Limited progresss was achieved in increasing the representation of
       designated groups at all middle and upper occupational levels and in
       some historically exclusive categories.
     • Slow progress was made in the advancement of women in general,
       African women in particular.


    The lack of consultation was prevalent in both public and private
    levels.  Trade unions were not insisting that the consultation process
    be taken forward.  It was suggested that the issue of consultation
    should be strengthened through advocacy work both at private and public
    levels.  Employers and trade unions should ensure that this process is
    driven seriously, and that progress reports were signed by the
    respective parties.
    The Committee raised concerns around the following:


    (1) Implementation matters


      The Committee noted that the implementing of employment equity was
    slow and the general state of non-compliance by some employers.  Some
    designated employers failed to submit their employment equity reports
    in compliance with the requirements of the Act.  Although there were
    weaknesses identified in the regulations, nothing was done to rectify
    the situation.  Some employers did not distinguish between social
    responsibility and employment equity.  There was insufficient link
    between employment equity and sub-contracting.  Employer reports
    submitted to the DOL did not provide the full picture of the progress
    made by employers in implementing their employment equity plans.


      There was lack of consultation between employers and employees,
    especially at government levels.  The analysis of the workforce
    movement reflected a decline in the employment of Coloured people and
    Africans in middle management.  However, progress in the advancement of
    women remained slow.  The low level of input from organized labour into
    employment equity processes remained a problem.

   (2)      Awareness, advocacy and training


      The Committee was concerned about whether information on employment
    equity was reaching people in rural areas, youth and the unemployed.
    It noted that 0there was ignorance of the Code of Good Practice and
    TAGs relating to the employment of people with disabilities at the
    workplace.


    The Committee was concerned that most employers perceived learnerships
    as a burden.  However, there was a need to look at alternatives to deal
    with the administrative burden that learnerships put on companies.  The
    establishment of an agency that would administer learnerships by
    companies should be considered.
      In relation to DOL’s intervention on SMMEs, levy paying SMMEs
    received a free training and grants from SETAs.  Others participated in
    employment and skills development agencies that were established by the
    DOL.  The SMMEs that did not pay levies received training funded under
    the National Skills Fund.  The DOL was engaged in discussions with
    Treasury on the proposed amendments to the Skills Levies Act to
    increase the threshold of SMMEs levy exemption from R 250 000 to R 500
    000.


    (3)     Enforcement


      The Committee noted that although there was a legal instrument to
    enforce procedural compliance, there was no enabling legal instrument
    to enforce substantive compliance.  The Director-General(DG) review
    system and the award system would serve as tool to enforce substantive
    compliance in a manner that was legally binding.


      There was a concern around the lack of a pro-active approach to
    enforce employment equity and non-discrimination and around the
    inability of the CCMA to stem the practice of covert discrimination at
    work.  It was proposed that the Committee consider conducting a
    workshop with the CCMA on employment equity.  A concern was also raised
    about the lack of a yardstick for evaluating employment equity targets.




   (4) Capacity and legislative links


      The lack of capacity by the inspectorate to interpret and enforce the
    legal requirements of the Act was raised as a concern.  The DOL had
    appointed a roving team of national specialists, comprising of four top
    inspectors in each province and capacitated to facilitate a deeper
    interpretation and enforcement of the Act. The DOL had identified
    administrative officers at levels seven and eight to be trained to
    conduct employment equity inspections.


      There was a concern about whether there were programmes in place to
    empower women in management positions.  The Committee noted that in
    most cases gender focal persons were often given added
    responsibilities. As a way of encouraging young girls, the Committee
    expressed support for initiatives such as ‘taking a girl child to
    work’.


   (5) Matters pertaining to the Commission and its Annual Report


      Only employers with 150 or more employees submitted employment equity
    reports in 2003.  The Report did cover information per sectors.  A
    proposal was made that the Report should in future contain more detail
    on the various sectors.  The DOL agreed to look at sector-related
    issues both in government and business.


      The Committee was concerned that the Report did not reflect the issue
    of youth and employment equity.  However, the 2005-2010 National Skills
    Development Strategy highlights the component that addresses youth at
    higher learning institutions


      The Committee was also concerned at the declining number of Coloureds
    and the rate of dismissal of Blacks.


   (6) Employment Equity Awards system


      The development of an employment equity awards system is meant to
    recognise employers who excel in developing and implementing strategies
    to eliminate unfair discrimination and promote equal opportunities,
    diversity and fair treatment in employment.  The award system will be
    implemented at an appropriate time when sufficient progress is achieved
    in the implementation of employment equity.  This would be determined
    by the second Commission in consultation with the Minister.


    The Committee was concerned about whether the legislation was tight
    enough in terms of enforcement, especially in relation to awards being
    an incentive to compliance with legislation.  The Director-General
    review system will serve as a tool to enforce substantive compliance in
    a manner that is legally binding.


   (7) Review of employment equity regulations


      The DOL acknowledged that there were specific areas in the
    regulations that will have to be addressed.  This was part of the
    identified problems experienced by the employers in the implementation
    of the legislation.  The amendments to the regulations would help to
    improve data collection and strengthen the capacity to enforce the Act.




   (8) Wider social developments


    Part of the deliberations brought to light certain developments in
    wider society that impinged on the implementation of the Employment
    Equity Act. These included the Black Economic Empowerment initiative.
    The focus was on the way in which the BEE codes could contribute to
    empowerment, employment equity, transformation and economic growth.
    Submissions


   (1)      Black Management Forum (BMF)


    The BMF was concerned that in the 10 years that the Commission had
    released its recommendations, corporate South Africa was still nowhere
    near targets for Affirmative Action (AA) that were suggested by the
    Affirmative Action Blueprint.  The employment equity debate had since
    shifted, and therefore there was need for a review of what employment
    equity entails and how it fits into the Broad-Based Black Economic
    Empowerment (BBBEE) scorecard.


    All companies in the respective sectors need to meet the BEE Charters
    that are set for employment equity.  Due to the significance of the BEE
    scorecard and related BEE codes for tenders and big private sector
    contracts, most employers were more concerned about the Charter
    requirements for employment equity than their own employment equity
    plans.  The BMF appealed to the Committee to investigate ways in which
    the BEE process could be used to stimulate and re-ignite the employment
    equity process and targets.


    The following proposals were made:


     • A review of the overlap of mandates of the institutions that enforce
       Section 9 of the Bill of Rights.  These include the Commission,
       Commission on Gender Equality, the Office on the Status of Women and
       Disabled Persons and other related institutions.


     • A renewed campaign and drive to enforce employment equity compliance
       under the supervision of the DOL.  This should be a partnership
       initiative between the DOL, organised labour, Black business and
       interest group organisations.  These bodies should work together to
       identify and eliminate all instances of unfair discrimination in
       South Africa whilst enforcing compliance with the Act.  A 24-month
       campaign with various roles for different stakeholders is
       recommended.


   *  There should be a link between the new BEE enforcement mechanisms of
    the Department of Trade and Industry and the employment equity
    inspectorate.


   *  The use of Accredited Rating Agencies to conduct inspections will
    alleviate the capacity problem of the DOL in terms of the quantity and
    quality of its inspectorate.


   *  The DOL should review  Section 10 of the Act .  This would entail the
    establishment of a common approach between the Promotion of Equality
    and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act (PEPUDA) and the Act.


   *  The Committee and the DOL should engage in the BEE process to ensure
    that the new BEE Charters, their employment equity targets as well as
    BEE Codes are aligned and advancing employment equity.


   *  The DOL should set up a commission of enquiry into racism and other
    forms of unfair discrimination in South Africa.  The DOL should be
    given a one-year mandate to review incidents and cases of racial
    discrimination in the workplace.


   *  The proposed commission of enquiry should collect valid and reliable
    statistics on the demographic profile in all the major sectors of the
    economy.


    The Committee emphasized the importance of revisiting the unpacking of
    employment equity and affirmative action policies, and recommendations
    put forward by the BMF.


    2) Commission on Gender Equality


    The submission by the CGE included the findings of the research
    conducted by CGE in 2003 on gender and private sector, the census on
    South African Women in Corporate Leadership which was commissioned by
    the Business Women’s Association of SA (BWASA) in 2004.


    The CGE in collaboration with the Commission conducted a pilot study on
    employment equity at workplace. Twenty companies were selected from a
    range of sectors, some traditionally male dominated and others female
    dominated.  A detailed final report will be made available to the
    Committee as soon as it is finalised.


    The Committee noted that the issue of casualisation required much
    attention.  Women are often the most vulnerable and most affected by
    casualisation.  According to the DOL, casualisation and other atypical
    forms of employment are currently at NEDLAC.  The CGE recommended that
    employment equity forms should be amended to reflect details of non-
    permanent employees.


    The employment equity reporting procedures are largely quantitative.
    It was proposed that the reporting procedures include any aspect of
    gender-mainstreaming, if they have been achieved.


    The BEE initiative seems to benefit Black middle-class men,
    marginalising women.  The CGE is of the view that if it is meant to be
    broad-based, a gendered analysis of women’s lives should take place.
    There was a concern that in most cases women in BEE ventures were used
    for fronting.  It was suggested that the DOL introduce a “stick” for
    companies to enforce gender equality.


    In relation to programmes that inform women in rural areas, workshops
    were conducted on issues relating to gender-based violence, employment
    equity and HIV/AIDS.  A total of 25 workshops were conducted in each
    province.
    The Committee noted that the Gender Policy Framework was not
    implemented in South Africa, and that there was a limited awareness or
    no knowledge of such policy, even within government itself.


    No follow-ups were done on what companies reported, especially
    regarding their employment equity plans.  It was proposed that
    companies be made accountable and more committed to their plans.


    The construction industry was identified as still being male- dominated
    with a high concentration by White males.


    To enhance compliance with the Act, the DOL should issue frequent
    awards of excellence and provide incentives to companies who have
    successfully implemented employment equity in order to encourage other
    companies to follow suit.


    The Committee noted that sexual harrasment was still a challenge at the
    workplace.  There were a number of cases that had been brought to the
    attention of the CGE.


 (3)  Disabled People of South Africa


    According to the analysed employment equity reports received in 2003,
    people with disabilities constituted 1.35% of the workforce.  The
    government set a 2% target for the employment of people with
    disabilities for the public service to be reached by 2005.  Indications
    suggest that very little was being done achieve the 2%target.  The
    challenge is for the public service to increase the momentum to reach
    the 2% target by 2005.


    One of the challenges identified was to establish a link between skills
    development and employment equity on disability at workplace level. The
    link between skills development and employment equity for the
    intergration of disabled people is not visible.


    To address some of the challenges, the DOL was in a process of
    translating all codes of good practice and technical assistance
    guidelines into all official languages.  The DOL will assist the DPSA
    in preparing and facilitating training workshops for National and
    Provincial Departments on TAGs on the employment of people with
    disabilities and the integration of disability into preparing,
    implementing and monitoring of employment equity plans.


    It was noted that insufficient progress was made by employers with
    respect to disabled people.  The DOL should introduce vigilant
    enforcement strategies for employers to comply and implement a
    sustained, aggressive advocacy strategy that would focus on the
    employment of people with disabilities.


    The Committee was concerned that no racial distinction was made in
    relation to people with disabilities during the crafting of the
    legislation.


    A concern was raised about the negative perception from certain
    employers about people with disabilities, and the fact that most
    employers claimed not to understand the definition of “disabled
    persons”.  The conditions under which disabled people worked were
    expected to be the same as those of people who were not disabled.  It
    was suggested that the government launch a campaign which would set
    time frames for departments to provide jobs to disabled people.  The
    latter should be encouraged to register with the DOL.   The Committee
    noted the non-reliability of data on disabled people.  It was suggested
    that the Commission engage with Statistics SA on how best to improve
    the research methodology.


    With respect to the reinforcement of training, the Committee suggested
    that the DPSA consider partnership with the Department of Public
    Service and Administration for training on codes of good practice in
    the public service.  Members of Parliament could do advocacy in their
    constituencies on the code of good practice on disability.


    DPSA affirmed its commitment to work with government in looking at
    innovative ways in which the challenges raised could be met.


   (4)      Business Unity of South Africa


    BUSA noted with concern the declining numbers of Black middle
    management, and the codes that were not released collectively.  It was
    proposed that the reporting requirements for the Act, Skills
    Development Act and codes be similar.  BUSA affirmed its commitment to
    address the challenge raised around the disabled people and was
    concerned that transformation was moving at a slow pace.


    BUSA welcomed the government’s position that small business should
    voluntarily submit employment equity plans.


    The Committee also received a presentation on the case study by
    Woolworths.  The project started in 2003 and included 101 hearing
    impaired and deaf employees in 16 stores.   Woolworths viewed this as
    adding value to business and that hearing impaired and deaf people
    could play a meaningful role in society.
 Recommendations


 (1)  The Commission should be resourced and capacitated.


 (2)  The DOL should conduct effective inspections at companies for the
      latter to comply with the law.


 (3)  The DOL should more effectively publicise companies that comply with
      employment equity requirements.


 (4)  The Committee should engage with the DOL to revisit the
      recommendations made by the stakeholders during the consideration of
      the annual report of the Commission.


 (5)  The Committee should monitor companies that submit their employment
      equity reports after the closing date.


 (6)  The DOL should brief the Committee after the submission of employment
      reports has been completed.


   7) Interaction between the Commission and DOL should be enhanced.


4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Labour on visit to Natref, dated
    13 September 2005:


      The Portfolio Committee on Labour, having visited the Natref refinery
      on 4 February 2005, reports as follows:

      A.    Introduction





           The Committee agreed in principle to visit the Sasol Natref
           gas/oil refinery in Sasolburg with a view to conduct a fact-
           finding mission into the accident which occurred on 26 January
           2005, and through which 17 people were injured.



           On 3 February 2005, the Committee received a preliminary
           briefing from the Department of Labour (DOL) on the incident. On
           4 February 2005 in Sasolburg the Committee met with the
           management from Sasol and Natref, representatives from the South
           African Chemical and Allied Workers Union (SACWU), Solidarity
           Union (SU) and Chemical, Energy, Paper, Print, Wood and Allied
           Workers Union (CEPPWAWU), contractor representatives, health and
           safety representatives and affected workers. The Committee also
           conducted a site visit of the plant, including the section that
           was affected by the explosion.

           The objectives of the visit were, firstly, to monitor compliance
           with the Occupational Health and Safety Act and, secondly, to
           meet with stakeholders at the Sasol Natref plant to discuss the
           incident that occurred on 26 January 2005.


           Whilst the intention of the Committee was to conduct an
           oversight on occupational health and safety matters, time
           constraints made it impossible to complete its oversight at
           Sasol.  Other plants will still have to be visited.




      B.    Structure of the report





           The report consists of the preliminary briefing which the
           Committee received from the DOL on 3 February 2005; interaction
           with Sasol and Natref management and other stakeholders in
           Sasolburg on 4 February 2005, as well follow–up meetings with
           Sasol management, labour representatives and the DOL on 15 and
           22 February 2005 respectively.






           The delegation comprised Ms OR Kasienyane (Chairperson) (ANC),
           Mr O Mogale (ANC), Ms LN Moss (ANC), Mr SA Mshudulu (ANC), Mr
           MJG Mzondeki (ANC), Mr SM Rasmeni (ANC), Mr RK Henderson (DA),
           Mr CM Lowe (DA), and Prince NE Zulu (IFP). Ms P Jayiya,
           Committee Secretary, accompanied the delegation.



           As a sequel to the visit to Natref, the Committee met in
           Parliament on 15 and 22 February 2005 with the labour
           representatives from SACWU and Solidarity Union (SU), and the
           management from Sasol and the DOL respectively.


      C.    Summary of proceedings






            1.   3 February 2005


              The Committee met with the Acting Deputy Director-General:
              Service Delivery, DOL, and members from the Free State
              provincial office:
              The report tabled by the DOL indicated that the incident
              occurred when the plant was in shutdown mode for routine
              maintenance. It appeared that a gas leak caused the
              explosion. Although the incident occurred on 26 February
              2005, departmental inspectors were able to get there on 27
              February 2005 because they could not get access to the plant
              as the gas was still leaking.


              The findings of the preliminary investigations suggested that
              a mechanical failure of a pump seal was suspected. Seventeen
              people received medical attention for gas inhalation and were
              later discharged from hospital. One stayed in hospital longer
              as a result of the history of psychiatric problems. The final
              report would be available once the autopsy report was
              finalised.


              Discussion


              The identification of high-risk areas was done through blitz
              inspections. As a result of these blitz inspections, the DOL
              was able to identify industries that contributed to about 47%
              of incidents. The manufacturing industry was identified as
              one of those industries. For 2005/06, the DOL planned blitz
              inspections that would focus on identified sectors and come
              up with the relevant intervention strategy. The provincial
              management had been advised to build relationships with
              people on the ground, as well as forge linkages between
              inspectors and provincial constituency offices.


              The Committee made an appeal that it be informed about
              intended blitz inspections so that it could observe those
              inspections.
              Employers were obliged to notify the DOL within 14 days from
              the date on which an incident occurred. In the case of
              Natref, the DOL did not receive any information in terms of
              incidents, except for one that occurred in 2003. However, the
              DOL was in the process of prosecuting Natref as a result of a
              number of incidents that occurred there. The withholding of
              information by companies remained a problem.


              Most of the delays between the time an incident happens, the
              investigation and obtaining autopsy reports, were as a result
              of a shortage of experts. The DOL has put together a proposal
              that will focus on a training programme that is meant to
              empower people on the ground to enforce the law. An agreement
              was reached with the University of Cape Town to train
              inspectors, health and safety representatives, and shop
              stewards.


              The DOL does tap into government expertise. The integration
              of health and safety within the Departments of Labour, of
              Health and of Minerals and Energy will assist in tapping such
              expertise. The DOL was concerned at the low levels at which
              inspectors are paid. As a result the DOL was losing most of
              its inspectors to the private sector.


              The Committee registered its concern over the issue of
              subcontractors, the enforcement of the law over
              subcontractors, and the high number of temporary workers.
              Some companies seemed to neglect safety conditions specified
              in legislation.


              The Committee was concerned about the adequacy of training
              given to health and safety committees, whether there were any
              weaknesses in the legislation dealing with inspections, and
              whether the DOL had adequate resources to provide more
              inspectors at Sasol.



           2.    4 February 2005



                 a.    Briefing by Natref management


                 The incident of 26 January 2005 happened at the alkyalation
                 unit. The latter produces high-octane petrol from butane
                 butyelene using hydrofluoric acid. The plant personnel
                 noticed a gas leak and the alarm was raised immediately.
                 However, the leaking gas ignited and resulted in a fire. A
                 site emergency plan was then initiated. A preliminary
                 investigation, which included worker representatives and
                 experts, was conducted on 28 January 2005.



                  Discussion



                 The company takes responsibility for contractors on site.
                 International experts were involved as a means of improving
                 the existing practices at Sasol, as well as learning the
                 latest safety trends.


                 Sasol, together with other industries, was looking at a
                 uniform safety training model that contractors should
                 undergo. All employees at Sasol, including cleaners,
                 undergo full safety induction through a fixed formal
                 training programme.


                 Employees and their families were taken care of through
                 wellness programmes and insurance policies. However, the
                 unions were concerned about shortcomings in the
                 legislation, especially after the death of the breadwinner.


                 Although training on health and safety was provided, more
                 emphasis should be placed on training in respect of
                 inspections. Intensive training should be given to workers
                 in operation and production units. Each employee should
                 receive the same training on how to deal with specific
                 situations.


                 The shop stewards expressed differing views on training
                 provided on health and safety. Some felt that the training
                 they received was adequate, and that it was more a question
                 of whether people took training seriously. Others felt that
                 the training provided was inadequate, and that one day was
                 not enough considering the complicated industry in which
                 they operated.


              b. Input by labour representatives



              1. SACWU



              The union acknowledged that, in relation to the initiatives
              on the use of international expertise, it was given an
              opportunity to put forward what it believed could improve the
              situation. On the issue of training, SACWU felt that there
              was a need to integrate safety with any other training
              offered by the company. SACWU viewed the issue of contractors
              as a grey area. The DOL should check whether training given
              to safety representatives was done in accordance with the
              relevant legislation.


              2. Solidarity Union



              SU raised concerns around contract management, restructuring
              and retrenchments, practices of multi-skilling and labour
              brokers. Restructuring resulted in a shortage of labour and
              an increased workload. In relation to occupational health and
              safety matters, the industry operated in isolation. The
              visibility of inspections in the chemical industry should be
              enhanced. SU was concerned that there was no clear
              communication by management. In most cases management
              determined what should happen.




              SU proposed that the company should establish a disciplinary
              procedure on any disciplinary action that related to safety.




           c.    Interaction with affected workers




              The Committee received testimonies from two workers who were
              victims of the incident at Natref. One mentioned that the
              fire caught him while he was still informing other people
              about it. The other victim had developed bleeding since the
              accident happened.



           3.    15 February 2005



             Presentations by Solidarity Union and SACWU




              a. Solidarity Union




              SU based its presentation on the gas-related incidents in the
              chemical industry, more importantly on the six Sasol disaster
              explosions that occurred between May 2004 and 29 January
              2005. SU registered its concern around the contractor
              maintenance involvement and chemical plant system problems.




           However, SU also raised concerns around the following:




            1) Unskilled contracted employees who work in a highly
               specialised complex environment without the relevant
               training, and contractors who are involved in shutdown
               maintenance procedures.
           2) The attitude of management towards incidents, accidents and
              fatalities.
            3) General non-transparency from management regarding the
               investigation of incidents.
            4) Unnecessary lengthy periods of investigating incidents,
               accidents and fatalities.
            5) Compensation and insufficient assistance to affected
               employees and their families.
           6) Ageing chemical plants and equipment.
            7) The continuous drive for production and profit, while
               compromising safety in the workplace.
            8) The continuous reduction of personnel, and the supervisory
               shortfall of contractors due to skills lost and the
               reduction of personnel.
9) Non–compliance with safety standards by various parties.


               SU indicated that they have had severe conflict with Sasol
               management due to recent incidents at the Secunda plant.
               They initially experienced difficulty in participating in
               the internal inquiries until the Natref incident, wherein
               the management physically took them to the section where the
               accident occurred, and the conflict was resolved on the
               spot. SU believed that the cost of an employee’s life should
               not be measured in relation to the proportional amount an
               employer pays to the Compensation Commissioner. There is a
               need to implement an effective specialist shutdown
               maintenance procedure and a change of mindset to prevent
               fatalities in the industry.

        Proposals by SU

            1) The appointment of safety representatives should be based on
               mutual consent between management and organised labour.
               Currently, it is solely a management decision.
            2) Transparency relating to health and safety must be
               continuous.
            3) Specialist contractor maintenance teams should be assembled
               on a permanent basis to conduct continuous maintenance at
               various plants.
            4) There should be an improvement in the after–care of
               relatives of the deceased, and of injured employees
               themselves.
            5) The Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
               should be amended so that it becomes a costly factor for an
               employer to have injuries or fatalities occur at the
               workplace.
            6) Safety disciplinary procedures should be separated from
               ordinary disciplinary procedures. However, disciplinary
               steps for safety measures should not be viewed as
               punishment.
            7) For the purposes of transparency, forensic pathological
               reports should be made available to all parties concerned.
            8) CHIETA should be involved in the funding and implementation
               of safety training programmes for shop stewards. All
               training modules should contain safety training focus
               points.
            9) Employees should be encouraged to act proactively so as to
               prevent further incidents, accidents and fatalities.
           10) An in–depth research programme on occupational health and
               safety with constructive intervention outcomes should be
               launched.
           11) There should be a balance between health and safety, and
               maintenance and production.
           12) Safety in the workplace should involve a positive mindset
               change in the workplace.


           b.    SACWU




           The presentation by SACWU was around the following:

            1) The use of contractors.
            2) Safety, health and environmental policies at Sasol.
            3) The implementation of safety standards by contractors, Sasol
               plants and shutdown schedules.
            4) The occupational health and safety and compensation
               legislation. Some contractors do not observe the Basic
               Conditions of Employment Act. This results in workers
               working day and night without the required rest periods
               required by law. When the union advises employees of their
               rights to ensure that they report non-adherence to safety
               standards, they are often afraid of dismissal.


           Recommendations by SACWU


            1) The code of good practice signed by contractors needs
               monitoring and evaluation by Sasol.




            2) To ensure adherence by contractors to safety standards that
               may lead to the cancellation of contracts, penalty clauses
               should be part of the contracts.
            3) The company should not give contracts to subcontractors who
               have no capacity to observe, implement and evaluate safety
               policies.
            4) The safety audit on compliance with safety standards should
               include all contractors on site.
            5) Independent experts should supplement the training of health
               and safety representatives.
            6) The DOL should do some work in empowering its inspectorate.
            7) Instead of importing expertise from abroad, funds from the
               National Skills Fund should be utilised to train young
               people on skilled labour.
            8) Companies who hire pensioned employees should keep them for
               a specific period with a view to transfer skills to young
               people.


               SACWU raised its concern around the delays in the arrival of
               DOL inspectors during the recent incident at Natref. The
               union is also concerned that some of the experts who leave
               Sasol register as subcontractors.


           Discussion


               The Committee commended SU and SACWU for their
               presentations. It noted the lack of transparency that
               existed at Sasol between management and the unions. It
               agreed that the issue of capacity in the inspectorate would
               be raised with the DOL.


           The Committee sought clarity around the following:


            1) The monitoring of contractors.
            2) The workplace structures.
            3) Non–compliance in terms of overtime.
            4) The trend of losing skills.
            5) The specialist contract and maintenance teams.
            6) The lifespan of machines.
            7) The issue of labour brokers.


           Responses


            1) The chemical industry has “safety watchers” who are supposed
               to observe the comprehension process from the initiation
               stage to completion. However, monitoring of contractors is
               the responsibility of the supervisory line management and
               the safety watchers.
            2) The Occupational Health and Safety Act makes provision for
               workplace forums. This is viewed as a constructive avenue to
               follow and a correct vehicle to drive an awareness campaign
               on health and safety in the workplace.
            3) Usually when a company plans a structured maintenance
               programme, unions are requested to sign an agreement to work
               irregular hours. Some unions do not have a problem with that
               arrangement as this programme is usually scheduled for a
               relatively short time.
            4) Some people leave the industry due to restructuring and
               retrenchments. Some, who are qualified and highly skilled,
               join plants where they can add value.
            5) The union will engage with the management so as to get the
               correct people to form a specialised team to do effective,
               safe maintenance.
            6) The Du Pont team will come up with specific findings on the
               issue of the ageing machinery.
            7) Unions have no problem granting permission to extend the
               working hours, but they are concerned about its abuse. They
               suggested that there should be a harsh penalty either for
               full–time employees or contractors who abuse the system.
            8) It came to the unions’ attention that some of the labour
               brokers are former employees of Sasol. It is a known fact
               that these people utilised their skills to provide a service
               to the chemical industry as contractors.
          4.      22 February 2005


           a. Presentation by Sasol


              The presentation by Sasol was based on the following:


                       (1)   The corporate position on safety, health and
                           environment.
                       (2)   The safety situation at Natref.
                       (3)   Human resource issues.
                       (4)   Corporate social investments.


          Discussion


               In respect of corrective action, Sasol has systematically
               introduced improved safety, health and environmental
               standards, and systems and tools over the past years. Some
               of these include the ISO 14001, ISO 9002, quantitative
               targets for the reduction of injuries, fires, explosions and
               releases, responsible care, behavioural-based safety and
               many more. South African plants have been rated high in
               terms of the National Occupational Safety Association (NOSA)
               system. In March 2005, Sasol 1 reached the unique milestone
               of having received 30 NOSCAR awards.


               As part of Sasol’s culture of continuous improvement, best
               practices from around the world are sought. Sasol benchmarks
               both its performance and systems regularly to ensure that it
               keeps up with global best practice. Sasol is unhappy with
               the recent fatalities and has introduced both internal and
               external reviewers to identify areas for improvement. The
               appointed external reviewers is DuPont, who is expected to
               submit its report in April 2005.


               In respect of the speed by which investigations are done,
               Sasol endeavors to investigate incidents as soon as they
               occur. In most cases, incidents are investigated before the
               seven-day period prescribed by the General Administrative
               Regulations to the Occupational Health and Safety Act of
               1993, has expired.


               However, the situation is somewhat different with the
               statutory enquiry that follows some of these investigations.
               These enquiries are similar to court cases. Postponements
               and subsequent delays are inevitable as dates must be
               suitable to all the parties involved.


               Regarding the relationship between Sasol and the unions,
               Sasol has excellent relationships with the labour unions,
               namely CEPPWAWU, SACWU and Solidarity. Sasol was
               instrumental and played a significant role in the formation
               of the Chemical Industry Bargaining Council. The current
               Chairperson of the Council is a senior manager at Sasol.
               Regular meetings are held with all the unions’ leaders.
               Regular interaction with regional structures and shop
               stewards has resolved many differences between workers and
               management. Sasol also has a number of full-time shop
               stewards who share offices with the labour relations
               department.



               The last strike at Sasol’s chemical and petroleum operations
               took place in 1998 and was part of a national strike. Joint
               union/management forums have addressed many important
               issues, such as restructuring, BEE, employment equity and
               productivity improvement.



               Induction training in safety and compliance with national
               standards for the chemical industry is presented to Sasol
               employees and hired labour contractors. Contractors receive
               six hours of basic training plus two hours of plant-specific
               training. Sasol employees receive the same training, as well
               as fire and gas training because they are involved in
               dealing with such emergencies. Artisan-specific safety
               training is associated with their trade, for example.
               welding or boilermaking. Annual knowledge assessments of
               persons that were trained are also conducted. This is a
               prerequisite before entry permits are re-issued.


               In respect of possible legislative changes, Sasol is
               satisfied with the quality of legislation although some
               unintended consequences have been identified.


               Regarding working relations with the Department of Labour,
               especially in relation to inspections, all DOL personnel
               with a valid ID (DOL card) have access to the plant even
               without a Sasol permit. Personnel are, however, required to
               report to an identified Sasol Synfuels Safety Officer in the
               interest of the person’s safety.  Sasol has recently
               accommodated a large number of trainee inspectors during
               shutdowns, who work with the DOL to grow competence in this
               regard.


               Sasol has never obstructed the DOL in the execution of its
               duties. Many inspections have taken place on many fronts,
               such as employment equity inspections, skills plan
               verifications, and health and safety inspections. During the
               recent incidents the DOL inspectorate was immediately
               contacted and full co-operation was given.
               In respect of the length of the counseling process,
               employees can access seven counseling sessions per problem.
               Each session can range from 45 minutes to one-and-a-half
               hours, and is scheduled at the employee’s convenience.


               Employment Assistance Programme (EAP) counseling services
               occur both telephonically and face-to-face. An external
               service provider is used to ensure confidentiality.
               Telephonic counseling is available 24 hours a day. Every
               Sasol employee and their households have access to the
               services free of charge. Counseling services are
               multilingual and are provided by professional counselors.
               The service can be accessed privately off site, and no
               details of the counseling service are revealed to Sasol.



               Following a workplace-critical incident the EAP service
               provider is on site within 2 hours. The type of counseling
               given to primary and secondary victims of a critical
               incident takes the form of group or individual sessions.
               These sessions are 2 hours long depending on the size of the
               group.

               Thereafter structured debriefing sessions are set up with
               individuals, teams, and couples or families as requested. If
               ongoing counseling is needed,  employees can approach the
               EAP service provider. Survivors of trauma are carefully
               monitored and referred for counseling if needed.


               There is no formalised career guidance system under Sasols
               corporate governance for artisans and technical staff. Sasol
               provides excellent training courses for these employees to
               reach supervisory and management levels. An example of such
               courses is the National Qualifications Framework (NQF)
               accredited Frontline Supervisors Course. Sasol’s innovative
               Accelerated Leadership Development Programme for Black
               employees prepares and guides young Black leadership talent
               over a period of two years to reach senior management
               levels. A number of current Black senior promotions have
               emerged from this programme.


               All representatives are trained immediately after their
               appointment. They conduct dedicated monthly inspections, and
               participate in incident investigations. They also attend
               statutory safety meetings involved in task risk assessments
               and participate in third party audits such as NOSA.


               Sasol does not consider executive safety representative
               duties as time lost, but rather as time well spent in the
               best interest of employees and the employer.


             Examples are as follows:


           (1)   Two hours per month for monthly inspections and continuous
               observation during time at work.
           (2)   NOSA audit - a full day is spent with auditors, and
               representatives are usually released from their normal
               duties.
           (3)   Accompany the DOL during visits for approximately one
               hour.
           (4)   Participation in incident investigations – two to four
               hours per incident.
           (5)   Task Risk Assessments - approximately two hours per month.
           (6)   Attendance of statutory safety meetings - approximately
               two hours per quarter.
               In respect of the impact of accidents on the morale of
               employees, investigations into the accidents are being
               carried out. These investigations will determine the
               underlying cause of the accidents. However, as it is natural
               in any environment wherein workers have experienced a trauma
               and loss of colleagues, there is an impact on the morale of
               the employees. Despite being concerned, employees at these
               sites have rallied to assist their workmates and families.
               There is a sense of caring and responsibility towards each
               other. The EAP service provider and management are closely
               involved in monitoring the situation and providing
               counseling and support where needed or requested.


               Prior to starting work, contractors undergo training on
               relevant safety rules. During shutdowns, safety watchers are
               appointed and receive specialised safety training to monitor
               safety and behaviour on site during the execution of work.
               Persons not complying with safety rules are reprimanded and
               on repetitive non-compliance are removed from site.
               Natref does not operate its own trucking services.
               Contractor truck drivers are trained and tested on the
               safety and loading procedures of the site. The training and
               testing is repeated every 12 months. It is not possible to
               control the fatigue of drivers since it is difficult to
               control their working hours.  This matter will be accounted
               for by the transport industry.
               No contractors are allowed on site without proof of having
               undergone the relevant safety training. A site permit will
               only be issued once proof of safety training has been
               proven. All contractors are audited for registration under
               the Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act
               and other labour legislation with the Compensation
               Commissioner.


               Sasol endeavors to respond to requests for information as
               soon as possible. Delays may, however, occur where these
               requests are lengthy and require a large amount of
               information from different departments within the
               organisation. A reasonable amount of time is, therefore,
               required to collate this information.


               On the concern around the graph analysis on significant
               fires, explosions and releases, Sasol is not satisfied with
               this performance and is working hard at improvement.
               Internationally, the accepted way to address the issue of
               fires, explosions and releases, is through safety
               management. Sasol has started to introduce a system that has
               14 elements and focuses on the technical systems and aspects
               of the plant safety.


               Over the past five years Sasol has been tracking significant
               fires, explosions and releases. However, the graphical
               presentation reflects an improvement of 41 during the
               2000/01 financial year and 26 in 2003/04. As a result of
               these relatively small numbers, statistically one cannot
               expect a completely smooth pattern.
               In some Sasol factories the lifespan of machinery is over 50
               years. A way of sustaining the integrity as well as the
               safety of the plants is by conducting shutdowns, which is
               the period during which equipment is inspected. If equipment
               falls outside the agreed industry standards, the equipment
               is replaced. For example, three reactors that were over 30
               years of age and found to be inadequate, were replaced.   In
               essence, a plant is renewed through the renewal maintenance
               programmes.
               One method of ascertaining the lifespan of the equipment is
               by measuring the thickness of the pipes through ultrasonic
               wall thickness testing. This is an ongoing maintenance
               programme wherein the whole site is subdivided into a map,
               and the inspectors do the ultrasonic testing on a daily
               basis. The results are captured in a database where they can
               be used for predictions.


               Over the past four years, the company had found that
               although many people complied with all the requirements,
               some do not. About four years ago, the company realised that
               there was a need to train people on what the plants
               required. Over 250 people have been trained in fitting and
               turning, boilermaking, welding, electrical instrumentation,
               electrical analysing and diesel mechanics. After training,
               they are tested at Sasol training centres to ensure that
               they meet the requirements and are released back into the
               market. Apart from the training provided to people who are
               trained for the company, Sasol is involved in community
               upliftment projects. About 150 people from communities were
               trained as artisans. The company also ensured that the
               latter was absorbed by contractors. Sasol has also entered
               into an agreement with CHIETA for training shutdown workers.
               However, contractors that are appointed by Sasol do not get
               involved in the training of workers.


               Regarding the incident of 1 September 2004 where the
               presiding officer at the training unit wanted to allow the
               investigating officer from the South African Police Service
               (SAPS) to question the witness at a formal enquiry, but the
               legal representative of Sasol made an appeal to the Chief
               Inspector of the DOL relating to interpretation of the
               Occupational Health and Safety Act. It centred on the fact
               that the employees were entitled to a right to silence in
               terms of the constitution.


        b. Presentation by DOL


           The DOL reported on the four recent incidents that occurred at
             Sasol.


           Deliberations


               The Committee expressed concern at the delays in the
               investigation of incidents and delays in the arrival of DOL
               inspectors during the incident at Natref. From the side of
               the DOL, delays often result from the fact that some of the
               investigations were technical in nature, and required
               technical experts. The Committee is concerned at whether
               there is a possibility of short-circuiting the process.


               The Committee sought clarity on the frequency of inspections
               in the gas industry, and whether the inspectors have enough
               capacity to conduct inspections in that industry, the DOL
               conducted regular inspections at workplaces. By the end of
               2004, over 100 000 inspections were conducted around the
               country, and high-risk areas were identified. By the end of
               2004, about 185 incidents were reported.


               In relation to the capacity and pro-active nature of
               inspectors, a number of unannounced inspections were
               conducted. The challenge is the retention of scarce skills,
               as well as developing confidence of inspectors to deal with
               intimidating industries like Sasol with its legal capacity.


               With the Occupational Health and Safety Act the DOL
               monitored compliance by issuing improvement, contravention
               and prohibition notices. From April 2004 to December 2004
               almost 800 prohibition notices were issued.


               In relation to the lifespan of equipment, most equipment at
               Sasol is manufactured from high quality steel. Records on
               maintenance must be kept.


               On delays in getting autopsy reports, the DOL has no control
               over post-mortem reports. The preliminary report on the
               Sasol incident that occurred in September 2004 would be
               ready by the end of March 2005. The DOL is currently in the
               process of finalising the skills requirements and
               identifying high-risk sectors.


        D. Resolutions


            1) The DOL must provide the Committee with the final reports on
               inspections conducted at Sasol Secunda and Natref plants.
            2) The Committee should visit the Sasol chemical plant in
               Secunda within the current year.
            3) The DOL should provide the Committee with a database of
               subcontractors, as well as records of all inspections
               conducted at Sasol plants.
            4) The Committee, in consultation with other stakeholders,
               should consider the DuPont report and its recommendations
-----------------------
[1] The Department was allocated a capital budget of R5 790.  However, the
Department had already spent
   R 19852 at the end of the first quarter.
[2] The Department has further indicated that the court case has been
active for a long time.  The community won the first case, which was then
appealed by the Department.  The court ruled in the Department’s favour
following the appeal, but the community has appealed that judgment again.


