---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 08 November 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-11-08
---

TUESDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2005
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:03.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I am informed that the Whippery
has agreed that there will be no notices of motion or motions without
notice today. We shall now proceed to the Questions as printed on the Order
Paper.

I wish to also make the following announcement. The Minister of Housing has
requested that the questions put to her be taken later on, as she is still
held up. I have agreed to that and so we will end with the questions
directed to the Minister of Housing.

I will now go to Question 1. Just before I call upon the Minister, I would
like to inform you, as you would understand that Mr Sinclair is no longer a
member of this House, I have decided that this question be responded to for
the sake of the public and members as well. I will then call upon the
Minister of Defence to deal with Question 1. Minister, you can feel free to
address it from where you are seated or come over here. I think it is also
fine to speak where you are, if you are okay with that.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY:

New Questions:

               Cost, manufacture and budget of SANDF uniforms

1.    Mr K A Sinclair asked the Minister of Defence:

     Whether the uniforms worn by members of the SA National Defence Force
     are manufactured in South Africa; if not, (a) in which countries are
     the uniforms manufactured and (b) what are the financial costs related
     to this; if so, what is the annual budget for these uniforms?
                       C268E

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Perhaps I should just address the House from here,
Chair.

The answer to this question is that the uniforms of the members of the SA
National Defence Force are manufactured in South Africa.

In regard to the question on the budget for the 2004-05 financial year, it
is, as follows: SA Army – R64 293 615,06; SA Air Force – R13 998 42,27; and
for the SA Military Health Service - R6 296 184,15. Really, the question
was simply asking for that information. I table this information and I am
not sure whether there are follow-up questions.

Ms L MOTLAHEALA: I need to ask the hon Minister this question: Are we not
pro-South African when manufacturing things? Regarding the budget, would it
not be profitable for South Africans if the uniforms were manufactured in
South Africa?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Perhaps I wasn’t very audible, I did start off by
saying that the uniforms of the SA National Defence Force are manufactured
in South Africa.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I would like to know from the hon Minister
whether the manufacturers of these uniforms are BEE companies?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: In keeping with the transformation policy of
government, in all areas of the National Defence Force, whether it’s the
manufacture of weapons, acquisition of uniforms and so on, we have opened
up space to try and keep up with the transformation dictates of policy. I
do not have the breakdown but that is information I can make available if
it is required.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I am not going to ask a follow-
up question but I want to propose, if it will be in order with your good
self, that while the Minister is on the podium he should be allowed to
respond to the other questions relating to his department. I think that
will also save time in terms of shuffling.

Also, we should pardon the new member. I think we still owe her some
orientation and we should treat her with understanding. The questions may
have been given to her, and she will still insist on asking those questions
even if they are not applicable.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Chief Whip, the questions are listed here
on the Question Paper and I didn’t get a request from the Minister
indicating that he is really in a hurry. I think we should take them as
they are listed on the Question Paper. What I can allow is for the Minister
to remain there because the next question comes to him again.

Regarding Question 2, the written reply will be distributed to the members
and that is a request from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry.


          Supply of Calvinia’s domestic water from the Doring River


2.    Mr K A Sinclair asked the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:

    Whether her department is considering supplying Calvinia with water  for
    domestic purposes from the Doring River; if not, why not;  if  so,  what
    are the relevant details?                      C269E

Reply:

The problematic situation with water resources at Calvinia has received
attention from the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry over a number
of years.  The most recent assistance was the
R8,0 million my department secured for Calvinia from the 2004/05 Drought
Relief Programme of National Government.

This funding is being utilised to extend the current borehole field to
ensure a more sustainable water supply to Calvinia during periods of
drought.  This extension of access to nearby groundwater had been
recommended by geo-hydrologists from my department as being at this stage
the most feasible augmentation of the drought-related water shortages
experienced in Calvinia.

It is also in line with departmental policy that the nearest water
resources be utilised fully before moving further away to alternative
resources, such as the Doring River in this instance.

The Calvinia community is a “water wise” community and can be commended on
the ingenious methods they are already implementing in managing their
scarce water resources.  Other water-scarce areas can learn from the way in
which surface water and groundwater are being utilised as a joint resource
by Calvinia.

My reply to this question must therefore be seen against this background
and perspective. Water in the Doring River can be made available to
Calvinia as part of the basic human needs.  The fact that the Doring River
is about 60 km away from Calvinia, at its nearest point, will necessitate a
full feasibility study to look at all the impacts, such as on the
environment, operational demands and affordability, amongst others.  The
availability of the water is a given, but a decision on utilising it at
this stage by pumping it to Calvinia will be guided by such a feasibility
study. Previous preliminary studies indicated that it would be a very
expensive option.

It is recommended that the Hantam Municipality, jointly with the Namaqua
District Municipality, use their Water Services Development Plan (WSDP) and
Integrated Development Plan (IDP) processes to try and access funds via the
Special Municipal Infrastructure Fund (SMIF) programme of the Municipal
Infrastructure Grant (MIG) for the purposes of such a study.

My department can also assist Calvinia through the implementation of a
Water Conservation and Water Demand Management Strategy in the
municipality.  Through a pilot project at Emthanjeni (De Aar), a lot of
lessons had been learned and major water savings were achieved in the area.
 Although recognising that Calvinia is already doing a lot regarding water
conservation, there is always a possibility that more savings can be
accomplished, thus delaying future water infrastructure development. The
Department’s Regional Office in Kimberley will contact the Hantam
Municipality with regard to actions on this.

The hon member’s concern with regard to the water situation at Calvinia is
appreciated and I can assure the member that my department will fulfil its
role in assuring the best long-term solution of the water-resources issue
at Calvinia.

   Mechanisms to address grievances of SANDF members in African countries

3.    Mr A J L Moseki asked the Minister of Defence:

    Whether his department has put any mechanisms in place immediately to
    address grievances of the members of the SA National Defence Force
    deployed in African countries; if not, why not; if so, what mechanisms?
                                  C283E

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, all members of the SA National
Defence Force, including members employed in any environment outside the
territory of the Republic of South Africa, enjoy the same access to the
existing grievance and/or complaints procedure for members in uniform. Even
though a member may be employed as part of the United Nations or African
Union forces, those members are still to follow their respective lines of
command within the specific South African contingent responsible for the
mission area within which that member is employed.

The specific South African contingent, and not the UN or AU, is responsible
for addressing a member’s grievance. There are provisions for addressing
three kinds of grievances. Firstly, there is what we call collective
grievances. This category of grievance is experienced collectively by a
number of members often on a specific level of command, for example, among
junior non-commissioned officers. This type of grievance normally has an
influence on the effectiveness of a unit and therefore impacts on its
morale. These grievances can and should be raised at various forum levels
ranging from the level of unit officer commanding, the formation level, the
service division or agency level up to the Chief of the SA National Defence
Force.

The timeframe for feedback on issues forwarded by the relevant forum ranges
between seven days, at the shortest, and 42 working days, which is the
longest period members would have to wait to get a reply. The explanation
is, as follows: Where a grievance can be solved on the same level, we ought
to be able to respond to it within seven days. If a grievance is beyond the
unit commander where they are stationed, it may have to go to the next
level or even two levels up. That, of course, will increase the number of
days. But at the longest, in 42 working days we should be able to produce a
satisfactory reply to any complaint.

There is then, of course, a second category of complaints and these are
work-related grievances. This category of grievances refers to work-
related, non-personal frustrations experienced by individuals in the work
environment on a daily basis. This type of grievance cannot be solved by
the forum system and must be individually addressed within the line-of-
command structure. Thus it gets referred to the immediate supervisor, then
the unit officer commanding, the formation level, the service level, the
division level or the agency level, and thereafter it goes to the chief.
The aim is initially to resolve a grievance at the lowest possible level,
but if it seems to be impossible, to address the matter at the next level
within the line of command. Every level within the line of command must
respond satisfactorily to grievances forwarded to that level within a
timeframe ranging between seven and 14 days, depending on the level. An
important part of this system is to ensure that the aggrieved member is
informed in writing of every outcome at a certain level or decision and to
forward the matter to the next higher level in the line of command.
Then there is a third level of grievances, which is personal grievances.
The “redress of wrongs” procedure is a unique remedy in terms of the
military disciplinary code and is applicable to any member of the SANDF who
feels aggrieved by the conduct of another person also subject to the
military disciplinary code. This is primarily a legal process instituted to
solve disputes among soldiers in their specialised environment.

As with work-related grievances, again, the aim is initially to resolve the
grievance at the lowest possible level, but if it seems to be impossible,
to then address the matter at the next level within the line of command. If
the Chief of the SA National Defence Force is unable to redress the wrong
or satisfy the complainant, the complaint can be forwarded to the President
of the Republic, as a final resort.

Actually, I have to say that we are in the process of amending this
because, clearly, it was an error on the part of the legislation, in our
view, to take daily matters of management, bypass the Minister and place
them on the table of the President of the Republic, who has so many
responsibilities. So the process of amending that particular section is on
the way. On this point, specifically, we are in the process of review since
we are not convinced that the President needs to be burdened with matters
such as this.

Each level within the chain of command is governed by a timeframe of 10
working days, within which a satisfactory resolution must be provided. As
with work-related grievances, the aggrieved member must be informed in
writing of every outcome at a certain level or decision to forward the
matter to the next level in the chain of command.

The grievance mechanism has been under scrutiny for some time and we have
effected a number of changes which, whilst not altering the concept of a
special disciplinary code for members of the SA National Defence Force, are
nevertheless fair and impartial – since we are aware that there is little
value to a justice system if it is perceived to be unfair.

We will continue making adjustments to the system until we are certain that
the SA National Defence Force will continue to be structured and managed as
a disciplined military force, whilst equally balancing individual members’
constitutional rights to fair labour practices. An effective line of
command, including the ability to address individual grievances, is vital
in maintaining a disciplined SA National Defence Force capable of assisting
in South Africa’s resolve to pursue peace and stability, and, of course, to
provide the security of our nation. That is my reply to the second part of
the question.

Mr A J L MOSEKI: Chair, Minister, I would just like to say thank you very
much for the response. Indeed, recently, we visited the DRC and interacted
with the forces that are deployed in that country. We have discovered that
the grievances we picked up in the past are being attended to. I therefore
thank you very much, Minister, for doing a good job.

             Remission of sentences and negligence of officials

4.    Mr A T Manyosi asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

    Whether any inmates received remission of  their  sentences  which  they
    were not entitled to; if so, (a) how did it happen and (b)  how  is  his
    department going to correct the situation;
    Whether any officials will be held accountable for  negligence  in  this
    regard; if  not,  why  not,  if  so,  what  are  the  relevant  details?
                                              C284E

Reply:

1.    According to information at my disposal, only  one  (1)  offender  was
      released erroneously following the  incorrect  allocation  of  special
      remission of sentence.

(a)   The offender, who was serving an effective sentence of six  (6)  years
      imprisonment for multiple offences, including possession of a  firearm
      and ammunition, qualified for a reduction of only six  (6)  months  of
      his sentence but  was  released  on  parole  following  the  incorrect
      allocation of an  additional  14  months  special  remission  (he  was
      therefore accredited with 20 months instead of 6 months).

(b)   Section 39 (6)(a) of the Correctional Services Act, 1998 (Act  No  111
      of 1998) provides for the issuing of a warrant for the re-arrest of an
      offender who was erroneously  released.  In  this  specific  case  the
      parole period of the relevant offender  was  prolonged  with  fourteen
      (14) months in order to correct the mistake.

2.    The  officials  involved  were  disciplined  by  means  of  a  written
      warning, following an  investigation  to  establish,  amongst  others,
      factors which led to the erroneous release, negligence  of  officials,
      degree of failure to adhere to directives, recommendations  pertaining
      to  steps  to  be  taken  against  officials  implicated  during   the
      investigation, preventive measures to be taken  and  steps  to  ensure
      that procedures are adhered to.

      Skills development and its efficacy in the Department of Defence

5.    Mr A J L Moseki asked the Minister of Defence:

    Whether there is any skills-development programme in his department; if
    not, when will the department start with such a programme; if so, how
    effective is this programme?              C285E
The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, the response to this question is:
Yes, the Department of Defence does have a skills-development programme.
The DoD’s human-resource programme is the flagship programme for addressing
the high-level management concept to configure the DoD’s human-resource
composition in the most effective, efficient and economical way.

The execution of human resource 2010 has been supported by the promulgation
of the Department of Defence management strategy. This strategy guides the
DoD with respect to human-resource governance and structuring, human-
resource management capacity generation, human-resource service delivery,
human-resource force preparation and human-resource operational conduct, as
well as human-resource management system renewal and continuous
improvement.

In addition, the military skills-development system was initiated in 2003
with an intake of 981 members into the SA National Defence Force. The
intakes for 2004 and 2005 grew to 1 834 and 6 899 members respectively. I
may just add that we are hoping that at the peak of this we should be able
to do an intake of 10 000 a year and inject into society approximately the
same number of 10 000 trained men and women who go back to society with
skills that are usable in civilian life.

This growth is indicative of the success of the military skills-development
system, which is focused on the rejuvenation of the SA National Defence
Force and development of a professional officer cadre. The military skills
development system is part of the DoD’s human-resource strategy 2010, which
has as one of its objectives to have a skilled workforce.

The military skills-development programme is a recruitment drive aimed at
matriculants, who, upon admission, will enter the National Defence Force
and undergo basic military training for a period of two years, after which
they may either exit the National Defence Force to reintegrate back into
society or they can remain within the National Defence Force if they meet
the SANDF requirements and if they choose to be professional military
persons.

Mr A J L MOSEKI: Chair, could the Minister just allude to the role of the
Seta? Is the Seta, in those sectors, playing the role that it is expected
to play?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, there is no specific role for the
Seta. Nevertheless we have, since last year, initiated discussions with the
Seta, so that part of the resources that are budgeted for by Cabinet for
the training of young people can also be employed in this area, because we
have found that in certain areas you find that there are no available
facilities for the training to happen. So, we make ourselves available and
collaborate with Labour so that, whilst through the Seta they finance the
training, this also presents us with an opportunity to expose ourselves by
supplying facilities, but also being able to identify some of those young
men and women whom we may want to persuade to join the National Defence
Force. So, there is this collaboration that is happening.

I might just add that we are also in discussion in this regard with the
Department of Education to see how we can expand this kind collaboration so
that there is general training of young people. What we are doing in the
National Defence Force complements what is being done in Education and
Labour, and what is being done there complements what we are doing in the
area of national defence. Thank you, Sir.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I want to thank the Minister for the
response. Hon Minister, does this imply that those force members who, in
our opinion, have reached a ceiling, and who belong to the old guard,
cannot be reskilled or given training of some kind?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, I appreciate that question because,
indeed, it’s an important one. No, it does not mean this. We have men and
women, particularly those that came from the non-statutory forces, who,
because of various reasons, including age, in particular, are now at the
point of exiting. It is our responsibility to support their training and
skilling so that they are able to integrate into society. But it has become
increasingly clear to us that the most effective and beneficial point to
focus on, as much as possible, is the entry point.

The young people who are finishing matric have many years of life ahead of
them. We can train them and they can benefit the National Defence Force.
Even if they go back to civilian society, they go with skills and have a
greater capacity to contribute in terms of general upliftment and
development in the country. This seems to us a crucial area to focus on.

Another point is that the non-statutory forces were a finite number,
whereas the numbers of young people that need to get the opportunity of
training are many and are continuously growing.

So, if this strategy is focusing on that, it is because there is more
benefit for the country to invest in the training of its younger people
because of the numbers that are involved and the years that the country can
benefit from the training that you will have to put into those young
people. But we remain quite obliged to look after the old guard. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Minister. Before we proceed to the
next question, I would just like to remind the House that the time for
reply per question is five minutes, and that the time for responding to
supplementary questions is four minutes. We allow only four supplementary
questions per question, and members who want to ask supplementary questions
have two minutes to do that.

        Progress in acceleration of transformation in justice system

 6.  Mr  S  Shiceka  asked  the  Minister  for  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development:

    Whether her  department  has  made  any  progress  in  accelerating  the
    transformation of the justice system; if not, why not; if so,  what  are
    the relevant details?                                      C286E


The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, the
question is whether the department has made any progress in accelerating
the transformation of the justice system. The response is: Yes, but
obviously to varying degrees.

The concept of transformation is an area of fierce contestation in our
country, politically and otherwise. Transformation means different things
to different people. If you were to ask 10 people what their views were
regarding transformation, you would receive 10 different responses. So, it
is necessary for the department to briefly say what is meant by
transformation.

Transformation is the legal and political mechanism whereby this country is
changing or transforming itself from an undemocratic, white dictatorship to
a modern democracy. Therefore, when we talk about transformation, we mean
the change or transformation of the institution, the values that underpin
it, the procedures and the personnel of the justice system.

In other words, we mean the transformation of all the aspects of the
justice system, from what we had under the apartheid regime to what one
would expect in a modern democracy.

In this context, the changing of the composition of the judiciary and the
magistracy to reflect the demographics of our country is but one aspect of
transformation, albeit a very important aspect. This is what is called
“diversity transformation”. But what one should not lose sight of is the
institutional, procedural and values transformation of the system as well.
The institutional memory of the justice system is one that mainly fits an
apartheid paradigm and it should change to an institutional memory which
reflects such modern democracy.

Against this background, there are a number of initiatives that are being
taken by the department to accelerate the transformation process. After
extensive consultations and dialogue with the judiciary and other legal
experts, the department has managed to process two Bills emanating from the
Portfolio Committee on Justice, which are crucial to the transformation of
the courts, namely the Constitution 14th Amendment Bill and the Superior
Courts Bill.

The Bills are now before Cabinet and will be returned to Parliament for
further processing soon. These Bills will signify the demise of the last
remnants of the old judicial system, which was based on the homeland and
self-governing states, and establish in its place a judicial system that is
consistent with the Constitution and in which all people of South Africa
are treated equally.

Discussions on the three Bills dealing with the complaints-handling
mechanisms for judicial officers are at an advanced stage and the
legislation emanating from Parliament will soon be returned to Parliament
for further processing.

The drafting of the Legal Services Charter, which seeks to enhance access
to the legal practice and institutions within the sector for previously
disadvantaged persons, and the initiation of a special programme to fast-
track the appointment of women to judicial positions at the High Courts,
are some of the immediate programmes which aim to accelerate diversity
transformation of the sector. I thank you.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chair, Deputy Minister, can you say that the judiciary, as we
speak, is upholding the values and the norms of a democratic state in terms
of ensuring that all are equal before the law; so that people who have
committed the same offences get the same sentences when sentences are meted
out? What happened in the past was that people were sentenced differently,
based on race and colour. Can you say that that has changed? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, that
is a very complex and difficult question, and if I want to be popular
tomorrow in the newspaper with the vast majority of South African citizens,
I’ll know how to answer this question. [Laughter.] But I’m going to be much
more diplomatic.

I think that we have to realise that there is a separation of powers.
Judicial officers form a separate branch of government and their specific
task is to interpret legislation and to give judgments.

Now the big problem, and this is what we forget, is that each human being,
including judges, who are just ordinary people like you and me - although
they have particular training in being a lawyer and are senior at that -
carry all the baggage that any other person carries with him or her; all
that baggage that Johnny De Lange carries with him: Where he comes from,
where he’s been and where he’s going. [Laughter.] It is exactly the same
with the judiciary.
So, in other words, when you are appearing before a judge or a magistrate,
they obviously look at you, although they are trained lawyers, they look at
you through a certain prism, through a certain looking glass. And they
obviously assess you on the basis of the way they view the world. Now the
problem is that they may very well be very genuine in their intentions.
They may very well feel that they are not being particularly biased or that
they are being neutral about what they are doing, but clearly they are not.
No human being can be like that. So to that extent there is always
difficulty with this issue, namely whether I will feel that I would have
given the same judgment and the same sentence as another person. That will
always differ.

The only way to deal with this is to do what we are trying to do now,
namely to really keep training and training. That way people will become
more and more professional in what they do. Obviously, the higher you move
up the system, hopefully, the more professional you will get. The response
of those higher up in the system to a given set of facts should be more
“neutral”.

But that again is not something that one can say, categorically, is so. All
I can say is that we have to do what we say, which is to transform that
judicial system to make sure that the value base is different, that
diversity is reflected in that and out of that to then speed up our
judicial training processes to bring people to certain levels of
professionalism. I mean every one and not one particular group. That is my
polite and diplomatic answer to it.

But the reality is that the less professional a person is, the more likely
that the judgment will be coloured by factors other than legal factors. So
if you are racist, for example, deep in your heart, and you don’t tell
every one about it, then clearly in your judgments that will come out and
you will find ways of couching things in legal terms, yet you will be
coming up with different responses than a normal person or the average
person would have come up with.

And I think that the only thing that we can do is to keep on teaching and
giving education and trying to lift the levels of professionalism to try
and counterbalance these things that are still happening in our country to
this very day.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I want to thank the Deputy Minister for
the progressive response. Arising from the Minister’s response, what can be
done to remove the myth perpetuated by some unpatriotic South Africans who
think that transformation means to remove a white skin and replace it with
a black skin? Thank you, Chair.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, that
has never been the policy of government. If you go and look at the various
pieces of legislation we passed, particularly around equity, then clearly
that does not spell out the principles as we understand them. And in fact,
if one were to do that as crudely as you are saying, namely by replacing
people, it will definitely be unconstitutional.

But the problem clearly is that we do have an enormous problem and that is
that on the diversity side, clearly our structures do not reflect what is
in this country. But the one thing that we must be careful about, and
government has been very careful to emphasise this all the time, is that
merely replacing a white person with a black person does not necessarily
fulfil what we would want it to fulfil. It fulfils the diversity criteria,
but the issue of values is also very important.

When we appoint black lawyers to the judiciary, clearly what is very
important, over and above the fact of their demographics, which is
important, and the diversity issues, are the values that they stand for. In
fact, our struggle was not to go and replace people on the bench that would
have values that are completely out of sync with our Constitution. So, the
people that we would want to appoint should also have such value systems so
that what they would want to promote on the bench is what is in our
Constitution.

In a nutshell, what we are saying is that diversity transformation has two
aspects to it: It has the diversity aspect, whether it is black people or
women or the disabled whom we are trying to promote; and on the other hand,
in the judiciary, the values that are underpinned in the Constitution. We
want those people, whether they are black, white, pink or purple, in order
to promote those values.

And it is in promoting those values that there is still a place for whites
in this country to fulfil a role in the judiciary. In other words, a white
person can be a transformation candidate if they very strongly promote
those things that stand in the Constitution. And I think that that is the
balance, although it’s a very difficult balance to find. But it is a
balance that is very vital for us to maintain.


             Monitoring of judicial officers’ time on the Bench


 7.  Mr  S  Shiceka  asked  the  Minister  for  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development:

    Whether her department will monitor the time spent by judicial  officers
    on the bench; if not, why not; if so, what  are  the  relevant  details?
                                        C287E



The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, whether the department will monitor the time spent by judicial
officers on the bench, again one has to be careful here.

The response is that the department has established a mechanism through the
Court Nerve Centre to measure the performance of the courts and the
measures we take into account is for the different benchmarks which are
necessary to assess court productivity, such as time spend in courts, case
cycle times and the rate at which cases are disposed of, and the quality of
services and judgments delivered by the courts.

The department is also creating an administrative capacity in the offices
of the Chief Justice and the Judges Presidents to support the process of
monitoring performance of courts to ensure that judicial resources are used
optimally.

A legislative framework is also being put in place to allow the Chief
Justice and the heads of courts to set norms and standards for the
effective functioning of the courts.

Mr S SHICEKA: Deputy Minister, is there any plan or thinking that looks at
what is practice in this country; that people who are paid out of the
taxpayers’ money must be measured on their performance as individuals,
meaning that at some point in this country we will be able to say that the
judicial officers are measured in terms of their performance and we will
enter into a performance contract with them?

In this way we would be able to ensure that there is productivity. You
don’t just look only at the institution, but you also look at individuals
who are actually part of that institution, because you find that in some
areas the way things happen, judicial officers are not performing in the
way that would be expected by this country.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, this is a very complex issue. Clearly, there is the necessity
for us to make sure that the courts function properly and if they function
properly, then clearly they have to be effective and efficient.

The last figures I saw were not exactly what one would want to see; I think
High Courts were sitting for about three and a half hours a day on average
in criminal matters. Regional courts and districts courts were slightly
higher.

So, if you take that most of us work an eight-hour day, then clearly the
reflection of those kinds of statistics is not very good. Although I must
say that over the years, that time has been improving and that is something
we have to look at.

But as we try to point out on the question, there are a whole lot of things
we have to look at. One of them is the amount of time spent. There are also
things like cycle time. How long does it take a case actually to get to
court and actually be finished? In the High Court at the moment, I think,
for a criminal matter, you will wait for something like at least 18 months
to two years for the case to get to court and then it only starts.

So, the issue is not just time spent in court on that particular case, but
it is also cycle times and so on. There is a whole host of factors that we
have to look at, and not just time in court, to deal with this.

The other difficulty, of course, particularly with the High Courts and the
district courts, is that some of their work is criminal, but there is also
a whole lot of civil work. In this country, could you believe it, we still
do not have proper statistics on civil work. So, it is difficult to assess.
So, that is why we have created this Court Nerve Centre and we are busy
expanding its capacity to get full figures for us, not only on criminal
work and on all these issues I am raising but also on civil work.

The issue of performance contracts is very sensitive. If you mention that
in the area of judicial officers, you will really have an uproar, as there
was one or two years ago. However, I think it is something we need to
debate because, as I was reading recently, I understand that in Australia
they have now introduced performance contracts.

So, it depends on how we do it and how we take up this debate. But if you
were just to mention it now, particularly in the environment we have, you
would definitely get some hysterics about it. There can be no doubt.

But I think what we have to emphasise is the fact that the courts can’t
just be seen as a hands-off situation anymore. There has to be a level at
which we expect them to perform. What our duty is, is to provide them with
the resources and all the means to do their job and then we should expect
that they should be a certain result, whatever that result is, we agree
amongst ourselves, without spelling it out now.

So I think that there is a long way for us to go but the situation is
improving.

                       Retraining of judicial officers

 8. Kgoshi L M Mokoena asked the Minister  for  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development:

    Whether there is a need for the retraining of judicial officers; if  so,
    how will this process be carried out?                      C288E


The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, I am really earning my salary today. Whether there is a need
for the retraining of judicial officers – now, the word is “retraining”, so
again there is a bit of sensitivity here - judicial education is crucial
for the transformation of the judiciary and it is a tool through which a
pool of particularly adequate black and female practitioners can be
prepared for judicial appointments to rectify the historical deficiencies
we have.

Processes are under way to institutionalise training for judges and
magistrates. While magistrates continue to obtain training of some sort,
though not adequate, historically it is known that judges were opposed to
any training intervention because they argued that since judges were drawn
from the senior counsel pool, it was not necessary for them to go for any
further training.

The attitude has changed, particularly after the appointment of the first
black Chief Justice, the late Justice Mahomed, when he assumed leadership
of the judicial roll. There is now a general acceptance by judges that
continued training is necessary, especially in respect of scarce skills,
for example in commercial law, law of competition, patent law and so on.

With the advent of the human-rights culture, there is a greater need to
have social-context training for all judicial officers to understand the
social and cultural context of the people they serve and I dare say that I
think there is a great level of acceptance of that concept.

The exact mechanisms of the institutionalising of judicial education for
judges and magistrates are being finalised and will be announced in due
course. In the meantime Justice College is being revamped to provide legal
and management training to legal professionals and managers within the
broader justice family.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I want to thank the Minister for this
response. There are different opinions by judicial officers as to who must
conduct this training. Would the Minister care to comment on that, please?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, I think there is no dispute about that. I don’t think
government has ever said that we must do the judicial training of judges.
It is best practice all over the world that judges really do train
themselves.

This is a question of us interacting and making sure that those programmes
are being performed and that they take place in the different areas. But as
to who does the training, what is in the curriculum and so on, that to a
large extent we have accepted, as it is the best practise elsewhere, that
it should be the preserve of the judges.
Of course, in terms of the administration thereof, and the provision of
facilities and so on and so on, that will remain a departmental function.
But the substance of the training and what people are trained in, and by
whom they are trained; definitely there is no dispute about that. For
example, you will never see Johnny De Lange going and being the lecturer to
train judges on what they should know and not know. That would not happen.
That is not our policy.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, in response to the Deputy Minister’s question,
if the training of judicial officers is to be monitored, who determines
that this judicial officer must now go or undergo training, or it is them
requesting that they should go for training? Otherwise, if there is no
mechanism, then there will be those who would actually dodge this and not
go for the training.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, it is a good question. There are two models. In some countries
of the world it is compulsory for you to receive judicial training. At this
stage in our discussions and the debates we had, the feeling is that we
should keep it voluntary.

So, maybe what we should be doing is moving in that direction, but if it
doesn’t work and if it’s clear that some judicial officers feel that they
should not receive training, particularly social-context training, I feel
that it should be compulsory. But I think what we would probably do is move
in a direction where there is a level of latitude, that people are given a
chance to make those choices. If that clearly doesn’t work, we will have to
consider a model that is very widely known in the rest of the world, and
that is compulsory legal education. But at this stage, as far as I know, we
are still going with the voluntary model.

Mr Z C NTULI: Thank you, Chairperson. Deputy Minister, I want to find out
whether there is any training for the traditional leaders to man the
traditional courts.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, that is another difficult question and I have to handle it
sensitively. [Laughter.] Now, as far as I know, I am not sure if there is
formalised training at this stage, but I do know that there are two pieces
of legislation for consideration to look further at this matter and then,
as I said, Justice College is being revamped and everything we do with that
college is to formalise in the whole justice sector that all training takes
place there.

I definitely will make sure that this issue is at least considered at that
stage. But I am not aware of any formal training that takes place at this
stage.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, I promise the Deputy Minister that this is the
last question that he will have this afternoon. The question that I want to
raise, Deputy Minister, is on the level of interface between government and
the judicial officers in terms of the imperatives of the country to say
that these are the needs that we think the country has in terms of its
vision and its values so that the training then, in terms of the content,
is within that context which the state or the government in particular
understands.

What would be the level of interface because the public discourse, as it is
currently raging out there, is that government must be hands off in respect
of training. Nothing must come from government and judicial officers must
be there themselves - even the context must come from them.

Can you explain the level of interface and the induction that will be there
as it has been envisaged?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, I must actually ask the Minister to come and answer the
questions - the difficult ones are in the NCOP. [Laughter.]
I think that you are right and that from the judiciary’s  side there is a
very strong push that they should decide the whole curriculum and all
aspects thereof.

But, as I said, we are still engaging with these issues because there are
models in the rest of the world where what I said just now is correct,
where the actual training is undertaken by judicial officers and the way
they deal with it is done by judicial officers, but that when they sit and
at least spell out what should be in the curriculum, that forum is a little
bit wider than just the judiciary.

There are other models like that; please, I am not saying we are
considering that or something, I am just saying there are models like that
at this stage. But the feeling here is very strong – and we have been told
regularly - that clearly we will be intervening, crossing that elusive line
called the separation of powers. It is something like quicksand that moves
a lot, but that debate, I think, is an ongoing one and we should make some
space for it to take place.

I think the models in some parts of the world, where one has some
interaction on what should be in the curriculum, is in very democratic
states in the world and there is not a complete exclusion of government at
least saying something like that. But at this stage, what is still the
preferred model from the judiciary is, hands off.


                    Child protection services of the SAPS


9.    Ms F Nyanda asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

    Whether the child protection services are effective; if not,  what  will
    the SA Police Service do to improve the situation?         C289E
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, our child protection
services are working very well and are as effective as is possible under
the circumstances. I am saying this because there are weaknesses and some
bumps regarding the system. Of course, our members – as will be understood
by the hon members here,
including hon Nyanda – do not turn everything they touch into gold, like
the mythical king Midas did. There are weaknesses but, overall, I am giving
them a very good mark. I thank you.

Ms F NYANDA: Hon Minister, can you give us or describe to us a picture of
this effectiveness? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: The first thing I would like to do is
to explain that our child protection services fall under what we term, in
the police, the family violence, child protection and sexual offences unit.
That’s the entire establishment that deals with matters like these and are
responsible therefore, among other things, for the investigation of rape,
incest, indecent assault, kidnapping, abduction and sexual exploitation.
They use, for purposes of such investigations, laws like the Sexual
Offences Act, the Prevention of Family Violence Act, the Domestic Violence
Act and, of course, the Films and Publications Act, which is administered
by the Department of Home Affairs – and as it relates, therefore, to things
such as child pornography.

Regarding effectiveness in terms of investigations, if, for instance, we
were to consider the annual report of the SA Police Service for 2004-05, we
would see that during that period they handled 60 429 cases. Those cases
were made up of the following aspects: there were 5 867 enquiries, just
enquiries, relating to these crimes; of course, 54 562 dockets were opened.
We arrested 27 707 suspects relating to this. These matters, therefore,
were taken to court.

It is instructive to look at what then happened in court. We were able to
finalise in our courts 1 383 of those cases. But, with regard to sentences,
among those who were sentenced, for instance, those who visited sexual
offences against children were 177. Those who accosted elderly people were
42. This gives a total of 219 people who were convicted and sentenced to
life imprisonment.

Now, to me, this is not a big thing, with respect to what they do, because
the cases that I have referred to are defined as social crimes, which are
very difficult to investigate using purely conventional policing methods.
So it is very difficult to deal with these cases. As you are aware, these
children who are raped - at the best of times - are molested by their
uncles, grandpas, including their own fathers in some instances. These
crimes happen behind closed doors and it becomes very difficult, therefore,
to investigate them.
Thus, what members of these units have done is to interact with people,
educating and mobilising them. And these many cases that we dealt with were
cases that indicate the success of that project because people are now
coming forward and are reporting these types of crimes to the police. That
is why I say, overall, I give them a mark that indicates the excellent work
that they have been doing.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, Minister, given the fact that some of these
cases are indeed difficult to investigate, what are the success rates of
conviction, given the fact that some of these cases may have happened
probably some time ago and such matters may not have been reported; and
when things developed, the individuals concerned may have thought, “I can
now go and report the case”? How do the police treat those cases?

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: I am quite happy with the outcome in
our courts regarding the cases, particularly these that I am referring to,
for the period 2004-05, because this compares favourably with what is
happening internationally. And, in fact, there are many countries – older
democracies among them – where our performance is better than they have
been able to achieve. Therefore I am quite happy with what is happening.

But when you look at only one financial year, 2004-05, and you look at
figures like this, that is 1 383 people who were convicted . . . Let’s just
look at their conviction. Those people are serving 13 760 years. That’s
what they are serving. I am not talking about 219 people who are serving
life sentences - just for the period over 12 months that I am talking
about. In other words, I am personally quite happy with the result,
relevant to the work that we do around these questions. Thank you.

Mr E M SOGONI: Thank you, hon Minister, for the comprehensive answers. With
regard to paedophiles, I would like to know whether the department has a
view in terms of what it is that needs to be done to stop this kind of
crime. For instance, there is a debate out there whether to publicise their
names or not. Has the department, perhaps, established a view in terms of
the policy that it would take to discourage this kind of action? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: When I was occupying the position
that he now occupies, at Home Affairs, I came to this question. Indeed, you
are correct when you say there is a raging debate out there, not only in
terms of South Africa but also in many countries, including the leading
democracies of the world. And we are not finding an answer to this. I will
tell you why we are not.

It is because, at one level, we are dealing with people who have been
convicted as a consequence of their activities, paedophilia. There are
people who argue therefore that these people have already paid for that
crime. When you go and put them on a register, it means that you are now
sentencing them a second time. There are people who are arguing like that.
But it is not a matter for the department and, fortunately, I have one of
my commissioners here, Deputy National Commissioner Singh. These things are
located in her section. But she can’t have a personal opinion on this, and
the police, as a structure, cannot have a personal opinion.

But who should have a personal opinion; and who should actually pilot any
law that relates to this? It is all of us who are sitting here, rather than
these structures. Let’s discuss the matter and see what happens. But, as I
say, one of the big things, and I am sure this is going to affect us as we
discuss it, is the fact that we have a Constitution. And, as I say, there
is this particular problem: Can you punish a person perpetually? That
matter has arisen as one of the problems relevant to this matter. Thank
you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, thanks to the Minister for the response.
Hon Minister, we tried, as public representatives and committee members who
serve in the committee that deals with this department. But what message
can you send, hon Minister, to those lunatics or monsters that think that
by raping our children they would get cured of Aids?

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: The message ought to be the same with
respect to anybody who commits these dastardly crimes: That where they
belong is behind the prison gates of our detention facilities. That is
where they belong. But it is also a matter that our integrated justice
system is beginning to discuss, because we want to ascertain that as people
are arrested, who particularly are involved in crimes of this nature, they
must be dealt with fully, in terms of the law. Quite soon, we are going to
pass the Child Justice Bill, which is before Parliament. I am sure you as
members of Parliament, including you in this House, will assist us to do
this. When we have done that, it is going to empower us further to deal
with matters of this nature.

However, that is only one side of the coin. The other side of the coin is
that our people, the parents, must look well after their children. There
are many instances where children are left alone – infants left alone by
parents. At times they are left completely alone and on other occasions are
left in the care of other small children. These problems arise as a
consequence. Therefore let us appeal to all parents to look well after
their children. Let us appeal to the general community to assist in
ensuring that that actually happens, as part and parcel of the traditions
we grew up embracing, so that we do not have these types of problems. I
thank you.

                      SAPS skills development programme

10.   Mr Z C Ntuli asked the Minister for Safety and Security:


     (1)    Whether his department has any skills development programme;  if
           not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


     (2)    whether the programme is successful; if not,  why  not,  if  so,
           what are the relevant details?                           C290E

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: Yebo, baba uNtuli. [Yes, Mr Ntuli].
We do have a skills development programme. Apart from that we have what is
called a workplace skills plan, which guides the implementation of all
training interventions within the organisation.

As far as the last part of your question is concerned, I do wish to say
that indeed it is a successful programme. Regarding the training, we are
implementing this as it has been planned. We have quarterly reports, which
are generated as part and parcel of the workplace skills plan. Our impact
assessment, which we do on training, indicates that it is working very
positively. I thank you.

Mr Z C NTULI: Thank you, Chairperson. Can the hon Minister specify in what
fields interventions are developing members?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: We believe that these awards are
important because they point to the core of our business. Therefore our
training is designed to deal particularly with those matters; for instance,
as they relate to crime prevention. This is because we want to prevent
crime from happening.

I am sure you are aware that this is one of the things that we are doing.
We have not done it throughout the country. At the moment we are
concentrating on areas where the crime levels are higher than in the rest
of the country. We have started deploying sector police in sectors that
have been carefully identified.

Some of these sector police are already working with our people on the
ground. There is the detective service, in other words, investigations; if
we fail there and do not have people who are highly trained in
investigative work, we are not going to make a mark in as far as dealing
with crime is concerned.

Let me say that we are proud of the fact that already, given the fact that
people are recognising the high levels of our training, we are helping the
rest of the African continent with respect to their own investigators who
have been receiving training in South Africa. We go abroad to help them
with their training. Therefore our training is of a very high quality.
There is crime intelligence and generally, this has been publicly admitted
to, our crime intelligence is amongst the best in the world and we have
received that commendation from many people, including Interpol itself.

As far as operational response is concerned, we must say this because it is
part of the truth of our history: South Africa has the best people. Do you
know why? It is because in the past, the police trained on us. In other
words, we were the people who were providing them with the necessary
wherewithal to be able to do their work. Therefore they were able to hone
their abilities on the basis of their attempt to try to stifle our
liberation struggle.

Hence, even now, we continue to provide the best training with respect to
operational response. Of course, with regard to protection and security
services, you can ask the Minister of Education if she is happy with the
people who are protecting her. You can also ask these Deputy Ministers and
other Ministers who are here. They will tell you that they have a very good
protection and security service.

They are not only close protectors but are also responsible for static
protection and for protecting our national key points. It is not only that,
they are also protecting very important visitors to South Africa, including
heads of state from other countries and so on. There is basic police and
management and generic training that is taking place. It is part and parcel
of these things, but there are those specifics that are part and parcel of
the interventions that we are talking about.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, I have a follow-up question to the Minister. I
can must safely say that he is a custodian of the police. You can tell by
the way he is responding to the issues that there are no challenges. He is
responding very well. The area of importance that I want to focus upon is
around recruitment and targeting of women, particularly as detectives and
also as intelligence officers. I think if that can be done, this country
can achieve a lot in terms of preventing and combating crime.

Is there any focus on those two areas that is accelerated to ensure that
they come in numbers in the skills development?

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: I have been reminded by the Chief
Whip that our protection and security services also protect members of the
NCOP when they take Parliament to the people. [Laughter.] These are not
things that I am saying simply because I am in charge of the police, you
have seen it at work yourselves. They protect you when you go and interact
with the people on the ground.

Many years ago, there was an argument that many of us made in our other
life; where it was only men of our liberation army who were being
infiltrated into the country and not many women. We used to say that if you
want people who will easily infiltrate, collect information and therefore
intelligence, it is women. Let’s send women into the country to do this. We
picked it up from the history of the Algerian struggle for freedom because
there they used women. The security police were not paying too much
attention to women. [Interjections.][Laughter.]

I am not going to repeat what you are saying. [Laughter.] This is still the
attitude of quite a number of people who are in the police, including the
Deputy National Commissioner I referred to. They are doing something else
there. They have established something that they refer to as a network.
They say it is a women’s network. But that thing is so powerful that people
like the National Commissioner may think that at some point these women
will simply take over every aspect of our divisions in the police.

Let me tell you something, on the entire globe, ours is the only police
service that has the highest level of representation by women. We are now
standing at 28% - there it is. Last year I said that we were standing at
26% but now it is 28%. Is Sweden number 14 or 16? They have moved up to 18
and that is number two after us. Look at that gap.

This is not only because we have trained for the first time in South Africa
one of the most effective special forces units in the police – women only.
They went through the same rigorous training as men do. They obtained a
higher pass rate than what we have found over the years amongst men.
Therefore there are changes that are happening with respect to this matter.
You are going to be seeing these units of women. At some point, when we
conduct raids – here in the Western Cape - I am going to invite some
members of the portfolio committee.

When we mount raids, you must see how many women participate as members of
the area crime combating units. As I said, the training is the same. We
have nothing like training for men and training for women. Even in terms of
that, there is a clear change with respect to how we are developing a
modern police service within our democratic dispensation. I thank you.

                         Amnesty on illegal firearms

11.   Kgoshi L M Mokoena asked the Minister for Safety and Security:


     Whether the amnesty on  illegal  firearms  has  achieved  its  intended
     objectives; if not, why not; if so,  what  are  the  relevant  details?
                                        C291E

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much for according me
this opportunity, particularly because he should listen. All of these
people I am talking about belong to his institution, so he must know the
numbers that I am dealing with.

Kgoshi Mokoena, ke ya leboga, ntate. [Chief Mokoena, thank you.]

The amnesty that we declared with respect to firearms worked very well. The
aim, as you know, was to reduce the number of illegal firearms in
circulation in South Africa, given that it is these illegal firearms that
are used in serious and violent crimes in our country. The amnesty was
meant for people in possession of illegal firearms to hand them in without
fear of being prosecuted for illegal possession thereof. Thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chair, I would like to thank the hon Minister for the
calculated response. Hon Minister, can you give us a figure that speaks to
what you described as a successful project?

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: I want to remind hon members what we
are talking about here. We are talking about an amnesty period that started
on 1 January this year and extended to the end of June. In other words, we
are talking about six months. In these six months, we did what we had never
been able to do, not during our term of office and not during the previous
term of office, in terms of firearms we collected as a consequence of the
amnesty that was in place.

But it’s not only that. Let me also remind hon members that we even
collected pieces that were not strictly part and parcel of this process but
which human beings who are peace-loving people ought not to carry. Just
recently, about a week ago, I saw an article of a person who was arrested.
Among illegal weapons he had was a mortar. I think I described to you a
while back what a mortar does. For instance, if they were to target this
building and the mortar hits the roof, I don’t know how many of us would
survive that attack. A mortar is defined as a small canon, in military
terms. So when you have a mortar you have a small canon.

Now, what private individual would want to carry or keep a mortar? What is
it for? But we were able to get mortars from people. We were able to get
bombs during the amnesty period. Again, you ask: Why would a South African
be keeping a bomb? Why would they keep those types of things? There were
grenades and quite a number of things.

But with respect to the weapons, the firearms themselves, in those six
months we were able to collect 33 823 illegal firearms. We had never done
this at any stage before the amnesty, whether during our term, as I say, or
during the past. In six months we had never been able to collect that
amount of firearms through confiscations and through the amnesty system.

Apart from that, there are South Africans who came forward and said, “We no
longer want to keep these firearms. Even though they are not illegal, and
even though we have licences for them, we want the police to take them.”
Those were 46 631 and that’s a lot of firearms. This means that it’s more
than 80 000 that we were able to collect.

I don’t know what we are going to do after this. But to us, that amnesty
period worked and it worked very well. There is another country that has
done this: Brazil also declared amnesty and people handed these things in.
The difference between Brazil and us is that in Brazil - and this is an
argument that some were making in South Africa as well - they said, “Look,
there is a dump there; just go and throw this thing there”. We could have
done the same thing in South Africa but we were confronted by this
political question: If you do such a thing, what about the possibility that
this firearm that we say must just be thrown clandestinely into the dump
may have killed families of people? How are we going to respond to those
families that have lost their loved ones as a result of this firearm if we
simply say to people just throw it off there? We therefore were confronted
by that political question.

We have not as yet been able to respond to that political question.
Therefore, in our case we said, “Just hand this thing in.” And we said to
people that it is better for you to face that consequence of a possibility
that you will be prosecuted. But what will speak in your favour is the fact
that you yourself understand that there were outstanding issues regarding
the firearm that you handed in; and that still you said: “No, let me hand
it in. It does not matter what happens to me later on.” That would, at
least, speak for you in court rather than for us to find that firearm on
our own because your circumstances would therefore be different and
harsher.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, Minister, I think the exercise of this amnesty
was to remove the old illegal firearms from communities. One would like to
know whether possibilities were also extended to those who are incarcerated
because it could have happened that at the time when they were arrested,
the firearms were not confiscated? What method would have been used to
encourage them regarding the following statement: Disclosing this
information is not going to make you face further charges but you would
actually be helping society? I would like to know whether that kind of
amnesty was also provided to those people?

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: We actually did speak to some of the
people who are in the various detention centres in the country. The other
day, we went to Piet Retief, to your correction facility there. We spoke to
some of the inmates. We did say to them: “Look, if you have a firearm that
you are hiding somewhere and you know it is illegal, tell the authorities
in this detention centre that you have such a firearm and you would like to
interact with the police.” I then said, “These officials would ensure that,
indeed, you interact with the police and would then call a policeman.” This
is what I said and I am sure that it would be in keeping with our
democratic practice. A person like that would therefore be allowed,
together with the police, to go and find this weapon so that it is handed
over officially. This is what we said to them. I hope people have taken
advantage of this.
There is another case that we are going to discuss with the police. People
who are deployed abroad, for instance in our diplomatic service, also face
the same thing, that is they could not be back in South Africa in time for
the amnesty. I am not suggesting that there are people who have illegal
firearms in our diplomatic service. What they said to me they wanted to do
was to hand in some weapons that they have which they got through
inheritance, because these were there in their homes. The fathers and
others wanted to hand in those firearms in keeping with the amnesty. But we
are going to talk about that matter as police. We did tell people that they
would have that opportunity. Thank you.

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, I would like to find out some information from
the Minister regarding the response of Umsinga in KwaZulu-Natal. I remember
that when you visited that place they said they were not prepared to bring
in illegal firearms. Now I want to check whether they have fulfilled their
promises? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: In the first instance, we have had
varied experiences as we interacted with people in terms of the Firearms
Control Act as it related to this amnesty. We were told many stories, such
as that the police themselves at times would go to a household and say to
the owner: “We know that you have firearms here. We have information. We
know where they are actually hidden in your kraal.” They would find those
firearms and those people would then say to the police, “Well, as you know,
I live in that hut. The cattle live in this kraal. Therefore ask the cattle
whose firearms those are.” [Interjections.] There were many problems
related to these things.

At Umsinga, if you recall, hon Ntuli, the very first person who spoke was
fiery and he uttered sentences such as, “You know, these police must not
think that we fear them. We don’t fear them. So they must never come and
harass us.” Of course, later on, the police were already on his case but
they did not tell me. That person had seven weapons of various kinds, which
were illegal. Immediately, when he was arrested by the police, there was a
change of attitude, even there. People started to come and hand in their
firearms. So we were satisfied with the amount of work that was done.

However, unfortunately, we did not get as many firearms as we had wanted
from some of those kinds of areas. But I want to warn those people, as we
did, that we are going to find those illegal firearms. We are not going to
buy this thing that we must “ask the cattle” – we’re not going to ask any
cattle. That is your property. We are going to find those illegal firearms
and people are going to pay the price. Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, I would like to put a question to the hon
Minister. He stated that 46 000 licensed weapons were handed in under the
amnesty and 33 000 illegal weapons. Probably, most of those 46 000 were
handed in by people who can’t be bothered by this new arduous licensing
process.

Now, according to norms and standards around the world, it’s the illegal
firearm that you try to get rid of. So for every one legal firearm that’s
handed in, there should be 10 illegal firearms. That’s according to the
norms and standards of firearm amnesty – and I’ve got it somewhere. What is
the Minister’s comment on that?

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, since we are talking about
international standards, the first one I want to recall is that the norm,
internationally, is that firearms kill. They kill not only people who ought
to be killed because they are involved in a war but they also kill
innocents. That being so, the move agitates for a total ban on firearms.
That is the international norm.

In Botswana, that government has already banned the possession of firearms,
except for people who are in the security services of governments. When we
talk about norms, those are the norms that, perhaps, we ought to be talking
about in South Africa, given the fact that on average in South Africa – and
this has gone down slightly with respect to the previous financial year –
there are 20 000 licensed firearms that are lost. I am talking about
licensed firearms that are misplaced by owners and lost.

I am not even talking about those that owners put anywhere in their house
in a careless fashion, and it is those weapons that children have had easy
access to and with which they then kill their siblings. I am not even
talking about that. I am talking about those that are lost – in the period
2004-05 it was just over 19 000. Incidentally, I am going to brief
Parliament on that matter. More than 19 000 licensed firearms went missing.
Those firearms, as you may imagine, go into the hands of criminals.
Criminals use them to do all manner of crime.

Now, can we speculate about a person who hands in a firearm to the police?
We have never asked them. When they say, “I no longer have a need for this
firearm, so take it because you are the police”, we do not say to them,
“No, is it not because we have a very strict regime in place which does not
allow you to do all manner of things that you are giving us this firearm?”
We never ask that question. All that we know is: Here are South Africans
who said, “I no longer want to keep this firearm.” The police take it and
it is destroyed. Thank you.


               District Six informal settlement and claimants


12.   Ms D Robinson asked the Minister of Housing:

      (1)   Whether the decision to relocate informal settlers to the
           District Six area in Cape Town is part of the greater N2 Gateway
           housing plan; if not, what action will be taken to prevent
           District Six becoming the site of a growing informal settlement,
           if so, what are the relevant details;


      (2)   Whether any discussions were held with the legitimate claimants
           to the District Six area (other than the District Six
           Beneficiary and Redevelopment Trust) prior to relocating
           settlers to this land; if not, why not; if so, (a) when were
           such discussions held with re-housed residents and those still
           waiting for houses and (b) what were the views expressed by
           them?


      (3)   Whether the land on which the informal settlement is located is
           meant for formal housing for District Six claimants; if not,
           what is planned for that land; if so, how many houses are to be
           built;


      (4)   Whether this informal settlement is intended to be temporary; if
           not, why not; if so, what is the planned date when this informal
           settlement will be removed?  C311E

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chair, the question under consideration is a
fairly long question, and I will give a fairly detailed explanation in the
hope that I will have answered any follow-up questions that might arise.

Regarding question 12(1), I would like to read, for Ms Robinson’s purposes,
a press release that was released by the city on this matter. It reads
thus:

   The temporary relocation area that we are talking about was fenced off
   and was monitored. Basic sanitation and water services were provided.
   This will allow for the proper monitoring and control of the claimants
   and the land. Some of the squatters are legitimate District Six
   claimants; the status of others is being investigated.


   The city is not bringing in squatters from other areas. This is not part
   of the N2 Gateway Project. The project is intended as a temporary
   measure. Very soon the city will resettle 124 claimant families.

The timeframes, at the time that the press release was given, were
indefinite, and the press release was issued on 19 October 2005 and was
carried in a number of media in Cape Town.

In response to the press release that came from the city, I wrote to the
city mayor and I would like to read it. It reads, as follows:\


   Media release, 19 October 2005: in the above regard, which is squatters
   on District Six land, please note that current policy does not allow the
   formation of new squatter camps anywhere contrary to our laws and the
   international agreements that we have entered into in the Millennium
   Development Goals.


   I would like to urge you, therefore, to hastily correct this, failing
   which we would be in breach of all our policies. It is therefore of
   utmost importance that the families mentioned in the press release be
   relocated within 14 days.

We have such a good mayor, within a week those people were relocated and
taken to Delft. As we speak there are no informal settlements in the area
that we are talking about. The families were relocated to Delft, as I
indicated, and I’d like to think that that closes the question. I thank
you.

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Minister, you’ve indicated that the people were moved to
Delft. I’m aware of that, subsequently, but I just want to know about these
ad hoc moves that are coming from the city, shunting people around from
pillar to post, and in a sense creating a hornet’s nest once they land in a
new area, as happened in Delft.

How is this occurring if there are clear policy guidelines with regard to
dealing with problems like this? And I know that there was a great problem,
because these people were settled in Wendy houses? There are also so many
people who are still living in shacks who have been on waiting lists for so
long. I was just wondering how one could deal with this so that you do not
create a hornet’s nest and create untold hardships to so many people
because of the resultant action in the community? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chair, I’d like you to protect me against
questions that have nothing to do with the original question. The original
question was: Are the people who have been settled in an informal
settlement in District Six part of the land claim?

My answer was carried in a press statement, which was carried all over Cape
Town, which the hon member would have read, namely that some of the people
are legitimate claimants, some are not, but they were brought together so
that the city could identify who they were and be able to verify if those
that were not on the list are indeed legitimate claimants.

They have since been moved, after we had had interaction with the city,
indicating to them that this is contrary to our policies. Beyond that,
Madam Robinson, the question would require another question sent to me,
because what you are asking is a general question about everything to do
with anything in housing in the Western Cape. Thank you.


                      HIV/Aids orphans and their future


    14. Mr MA Mzizi asked the Minister of Social Development:
        (1)      (a) What steps are the Government  taking  to  reduce  the
              number of children orphaned as a result of parents  dying  of
              HIV/Aids and (b) what will be the future of these orphans;


        (2)      whether the Government will foster aid to voluntary foster
              parents; if not, why  not;  if  so,  what  are  the  relevant
              details;


        (3)      whether the Government is taking any  steps  to  encourage
              society to adopt these children; if not, why not; if so, what
              are the relevant details?                  C312E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, the answer to the
first question is that the Department of Social Development is working
closely with the Department of Health to support the roll-out of the
comprehensive ARV treatment and support programme to reduce maternal
mortality and prolong the lives of primary caregivers.

Through home- and community-based care and support programmes, and
childcare forums, the department is actively involved in early
identification of orphans and other children made vulnerable by HIV and
Aids long before the death of their primary caregivers.

The identified children and their families are supported by community
caregivers from home- and community-based organisations, who refer them to
appropriate service delivery agencies within their communities to ensure
that they access comprehensive services.

Answer to the (b) part of the question is, to ensure that the rights of
orphans and other children made vulnerable by HIV and Aids are fully
protected at both policy and programmatic levels, the Department of Social
Development, in collaboration with the Department of Health, the Department
of Education, UNICEF, the National Action Committee for Children Affected
by HIV and Aids or Nacca, developed a policy framework and a national
action Aids plan on orphans and other children made vulnerable by HIV and
Aids.

The cornerstone of the policy framework and the national action plan is the
co-ordination of services to ensure that the orphans and vulnerable
children access comprehensive social services. Through the co-ordinating
structures and mechanisms put in place to fast- track delivery of services
such as access to birth certificates and identity documents, access to
grants, provision of educational requirements, protection from abuse and
neglect, as well as provision of psychosocial support and monitoring of
vulnerable households will be ensured.

Section 14(4)(a) of the Child Care Act of 1983 makes provision for orphans
to be determined by the Children’s Court as children in need of care, thus
enabling such children to be placed in foster care, residential care or
adoption.

The department, together with the provincial government, civil-society
organisations and faith-based organisations, is presently undertaking
campaigns in provinces to raise awareness regarding the identification of
orphans so that they can access services that they qualify for that address
their long-term placement.

The answer to question 2 is, “yes”. Regulation 4(1) of the Social
Assistance Act of 1992 stipulates that a foster parent is eligible for a
foster-child grant if the child is placed in the custody of foster parents
in terms of the Child Care Act of 1983, as amended.

However, if the income of the child exceeds twice the annual amount of the
foster-child grant determined by the Minister of Social Development, the
foster-child grant shall not be payable. Regulation 5(1) of the Social
Assistance Act indicates that the foster parent is eligible for the care
dependency grant in respect of care- dependent foster-children, provided
that the medical report from a medical officer confirms that the child
requires and receives permanent home care due to his or her severe mental
or physical disability.

The answer to question 3 is that the Department of Social Development and
NGOs have an important role to play in raising public awareness on local
adoption services. On 30 May 2005 the Minister of Social Development
launched an awareness campaign to promote national adoptions.

The national department has developed pamphlets with information on
adoption, which were distributed to the public to encourage and recruit
potential adoptive parents. The campaign is expected to be ongoing in all
provinces.

The NGOs that render adoption services are also embarking on the following
awareness programmes to promote national adoptions: an on-going orientation
programme to inform the prospective adoptive parents about adoption, visits
to churches, infertility clinics and other community structures, radio and
television talks, open days in places of safety and the dissemination of
information through the print media.

The Children’s Bill also makes provision for registers of prospective
adoption parents and adoptable children. This will certainly ensure that
people who are willing to adopt children are known to the department.

Mr M A MZIZI: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, if one probably could find
out because it is a very sensitive issue of these orphaned children, more
especially owing to the scourge of Aids.
Now, just to find out whether there is any mechanism in place in the
department that if these children are to go to school, because of the
trauma that they find themselves in, is there a mechanism in place that
could lead to some of these children being taken to the remedial schools?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, children who are
affected by or infected with HIV and Aids don’t necessarily need remedial
education. But as I said, there is an extensive programme of community-
based care in which there are caregivers who act as parents for those
children and do the same thing that parents would do. So, they would act as
a parent would if the children needed anything through school or anything
like that. I hope that satisfies the member.

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, arising from the Deputy Minister’s response in
terms of grants that are paid for children that are being fostered, the
law, which the Minister mentioned, currently provides for parents to adopt
kids so that they can access these foster grants. What about homes that are
child-headed? What does the law say, because in the constituency work one
often comes across situations where people say that because it is a child-
headed family they are not able to access these grants?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, where there are
child-headed households, the service providers will make the necessary
arrangements for those children who are old enough to be able to get access
to the money and it will be organised through those home-caregivers.

           Provinces failed to spend their low-cost housing budget

15.   Mr M A Mzizi asked the Minister of Housing:

      (1)   (a) How many provinces failed to spend their budget for the 2004-
           05 financial year to build low–cost houses and (b) what happened
           to the unspent monies;


      (2)   Whether those monies will be rolled over to the respective
           provinces if still available; if not; why not; if so, what are
           the relevant details?                              C313E

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you very much, Chair. Hon Mzizi, it is
always very pleasant to get a question like this because it allows us to
crow about our successes. This is a matter that we have been battling with,
namely where we have been unable to spend the money that we have allocated
to the provinces.

For the first time we are beginning to get it right. So, it is with utmost
pride that I can tell you, hon Mzizi, that in areas like KwaZulu-Natal,
they spent 102% of what we had given them. In areas like Mpumalanga and the
Northern Cape, they spent 100% of what we had given them. In areas like the
Eastern Cape, for the first time, they spent 96% of what we had given them.

However, within the budgetary terms, what we regard as acceptable is within
six per cent of what has been given to them. So, we found that in cases
like the Free State, they had 14% unspent. In Limpopo, they had 16% unspent
because they had administrative problems there. In the North West, they had
28% unspent; and in the Western Cape, unfortunately, they had 13% unspent.

Hon members, there is a 102% spent on one side - so give credit to that one
and a 100% and a 100%, and another 100%. We are getting there and one day
we will have spent 120% somewhere. The provincial legislatures will decide
on what to do with the unspent funds.

What we have done within the 2004-05 period is to transfer all these funds
to the provincial legislatures. Therefore we have requested that the
provincial legislatures then allocate these back to the housing department
- and this has been agreed upon. So, yes, these monies will be spent.

In the Eastern Cape, we have an additional R26 million that will be given
back. In Gauteng, unfortunately, it is only R9 million, because it is one
per cent of what they didn’t spend. We have a
R141 million that will be spent in North West and 76%, hopefully, will go
to the N2 project and that will be given back to the Western Cape. So, all
these monies have been rolled over and yes, they will be used for housing
projects in this current financial year.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, uNgqongqoshe usezikhululile ngoba uthi imali
sebeyinikeze izifundazwe. Ngakho-ke ngeke ngisawubuza umbuzo ozoqondana
nezifundazwe. Sekufanele ngitshele ozakwethu bezifundazwe ukuthi manje
isisezithebeni zenkantolo. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, the Minister has rescued himself by saying the
money has been allocated to the provinces. Therefore, I am not going to ask
a question pertaining to the provinces now. I must tell my colleagues from
the provinces that the money has been allocated to provinces. Thank you.]

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, I thank the Minister for the answer. However,
in your experience, Minister, has this expenditure been translated into the
provision of actual housing? In many instances the housing department has a
language called “funds committed”. It is not actually literally translated
into the houses that one can count. For example, how many houses have been
delivered in a particular place? Thank you very much, Chairperson.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Hon member, within the new plan we are now dealing
with houses on the ground. So, this money that we are talking about for the
period 2004-05 is money committed to the delivery of houses. We have been
taking part in an audit where we have counted the number of houses and
whether these actually correspond to the number of units that would have
been given in subsidy, and yes, within this period that we are talking
about, they have.

If you have any knowledge of anything within this period that does not
comply, we will be very grateful to follow that matter up. We’ve set up an
anticorruption unit, which will deal with any irregularities occurring
within the subsidy. But, to the best of our knowledge as a department, this
money does translate within this period to houses on the ground.

Ms L MOTLAHEALA (North West): Hon Chairperson, I would like to know from
the Minister whether these outstanding monies would be spent on the
foundations that are standing there unfinished in some towns up country or
it is going to be spent on new houses?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: No, hon member, our definition of a house is a
structure that has a roof on it. And a foundation remains a foundation; it
is not classified as a house in the terminology that we use.

However, we have had problems in the past, where we had projects that were
not completed and we call those “blocked projects”. For some reason or
other we have had problems with the developers that were building those
houses and have abandoned them and we are seeking to rectify that. However,
this money will be used for houses – houses with roofs on them. It will not
be foundations.


                       Municipal remuneration packages


16.   Mr C J  van  Rooyen  asked  the  Minister  for  Provincial  and  Local
      Government:

      (1)   What are the details of the remuneration package of (a)
          municipal managers and (b) senior staff members of the (i)
          George, (ii) Midvaal, (iii) Weskus, (iv) Swartland, (v) Agulhas
          and (vi) Breede River-Winelands municipality;


      (2)   Whether ward committees for these municipalities have been
          established; if not, why not; if so,


     3) Whether these committees are functional; if not, why not;
           if so, what are the relevant details in each case? C322E

USEKELA MPHATHISWA WEZOORHULUMENTE BAMAPHONDO NABEZEKHAYA:
Mhlalingaphambili, kunye namalungu ahloniphekileyo, imibuzo, ukusukela
kowokuqala, owesibini ukuya kutsho kowesithathu, ifuna ingcaciso
entsokothileyo, nende. Kungoko ke, Mhlalingaphambili, ndiza kwenza
isiphakamiso sokuba iinkcukacha ezifunwayo singabonelela ngazo silisebe,
ukuze ilungu eli lihloniphekileyo likwazi ukuyifumana. Enkosi. (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, and
hon members, questions one, two and three require a detailed and thorough
reply. For this reason I want to propose that the particulars that are
required be provided by the department so that hon members can access them.
Thank you.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I just want to give an executive,
summary interpretation for the benefit of hon Watson. The hon Deputy
Minister explains that because of its nature, the question needs a detailed
response and requests that this should be provided to the member and, of
course, even to other members of the House, who will be entitled to it.
Thank you.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr B J Tolo): I think that I want to rule on
this, especially given that hon Van Rooyen is not here. I will rule on his
behalf that we grant the Deputy Minister the request she is making. Thank
you.

Reply:

The information is not available within the Department.  The  question  was,
however, referred to the Western Cape and  Gauteng  Provincial  Governments;
and the following response is based on their input:
   (1)      Details of the remuneration packages of (a)  municipal  managers
       and (b) senior staff members of the relevant municipalities,  are  as
       follows:

(i) George Local Municipality (as at 1 July 2005)

|Incumbent                    |Annual salary         |Performance Bonuses  |
|                             |                      |2004/2005            |
|Municipal Manager            |R775 920,60           | R100 207,03         |
|Dir. Management and Admin    |R539 250,00           |R70 336,96           |
|Dir. Human Resources         |R431 400,00           |R56 269,56           |
|Dir. Planning and Development|R517 680,00           |R67 523,48           |
|Dir. Health Services         |R539 250,00           |R70 336,96           |
|Dir. Civil and Technical     |R657 885,00           |R85 811,09           |
|Services                     |                      |                     |
|Dir. Electro-technical       |R539 250,00           |R70 336,96           |
|Services                     |                      |                     |
|Dir. Financial Services      |R625 530,00           |R81 590,87           |


(ii) Midvaal Local Municipality


|Incumbent                       |Annual salary         |Performance Bonuses   |
|                                |                      |2004/2005             |
|Municipal Manager               |R703 000              |Information not       |
|                                |                      |provided              |
|Exec Director: Engineering      |R636 901              |R156 527              |
|Exec Director: Development      |R626 954              |R170 376              |
|Planning                        |                      |                      |
|Exec Director: Support Services |R622 212              |R170 376              |
|Exec Director: Community        |R617 718              | R170 376             |
|Services                        |                      |                      |
|Exec Director: Protection       |R617 711              |R170 376              |
|Services                        |                      |                      |
|Exec Director: Financial        |R594 686              |R170 376              |
|Services                        |                      |                      |
|Director: Support Services      |R561 035              |R154 403              |


(iii) West Coast District Municipality (as at 1 July 2005)

|Incumbent                       |Annual salary         |Performance Bonuses   |
|                                |                      |2004/2005             |
|Municipal Manager               |R779 169,60           |Not paid yet          |
|Dir. Corporate Services         |R493 468,80           |Not paid yet          |
|Dir. Financial Services         |R545 424,00           |Not paid yet          |
|Dir Technical Services          |R457 546,32           |Not paid yet          |
|Dir. Community Services         |R457 546,32           |Not paid yet          |


(iv) Swartland Local Municipality (as at 1 July 2005)

|Incumbent                       |Annual salary         |Performance Bonuses   |
|                                |                      |2004/2005             |
|Act Municipal Manager           |R235 567,50           |R33 250,68            |
|Dir. Corporate Services         |R235 565,68           |R33 250,68            |
|Dir Civil Engineering Services  |R236 662,19           |R33 250,68            |
|Dir. Financial Services         |R245 043,57           |R35 808,48            |
|Dir Electrical Engineering      |R239 591,77           |R33 250,68            |
|Services                        |                      |                      |
|Dir. Protection Services        |R222 730,46           |R33 250,68            |


(v) Cape Agulhas Local Municipality (as at 1 July 2005)

|Incumbent                       |Annual salary         |Performance Bonuses   |
|                                |                      |2004/2005             |
|Municipal Manager               |R621 769,00           |0                     |
|Manager: Civil Engineering      |R499 249,00           |R40 643,00            |
|Manager: Electro-Technical      |R502 000,00           |R36 127,00            |
|Services                        |                      |                      |
|Manager: Community Services     |R499 249,00           |R40 643,00            |
|Manager: Finance                |R497 168,00           |R40 643,00            |
|Manager: Corporate Services     |R502 000,00           |R36 127,00            |



(vi) Breede River/Winelands Local Municipality (as at 1 July 2005)

|Incumbent                       |Annual salary         | Performance Bonuses  |
|                                |                      |2004/2005             |
|Municipal Manager               |R608 300,00           | Not paid yet         |
|AMM Community Services          |R473 131,00           |Not paid yet          |
|AMM Corporate Services          |R535 302,00           |Not paid yet          |
|AMM Economic and Trade Services |R535 302,00           |Not paid yet          |
|Head: Administration            |R398 906,00           |Not paid yet          |
|Head: Finance                   |R429 501,00           |Not paid yet          |
|Head: Engineering               |R334 200,00           | Not paid yet         |
|Head: Electricity               |R429 317,00           |Not paid yet          |
|Head: Environmental and Parks   |R356 638,00           |Not paid yet          |
|Head: Planning and Economic Dev.|R295 494,00           |Not paid yet          |
|Head: Housing                   |R228 343,00           |Not paid yet          |
|Head: Traffic                   |R250 225,00           |Not paid yet          |
|Head: Fire Services             |R270 115,00           |Not paid yet          |





   (2)      Information pertaining  the  establishment  of  ward  committees
        within the relevant municipalities is as follows:

|Municipality                    |Ward Committees established  |Number of wards |
|                                |Yes / No                     |                |
|George Local Municipality       |No                           |20              |
|Midvaal Local Municipality      |Yes                          |9               |
|West Coast District Municipality|Municipality does not have   |0               |
|                                |wards or ward committees     |                |
|Swartland Local Municipality    |Yes                          |10              |
|Cape Agulhas Local Municipality |Yes                          |5               |
|Breede River-Winelands Local    |No                           |10              |
|Municipality                    |                             |                |



   (3)      Information pertaining to the functionality of  ward  committees
        within the relevant municipalities are as follows:

|Municipality |Ward Committees |Ward          |Comments                         |
|             |functional      |Committees    |                                 |
|             |                |not functional|                                 |
|George Local |0               |20            |A council resolution was taken in|
|Municipality |                |              |June 2005 to start the process.  |
|Midvaal Local|6 fully         | 1 (collapsed)|The Midvaal Municipality is rural|
|Municipality |functional and 2|              |and vast in nature.              |
|             |functioning     |              |Distance within the ward impacts |
|             |occasionally    |              |on the mobility of ward committee|
|             |                |              |members.                         |
|             |                |              |Lack of public transport in      |
|             |                |              |certain areas.                   |
|             |                |              |Lack of active participation by  |
|             |                |              |white members of the community.  |
|             |                |              |Lack of culture of community     |
|             |                |              |participation.                   |
|             |                |              |Lack of dedicated resources to   |
|             |                |              |implement ward committee         |
|             |                |              |projects.                        |
|             |                |              |Weak sector representation in    |
|             |                |              |ward committees.                 |
|West Coast   |Not applicable  |Not applicable|Not applicable                   |
|District     |                |              |                                 |
|Municipality |                |              |                                 |
|Swartland    |10              |0             |Have regular monthly meetings and|
|Local        |                |              |Municipality has incentives for  |
|Municipality |                |              |regular attendance of ward       |
|             |                |              |committee members in ward        |
|             |                |              |meetings.                        |
|Cape Agulhas |5               |0             |Meeting every second month.      |
|Local        |                |              |Presently have four members from |
|Municipality |                |              |each ward committee serving in   |
|             |                |              |the Cape Agulhas Municipal Forum,|
|             |                |              |to review and prioritise all IDP |
|             |                |              |plans.                           |
|Breede       |0               |10            |Decision was taken by council to |
|River-Winelan|                |              |establish ward committees. The   |
|ds Local     |                |              |council has also advertised for  |
|Municipality |                |              |consultants to implement the     |
|             |                |              |process.                         |


                  Mobile units in provinces – Home Affairs


17.   Ms H F Matlanyane asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      (a) What is the number of mobile units that have been delivered to
      provinces, (b) to which provinces were they delivered, (c) what impact
      have the mobile units made on rural communities and (d) what number of
      mobile units are still outstanding?          C327E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chair, there are 10 mobile units that
we launched a few months ago. Of these, three were distributed to KwaZulu-
Natal, three to the Eastern Cape, three to Limpopo and one to the Western
Cape.

Before the launch of these mobile units we had some challenges in that our
services were not easily accessible, particularly in deep rural areas where
we don’t have offices. Our people had to travel long distances in order for
them to access departmental services.

The launch of these 10 mobile units was a further step by the department to
take services closer to the people. These mobile units are providing
services that are normally provided by any fixed office of the department.
These include, amongst other things, applications for identity documents,
birth certificates and other vital documents. Hereunder are consolidated in
the answer some of the statistics.

The Limpopo province has had the largest number of ID applications in the
mobile units but, overall, the total number of applications for IDs have
been 26 236 and for birth registrations 10 368. This means that the mobile
units are having the necessary impact, especially in the areas that are
needy.

There are 57 more mobile units that we are still awaiting, and as soon as
they have been completed - and they are to be completed quite soon - we
will inform hon members accordingly. Thank you.

Mr M A MZIZI: Thank you, Chairperson. Deputy Minister, one other thing that
one could probably raise - I am happy that you have spoken about what they
provide in the mobile units - is that in the past officials manning the
mobile units used to say to people that they were there only to give birth
certificates and nothing else. Therefore, if people wanted to make an
application for an ID, they had to go to the offices.

Now, one can’t tell for sure whether these allegations were true or not,
but what we would like to know is whether, as you say, these mobile units
provide all the services that one would get if one went to a stationary
office. How true is this in terms of Gauteng, where we are having these
problems?

IPHINI LIKANGQONGQOSHE WEZASEKHAYA: Njengoba sesicacisile ukuthi sesithole
izicelo zomazisi ezibalelwa ezi-26 236, kanjalo nezicelo zezitifiketi
zokuzalwa ezibalelwa ngaphezu kwezi-10 000, lokho kucacisa ukuthi lezi
zinqola esikhuluma ngazo azithathi nje kuphela izicelo zezitifiketi
zokuzalwa.

Asikabi nazo izinqola ezingamahhovisi angamohambanendlwana eGauteng ngoba,
njengoba bese ngicacisile, sisalindele izinqola ezingama-57. Zizobe
sezithunyelwa kulezi ezinye izifundazwe ngoba, ngokohlelo lwethu, zonke
izifundazwe zizoba nazo izinqola. Kodwa ikakhulukazi kunezifundazwe
esizibeke phambili ngenxa yobubanzi bazo, kanjalo nangenxa yokuthi muningi
umsebenzi okudingeka wenziwe kuzona futhi zibe ziyizifundazwe ezinezindawo
ezisemakhaya ezibanzi. Nazi-ke lezo zifundazwe: iMpumalanga Koloni,
iLimpopo neKwaZulu-Natali.

Kodwa-ke kuzothi uma sekufika lezi ezinye izinqola ezisele, bese
zithunyelwa kuzo zonke izifundazwe. Njengoba sengicacisile, lezi zinqola
zizokwazi ukwenza yonke into ekwazi ukwenziwa yihhovisi elimile elakhelwe
phezu kwesizinda soMnyango wezaseKhaya. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: As I have stated, we received 26 236
applications for identity documents and over 10 000 applications for birth
certificates, which clearly indicate that these mobile units not only
receive applications for birth certificates.

We don’t have mobile units in Gauteng yet because we are still waiting for
57 mobile units. We are going to deploy them in other provinces because our
plan is to have these mobile units in all provinces.  There are, however,
provinces that are our priority because of their immensity and there is a
lot of work that needs to be done in these provinces. They also have huge
areas that are remote. Those provinces are the Eastern Cape, Limpopo and
KwaZulu-Natal.

When we get the mobile units that we are waiting for, we are going to send
them into all the other provinces. As I have explained, these units are
going to do all the work that is being done at a static office building
under the umbrella of the Department of Home Affairs.]

Ms J MASILO: Chairperson, I thank the Deputy Minister for giving clarity on
the question regarding the next 57 mobile units. However, I just want to
share with this House that when the 10 units were launched in the Eastern
Cape, they found out that they were not user-friendly in terms of people
with disabilities. I just want to find out whether they have upgraded those
10 units now? Thank you.

IPHINI LIKANGQONGQOSHE WEZASEKHAYA: Lezi zinqola esisenazo okwamanje,
ngisho lezi eziyishumi ezisekhona, azikabi nayo indlela yokuthi abantu
abakhubazekile bangene ngaphakathi. Ngalokho-ke abantu abasebenza
eMnyangweni baye behle babancede khona lapho ngaphandle, phansi kwetende
lelo elixhunywa phambi komnyango ukuze bakwazi ukuthi balekeleleke.

Ziningi ezinye izinto esizithole ukuthi ziyinkinga maqondana nalezi zinqola
eziyishumi ezikhona. Sizozama ukuthi kulezo ezi-57 ezizayo, sikwazi
ukubhekana nalezo zinkinga ukuze abantu bakithi bakwazi ukuthola usizo
abaludingayo. Kodwa-ke esingafisa ukuthi abantu bakuqonde ukuthi yizinqola
lezi, akuwona amahhovisi, ngakho kunezinto okunokwenzeka zingakwazi ukuba
nazo.

Kodwa izinto okuyizona ezibalulekile ezizokwenza ukuthi abantu bathole
izinsizakalo abazidingayo zikhona kulezi zinqola. Sizokwazi ukuthi uma
kukhona okunye okuncane esingekwazi ukukwenza, abantu abasebenzela uMmyango
bakulungise lokho ngendlela efanelekile. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: The 10 mobile units in question don’t
provide access for people with disabilities. The employees of the
department leave the units and help them outside, in the tent in front of
the door.

There are several things that are problematic about the mobile units that
we have. We are going to try and make sure that the 57 mobile units that we
are going to get are well equipped so that people will be able to receive
the services they need. I would like people to understand that these are
mobile units, not offices; therefore there are some things that we won’t be
able to have.

But we do have the most important things that are necessary for people to
receive the services they need. We will make sure, if there are some things
that we are unable to do, that our employees will see to its being sorted
out properly.]

   Government support to medal winners in the Expo for the Young Scientist

18.   Mr M A Sulliman asked the Minister of Education:

      (a) What support is the Government giving to schools and learners such
      as the two learners from Intlanganiso Secondary School in  Khayelitsha
      who won a medal in the Expo for the Young Scientist and  (b)  what  is
      the Government’s commitment to the development  of  young  scientists?
                             C328E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Mhlalingaphambili, umbuzo wohloniphekileyo
uSulliman, uphenduleka ngolu hlobo. [Chairperson, hon Sulliman’s question
can be answered in this way.]

And in order for hon Sulliman . . .

 . . . yo o santseng a ithuta Setswana gore a nkutlwe sentle, ke tla mo
araba ka Seesimane. [. . . for those who are still learning Setswana, I
will answer in English to enable you to understand me clearly.]

With respect to (a) of the question, expo medal winners received
R10 000 for study at an institution of higher education. And an agreement
has also been signed between the expo and the Department of Science and
Technology to develop the potential of young people while in school.

With respect to (b), our government has a strong commitment to developing
and promoting young scientists. This is demonstrated in our maths and
science focus school strategy that we are currently intending to expand
significantly from 102 schools to over 400 in 2006.

We also demonstrate this commitment in other events, awards and strategies.
Firstly, the Education department and the Science and Technology department
organise, annually, a national science week. We have a National Science and
Technology Forum award programme for top girl learners who excel at
mathematics and science, and top girl learners who perform well in the expo
for young scientists.

In addition, the National Science and Technology Forum also recognises the
top nine schools from each province that are dedicated to maths and science
excellence in education.

Furthermore, our department and the Science and Technology department co-
ordinate all mathematics and science olympiads at national and provincial
level. We organise mathematics and science girls’ camps in all provinces
every September of every year.

On 25 October, the hon member would be aware, the Minister of Science and
Technology opened a national consultative conference on Youth into Science,
which intended to develop a strategy to encourage more and more young
people to take up science as an intellectual area of study. Thank you,
Chair.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I want to make my follow-up question in
Setswana, but I will bear with the Minister, and rather do it in English.

Firstly, let me just say thank you very much, to the Minister, for that
information; it is very helpful. Secondly, does government have some
timeframes in place as to when we can, perhaps, overcome this shortage of
scientists in South Africa? I just want to hear from the Minister: Do we
have timeframes for that? Thank you.

TONA YA THUTO: Tiro eo ya go oketsa Maaforika Borwa a a itseng dipalo le
saense, e tlile go re tsaya sebaka se se telele, ka gore fa re bua ka go
tlatsa, mo dilong tse, re bua ka bagolo ba ba ithutileng dirutwa tse.
Mathata a rona ke gore bana ba rona ga ba dire dipalo le saense kwa
sekolong. Ga rena barutabana ba ba rutang sentle.

Dikolo tse dintse ga dina barutabana ba ba rutang dipalo le saense. Fa re
bua ka dikolo tse di bidiwang dinaledi, e seng dinaledi tsa Naledi yo,
dinaledi tse di simolotsweng ke moemedi wa thuto wa pele re bua ka dikolo
tseo. Ke yona tiro ya rona e e lekang go oketsa bana ba ba dirang sentle mo
dilong tse re buang ka tsona.

Re batla go netefatsa gore bana ba rona botlhe mo Aforika Borwa ba nna le
lebaka la go ithuta dipalo le saense. Fa re ka baakanya mo dikolong, re ka
fitlhela gore re oketsa batho ba ba itseng, ba ba nang le kitso e e
ikemelang mo tirong e. Mme fa re sa baakanye mo dikolong, re ka se kgone.

Santlha se re se dirang, ke go oketsa dikolo tse di tla tshwaraganang le
dipalo le saense go leka gore re nne le bana ba ba ka tswelelang pele mo
diunibesithing le mo dikholejeng tsa FET, ba ithute dirutwa tse.

Fa re ka dira mo dikolong mme lona baemedi ba rona ba Ntlo e le Ntlo ya
Kokoano Bosetšhaba la re thusa go bona gore dikolo tsa rona mo
diporofenseng di a dira le gore a tumalano e ke buang ka yona e re e bona e
tshela mo magaeng. Fa re ka baa matlho a rona mo dilong tseo, re tla bona
bana ba rona ba tswelela pele. Ke a leboga.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr B J TOLO): Re a leboga Tona e tlotlegang. Ke
a tshepa motlotlegi Sulliman o utlwile. O tlhalogantse Setswana.
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: It would take time to address the problem of
the lack of people qualified in mathematics and science in South Africa. In
order to address this shortage, we need teachers who have studied these
subjects. This situation is compounded by the fact that our children do not
study mathematics and science at school. There is a lack of good
mathematics and science teachers.
Most schools do not have mathematics and science teachers. The “star”
schools I am talking about - not Naledi, the Star, which is the name of our
Minister of Education translated into English - are the ones that were
introduced by the previous Minister of Education. These schools are called
“star” schools and they serve to encourage learners to perform as
brilliantly as the name suggests.

We would like to ensure that all the children in South Africa have a reason
to study mathematics and science. By rectifying the situation in schools,
we stand a chance of increasing the number of people who have vast
knowledge of these subjects. If we do not rectify the situation at schools,
we are destined to fail.

We should first increase the number of schools that teach mathematics and
science because by doing so we hope that learners would be encouraged to
pursue further studies of these subjects during their tertiary education
years at universities and FET colleges.

As representatives in this House, together with those in the National
Assembly, we need to collaborate with and encourage schools in the
provinces and parents in the homes regarding this important aspect. If we
can give thorough attention to these things, there would be noticeable
progress among our children. Thank you.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr B J TOLO): Thank you, hon Minister. I am sure
that hon Sulliman understood you very well. He understands Setswana.]

       Government programmes to equip learners and contribute to their
                                marketability
19.   Mr B J Tolo asked the Minister of Education:

      Whether the Government has any programmes in place to  equip  learners
      who will pass their matric exams and would require employment with the
      necessary experience for them to be marketable; if not,  why  not;  if
      so,        what        are        the        relevant         details?
                             C329E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I was asking, Chairperson, should you be in the
chair if it is your question? [Laughter.] The reply is, as follows:

I have been informed by the department about the recent Status of Youth
Report 2005 and, in particular, about one of its findings: that lack of
funds is the main reason why post-matriculants do not further their
education.

The state does assist with financing study in higher education and we will
assist in future with financing study in further education. There is no
doubt that the National Student Financial Aid Scheme has been and is one of
the great success stories of our democracy. It has funded nearly 100 000
higher-education students to acquire high-level skills, while our current
transformation of the further-education college sector entails studying a
number of options for financial assistance to students whose careers lie in
the acquisition of intermediate skills.

There are a number of programmes that provide post-matriculants with
experience and skills that enhance their employment opportunities; these
are supported by government and other partners. They include the following:
Our FET colleges offer structured learnership programmes that provide
access to opportunities for workplace experience and, in addition, our
department and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund have a partnership programme which
we are running at 22 public FET colleges for youth skills development
training. The Umsobomvu Youth Fund has undertaken to invest an estimated
R28 million in this partnership programme.

Also, our government departments run internship programmes that provide
young people with workplace experience. We do this in our department as
well and we have asked our director-general to consider expanding that
internship programme to take on more young people.

In addition, several of our FET colleges run skills programmes that are
linked to the establishment of co-operatives by young people. The co-
operative initiatives provide young people with opportunities for
employment or self-employment. This merely refers to what government is
doing.
Beyond the Education department and its partnerships, as you would have
heard this afternoon, is what the Minister of Defence is doing through the
training institutes. We are also aware that major state-supported
businesses such as Eskom, Telkom and others have youth training programmes
for post-school training. So, there are lots of initiatives for young
people. Let me come back to my earlier point that for all these
opportunities to work, one of the things we have to do is to communicate
effectively to young people all this information about opportunities
available to them.

We were speaking to young people in Limpopo just yesterday and saying to
them they should not regard FET colleges as poor persons’ colleges, but
they should see them as institutions for the acquisition of key technical
skills for our country; skills they have not always allowed themselves to
access because they have had the notion that for post-school training,
there is one line and that is from school to university. However, we are
saying that FET colleges offer wonderful opportunities for young people of
our country to acquire critical skills to serve and grow the economy of
South Africa. Thank you.

     Increase in ID applications arising from upcoming local government
                                  elections

    20. Mr M A Sulliman asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      (1)   Whether, in light of the upcoming  local  government  elections,
          there is an increase in the number of applications  for  IDs;  if
          so, (a) what are the relevant details and (b) how many IDs  still
          await collection from the Home Affairs office in each province;

      (2)   whether there is any strategy in place to deliver the
          outstanding IDs; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
          details?
          C330E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, according to the
statistics reported by our local offices there has not been any noticeable
increase in the number of applications for identity documents as a result
of the upcoming local elections.

Every month the department collects statistics in respect of unclaimed and
uncollected identity documents from our local offices. On 30 September 2005
we had a total of 197 685 identity documents which were not collected or
claimed, the largest number of which is in the Gauteng province with 70
768, followed closely by KwaZulu-Natal with 31 522. The lowest number of
uncollected identity documents were in the Northern Cape, about 1 824.

In the last four months, as a result of these challenges, we held
discussions with the SA Post Office to find a suitable, reliable, secure,
efficient and cost-effective method specifically designed for the posting
of identity documents. At this stage the department and the SA Post Office,
Sapo, have agreed to sign a service-level agreement before the end of this
week, which will provide a long-lasting solution to this problem.

In addition to this, and as is the case currently, our local offices, in
partnership with various stakeholders such as municipalities, traditional
leaders, community development workers and civil society organisations, use
various methods such as conducting door-to-door campaigns, community
gatherings and other activities to distribute identity documents. I must,
however, indicate that this method has not been very effective due to staff
shortages and other resource constraints, hence our partnership with Sapo.
Thank you.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Thank you, Deputy Minister, for the information. What we
have experienced is that people are moving from province to province and
you find that people are applying in Gauteng for an identity document, stay
there for two months and then move to the Northern Cape and submit a new
application there. What I would like to know from the department is: Do you
have mechanisms in place where you can trace these duplication of identity
documents, or are we still faced with the problem?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Indeed, there are new challenges that
we come across in so far as identity document applications and collections
are concerned. We are exploring new ways, including a short message
service, sms, method to get people’s cellphone numbers and a friend’s or
relative’s cellphone number as a backup so that we are able to communicate.
As soon as the identity document is ready for collection, we should be able
to communicate with the applicant and the relative, friend or whomever, so
that both of them can inform each other that the identity document is
available.

The real challenge we face as a result of this is that the department
wastes a lot of resources producing documents which are not collected,
because after 12 months we have to destroy these uncollected identity
documents, only to find that the person who had applied would by that time
still not have obtained their identity documents and may have applied in
different offices. But, it also poses a security threat because with the
many identity documents that people apply for, there is a real danger that
somewhere some of the corrupt officials we have may cause a leakage. They
may sell some of these documents after having noticed from our information
technology systems that a particular individual has applied several times
for these documents.

We want to ask our people and we would like to ask the hon members here to
use their constituency offices to emphasise to the members of the public
that they must treat their applications, and in particular their identity
documents, in a very serious manner because if this document is lost, it
could cause very serious security challenges for the country; security
challenges of the nature that we have seen in other countries. You cannot
allow our identification document to land in the wrong hands. Some of those
security threats may not just be an illegal person trying to enter South
Africa, but some of these people may be serious security-risk persons being
sought by their own countries for crimes or violation of human rights.

Mnu Z C NTULI: Bengicela ukubuza kuSekela Ngqongqoshe ukuthi kungeke yini
kusisize, njengoba sazi ukuthi sino-wall to wall wards manje, ukuthi uma
omazisi befika eMnyangweni wezaseKhaya bababhalise ngoba banamakheli bese
benikeza amakhansela aqondene nawo bathi: Naba abantu okufanele bayolanda
omazisi babo eMnyangweni wezaseKhaya, ngoba uma uya laphayana uthi uyofuna
umazisi bese kuthiwa uphakathi kwalawa, kule nqwaba engaka, kubathena
amandla abantu ukuya lapho. Kanti-ke uma umuntu ezoya esazi ukuthi cha
ngikhona lapho ohlwini, kusho ukuthi umazisi wami ukhona nawo.  Ngicela
ukubuza ukuthi kungaba nenkinga yini uma kwenziwa lezo zinhla zinikezwe
amakhansela amawadi? (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr Z C NTULI: I would like to ask the hon Deputy Minister whether or not
it could work, since we have the “wall to wall” project in wards, if, when
the Department of Home Affairs receives identity documents, they draw up a
list according to the addresses given and give this to the relevant
councillors and say to them, look, this is a list of applicants who must
collect their identity documents from the local municipal office? I am
saying this because when one goes to collect one’ s ID, one is told that
the ID may be in a certain batch of IDs, referring to a very big batch, and
that really discourages people from collecting their IDs. On the other hand
a person who knows that his or her name is also on the list will be certain
that his or her ID is available. I want to know if it would be a problem to
set up those programmes and to sub-delegate this to councillors?]

IPHINI LIKANGQONGQOSHE WEZASEKHAYA: Mhlonishwa, sizama wonke amaqhinga
esingaba nawo futhi sizimisele ukwamukela amasu nakwabanye abantu ukuze
sikwazi ukudlulisa omazisi babantu bafinyelele ezandleni zabo.
Sinezinkinga, ezinye zazo eziphathelene noMnyango, zokuthi kwathina kumele
sithuthukise inqubo esiyisebenzisayo ukwakha omazisi babantu
nokubadlulisela ebantwini kanti futhi sinazo izinkinga zokuthi sizama
ukusebenzisana nabo bonke abantu ezindaweni ezahlukene ukuze sikwazi
ukufezekisa lo msebenzi. Inkinga ekhona eyokuthi asikwazi ukucela omunye
umuntu ukuthi athathe izinyathelo zokuthi kube uyena odlulisa umazisi,
kodwa-ke leli su leli lokuthi sisebenzisane namakomidi ezigceme,
sisebenzisane namakhansela, sisebenzisane namakhosi ekuthini abantu baziswe
ukuthi omazisi babo sebelungele ukuthi bangalandwa, onke lawo masu
siyawaphenyisisa, sizowasebenzisa ukuze sithuthukise inqubo yoMnyango
esisebenza ngawo. Ngakho-ke siyawamukela wonke lawa masu abantu bakithi
abangeza nawo kanjalo namanje esesivele siwaphenya ukuze sikwazi
ukufezekisa lo msebenzi, ngoba siyazi ukuthi abantu bakithi uma befaka
izicelo zomazisi abafuni nje izinto ezinezithombe abazohlobisa ngazo
ezindongeni kepha bafuna izincwadi ezizokwazi ukubelekelela ekutheni
bathole izidingo zikahulumeni kanjalo nezeMinyango yangasese. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon member, we are trying our best
and we are also willing to take ideas from other people in order to make
sure that identity documents reach their owners. We are faced with
challenges, some of which are related to the department; we still need to
improve our systems of processing and returning of IDs to applicants. In
addition to that we are also faced with challenges when trying to work
together with all the people from different places in order to finalise
this task.
Another problem is that we do not have the right just to request anybody to
take the responsibility of handing over identity documents. However, we are
still exploring the viability of the idea of working together with ward
committees, councillors and amakhosi in informing applicants that their IDs
are ready for collection. We will use all these avenues in order to improve
the department’s processes. Therefore we welcome all these ideas that have
been brought forward by our people and there are some that we are exploring
so as to enable us to finalise this process. We also know that when our
people make applications for identity documents they are not just applying
for pictures that they will put on the wall, but that they want documents
that would help them to access government services and private business.]

     Graduates blacklisted by the National Student Financial Aid Scheme

21.   Ms J M Masilo asked the Minister of Education:

      Whether there are any interventions by the state in trying to  address
      the issue of graduates who  have  been  blacklisted  by  the  National
      Student Financial Aid Scheme for failing to pay back loans because  of
      being  unemployed;   if   so,   what   are   the   relevant   details?
                                              C331E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, the reply is as follows, and I want
to say this, first in Setswana, IsiXhosa and then in English, because this
keeps coming up in the public domain.

Ga re kwadise ba ba sa kgoneng go duela Nasfas fa e le gore ga ba dire.
[Let all those who are unemployed register with Nasfas.]

Asibabhalisi abantwana ababoleke imali kwi-Nasfas ngenxa yokuba abasebenzi.
[They do not list those who borrowed money from Nasfas when they are
unemployed.]

Nasfas does not list loan defaulters who are unemployed, but we do list
loanees who fail to comply with two undertakings that they made. Loanees
undertake to do two things after they graduate. This is part of the
agreement when they get the money while they are at university. First, they
undertake to start to repay their debt when they start to work and when
they earn in excess of R26 300 per annum.

Fa ba tsaya madi, ba kwala ba re, fa ke bona tiro ke amogela madi a kana ka
R26 300 ka ngwaga, ke tla simolola go duela. [When they receive money, they
promise in writing that when they start working, earning about R26 300,
they will repay.]

Secondly, they undertake to keep Nasfas informed of changes in addresses.

Xa ndingalishiya eli khaya, ndiye kwenye indawo, ndiya kumxelela u-Nesfus
ukuba ndiye phi, kwanokuba idilesi yam entsha ithini. [When I leave this
address and go and live elsewhere, I will inform Nasfas of my whereabouts
and my new address.]

Those are the two undertakings that they sign to. If a graduate is working
- a loanee - and refuses to pay back, then they are listed with the credit
bureau, because we have the record that they are working, given the link we
have with our tax system in South Africa. When they begin to pay or to make
alternative arrangements with Nasfas, then they will remain on the credit
bureau’s list.

If they fail to inform Nasfas of their change of address – and therefore
are in breach of an agreement they have signed – and letters or statements
are sent and returned repeatedly to Nasfas, then they are also listed until
they provide Nasfas with their correct addresses. These are normal
agreements that every institution would engage in and I think we need to
accept this. I said earlier, this is one of the best schemes. It is very
fair. If you are earning a salary, why are you refusing to pay? If you
change your address and you have signed, and we are talking about
graduates, why don’t you want to give your address?

In either event, once compliance is established, the listing is removed
immediately. I am told by Nasfas that this can be done online in 10 minutes
and no record is left with the bureau. It’s important to emphasise that
those who are still studying or those who are unemployed or those graduates
– there will be very few - who earn less than R26 300 per annum will not be
listed, provided they keep Nasfas informed of any address changes. Nasfas
also informs me that they write off the debts of those loanees who die or
who are permanently disabled.

The sustainability of the scheme depends in large measure on the repayment
of loans. I am pleased to report to the House that the record of loan
repayments has been what we think is very good and is an indication of the
willingness of young graduates of our country to contribute to the future
development of South Africa.

This year, young graduates who are employed and working were able to assist
us in providing for over R200 million more in funds for new loanees. This
is why it is so important that our young people keep to the agreements that
they undertake. This is an excellent scheme. I think to say R26 300 is the
level at which you begin to repay and the repayment will be small amounts
each month; I don’t think you can find a scheme that is better than that.

Mme J M MASILO: Ke a leboga. Dikarabo tsa Tona di nkgotsofaditse. [Thanks.
I am satisfied with the Minister’s answers.]

Mr E M SOGONI: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you, Minister, for the
response. Minister, it’s either the offices of Nasfas are not doing what
they are supposed to be doing or we are not getting accurate information
from students who say that they have been blacklisted. The other area,
which is not necessarily in your domain, is that once they are blacklisted
and look for work, the prospective employer starts looking for the track
record of this person. If it’s found that the person has been blacklisted,
it’s difficult to get a job out there. That is what people report to us.
From the response that the Minister has given, it means that we will be
able to follow up on the accuracy of information. It is possible that the
information might not be correct. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I would like to respond, Chairperson, if you
would allow, because this is a very important matter. There is a lot of
misinformation, because there are many recipients who do not wish to pay.
There are thousands who are paying back and I thank them for that, but
there are also many who send out a very erroneous message and I think we
should say that to them.

There are also people who have not begun paying although they are working.
They go to the BMW garage - I know instances of this - where they purchase
a BMW car and they need to get a loan from the bank. When the bank checks,
it finds that they are listed. Why are they listed? They were earning, but
they were not paying back their Nasfas money. I think the bank should ask
questions about whether such a person deserves to be given a loan? They are
people who they have given an undertaking, but are not meeting it.

There are lots of stories. There are even instances where parents who are
very poor, who are not wealthy in South Africa, give young people money to
go and pay at the institution where they are studying. These young people
do all sorts of things with the money and then go back home and say I was
not allowed into the university, because they wanted so much - actually not
telling the honest truth to their parents.

We have such instances where at the end of the year, when they can’t get
the results to earn their degree after completing their studies, they are
suddenly able to produce money to pay off the entire amount that they owed
the institution.

There are all sorts of strange things and sometimes it’s because we as
parliamentarians are not informing parents of what we are seeing. I would
really appreciate us sending out a clear message that this is one of the
best schemes and that if we all do what we should, we will benefit as many
South Africans as possible. Thank you very much.

                   Transport for learners in KwaZulu-Natal

22.   Mr B J Tolo asked the Minister of Education:


      Whether the policy for the provision of transport for learners will be
      implemented  in  KwaZulu-Natal;  if  not,  why  not;  if   so,   when?
                                                   C333E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I am told by KwaZulu-Natal that
they will implement their own transport policy for schools. There is no
national policy for learner transport in South Africa. It’s up to each
province to determine, within its means, what programme it would implement.

Thus far, three provinces have developed provincial policies for learner
transport: Gauteng, Western Cape and Northern Cape subsidise learners in
need of assistance. In terms of their policy, learners who have to walk a
distance of more than five kilometres to school quality.

According to the labour force survey study of 2001 and 2003, three-quarters
of the children of South Africa walk to school every day. The next most
popular method of transport is that provided by parents themselves,
followed, at around five per cent, by taxis to primary school and, at nine
per cent, by taxis to secondary school. Buses and trains are the least
popular method of transport for learners.

Children who have to walk more than five kilometres to school are the ones
who are a key concern for the Department of Education. Provincially, in
their assessment, we found that the largest numbers of children who walk
more than five kilometres to school are in the Eastern Cape, at around 77
000 children, and KwaZulu-Natal, which has the highest number at around 130
000 children. Therefore, around five per cent of learners in these
provinces walk long distances.

However, in three provinces in our country, less than one per cent of
learners walk excessive distances to school while a further two have rates
of between one and two per cent. Certainly, KwaZulu-Natal is saying, within
it’s available means and in terms of need it has identified, they indeed
intend to implement a provincial transport policy for learners.

                   Service delivery of emergency services


23.   Ms N F Mazibuko asked the Minister of Health:
      (1)   (a) What amount has been allocated to the  service  delivery  of
           the emergency services, (b) what programmes  have  been  put  in
           place to strengthen this sector, (c) how  many  (i)  ambulances,
           (ii) response cars, (iii) helicopters and (iv)  paramedics  does
           each province, local metro and municipality  have  and  (d)  how
           many new ambulances with proper  equipment  does  each  province
           intend to purchase;


      (2)   whether there are any learnership programmes to encourage young
           people to join this sector; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details?                                        C333E

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Sihlalo, angibonge kudadewethu uNk Mazibuko
ngokubuza umbuzo obalulekile. Ngiyacela ngiyanxusa futhi ukusho ukuthi
impendulo izoba yinde kakhulu ngoba igcwele amanani ayizigidi ngezigidi
nezigidi zamarandi. Kodwa-ke asiqale simnikeze impendulo yombuzo wakhe.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)


[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, let me thank my sister Ms Mazibuko
for asking such an important question. Let me tell you, however, that the
answer is very long, because there are a lot of figures involved. Anyway,
let me start answering her question.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr B J Tolo): Hon Minister, if it is that long,
is it not possible to table it and then maybe in five minutes capture the
main issues in the answer. Is it possible to do that?

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Ngizozama. Kodwa bengithi ngenza isicelo maqondana
naleli lungu elibuze umbuzo. Kodwa ngizozama ngisheshise ngithi qaphu qaphu
ukuze ngingachithi isikhathi.

Izifundazwe zonkana zikhiphe imali eyeqile kumabhiliyoni amarandi angu-1,6
yokubhekana nesimo esiphuthumayo. Isifundazwe saseMpumalanga Koloni
sikhiphe R168 wamamiliyoni; eFreyisitata kwaba R142 wamamiliyoni; eGauteng
kwaba ngaphezu kwamamiliyoni anga-R306; KwaZulu-Natal kwacishe kwaba ama-
R366 amamiliyoni; eLimpopo kwaba i-R118 lamamiliyoni; eMpumalanga kwaba ama-
R93,5 amamiliyoni; eNyakatho Kapa kwaba ama-R66 amamiliyoni; eNyakatho
Ntshonalanga kwaba ama-R97 amamiliyoni; eNtshonalanga Kapa kwaba ngaphezu
kwama-R254 amamiliyoni; (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: I will try. But I was just making a request to the
member who asked the question. I will try to be concise so as not to waste
a lot of time.

All provinces in total have set aside over R1,6 billion for emergencies.
The Eastern Cape has put aside R168 million, the Free State R142 million,
Gauteng over R306 million, KwaZulu-Natal about R366 million; Limpopo R118
million; Mpumalanga about R93,5 million; the Northern Cape R66 million,
North West R167 million; and in the Western Cape it was over R254 million.]

Regarding Question 23(1)(b), the department has finalised the national
emergency medical services strategic framework, which will enable the
national and provincial health departments to determine the optimal
placement of emergency medical services, EMS, throughout the country. The
framework, in addition, enables the cost of these services to be precisely
defined and determined.

Joint meetings between the department and the national and provincial
treasuries have already taken place to address the requirement of
additional funds for the improvement of emergency medical services. This
will become one of the department’s priorities over the next five years.

Make ngibuyele futhi kwingxenye yombuzo 23(1)(c), izigatshana (i), (ii),
(iii), (iv) ezibuza mayelana nama-ambulensi, izimoto zokubhekana nesimo
esiphuthumayo, amahelikhoptha kanye nalabo abasebenza kulo mkhakha.
Empumalanga Koloni banama-ambulensi anga-211, izimoto zesimo esiphuthumayo
ezinga-40, amahelikhoptha amathathu, abasebenzi bezempilo besimo
esiphuthumayo aba-1 100; Efreyisitata ama-ambulensi ayi-143, izimoto zesimo
esiphuthumayo zi-75, abanawo amahelikhoptha, kanti banabasebenzi besimo
esiphuthumayo aba-751; eGauteng ama-ambulensi anga-201, izimoto zesimo
esiphuthumayo zi-39, abanawo amahelikhoptha, abasebenzi bayi-1 786; KwaZulu-
Natali ama-ambulensi anga-342, izimoto zesimo esiphuthumayo zi-41, yinye
ihelikhoptha, abasebenzi bayi-1 731; eLimpopo ama-ambulensi ayi-130,
izimoto zesimo esiphuthumayo zi-12, abanawo amahelikhoptha, abasebenzi ba-
500; eMpumalanga ama-ambulensi ayi-154, izimoto zesimo esiphuthumayo zi-39,
abanawo amahelikhoptha, banabasebenzi aba-602; eNyakatho Kapa banama-
ambulensi ayi-120, izimoto zesimo esiphuthumayo ezi-8, abanawo
amahelikhophta, banabasebenzi aba-386 – kodwa kufuneka ngisheshe ngisho nje
ukuthi kwezinye izindawo lapho ngithi abanawo khona amahelikhophta,
njengaseNyakatho Kapa, banebhanoyi elijwayelekile nje elenza lo msebenzi,
kanti kwezinye izindawo basayina izivumelwano zokuthi, uma kunesidingo,
bahlele nalabo abanamahelikhoptha ukuthi basebenzelane nabo; eNyakatho
Ntshonalanga ama-ambulensi ayi-106, izimoto zesimo esiphuthumayo zi-9,
amahelikhoptha abanawo, kanti abasebenzayo ba-730; eNtshonalang Kapa ama-
ambulensi ayi-188, izimoto zesimo esiphuthumayo zi-32, amahelikhoptha
mabili, kanti abasebenzayo bayi-1 310. Sekuhlanganiswe konke, ama-ambulensi
esinawo lapha eNingizimu Afrika ayi-1 595, izimoto zesimo esiphuthumayo zi-
295, amahelikhoptha okungawethu ayi-6, abasebenzayo bayi-8 879.

Ngifuna ukuphinda ngisho ukuthi, kuye kuthi uma kufuneka sisheshise
masinyane, sisayine isivumelwano nanoma yibaphi abamabhanoyi abangashesha
bahambise izigulane lapho kufanele zifike khona. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)


[Let me go back to the other portion of question 23(1)(c), sections (i),
(ii), (iii), (iv), which ask questions regarding the ambulances, emergency
vehicles, helicopters and the people working in this field. In the Eastern
Cape, they have 211 ambulances, 40 emergency vehicles, 3 helicopters and
there are 1 100 emergency workers; in the Free State there are 143
ambulances, 75 emergency vehicles, they have no helicopter and there are
751 emergency workers; in Gauteng there are 201 ambulances, 39 emergency
vehicles, they have no helicopter and they have 1 786 emergency workers;
whereas in KwaZulu-Natal there are 342 ambulances, 41 emergency vehicles, 1
helicopter and there are 1 731 emergency workers; in Limpopo there are 130
ambulances, 12 emergency vehicles, they have no  helicopter and there are
500 emergency workers; in Mpumalanga there are 154 ambulances, 39 emergency
vehicles, they have no helicopter and there are 602 emergency workers; in
the Northern Cape there are 120 ambulances, 8 emergency vehicles, they have
no helicopter and there are 386 emergency workers – I must, however, hasten
to say that where I said provinces do not have helicopters, like in the
Northern Cape, they in fact have normal small planes that do the same job,
while in other places there are agreements that those who do not have
helicopters will be assisted by those who have if the need should arise -
in the North West there are 188 ambulances, 32 emergency vehicles, 2
helicopters and there are 1 310 emergency workers. In total we have 1 595
ambulances in South Africa, 295 emergency vehicles, 6 helicopters of our
own and there are 8 879 emergency workers.]


I would also like to mention that we are already developing a national
emergency medical services plan, which is going to be very comprehensive.

Bengifuna ukuphendula umbuzo 23(1)(d) obuza ukuthi mangaki ama-ambulensi
kodwa ngoba sengikushilo lokho, sebeyofunda emaphepheni ngoba ngizolishiya
leli phepha engifunda kulo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[I wanted to answer question 23(1)(d), which seeks to know how many
ambulances there are, but I have obviously answered this question and those
who want the answer can read it on this very piece of paper I am reading
from, because I will leave it here.]

Regarding Question 23(2), only two of the nine provinces, that is Free
State and KwaZulu-Natal, presently have learnership programmes owing to
lack of capacity in the provinces.

Kodwa-ke njengoba sesishilo, sinesu lokuthi sizobaqeqesha kanjani ukuze
sandise inani lalabo abasebenza kulo Mnyango. [Well, as we have said, we
have a plan as to how we are going to train them to multiply the number of
people working in this unit.]

However, as part of the national emergency medical services strategic
framework, the capacity for the training of emergency care practitioners
will also be addressed. The department is, in collaboration with the
professional board for emergency care practitioners, presently reviewing
training in the field of emergency care.

Uhlelo ebesinalo seluludala, aluhlangabezani nezidingo ezibonakalayo
emphakathini. Yingakho-ke silubuyekeza lolo hlelo lokuqeqesha. [The
programme that we had is outdated; it no longer meets the expected
standards in the communities. It is for this reason that we are reviewing
the training programme.]

This is being done with a view to revising the present system of training
to provide better care in the prehospital environment and to meet the
additional requirements for the trained emergency care practitioners
through the implementation of the framework.

Ngiyabonga kakhulu. Ngithemba ukuthi angithathanga isikhathi eside kakhulu.
[Thank you very much. I hope I did not take too much time.]

USIHLALO WESIKHASHANA (Mnu B J TOLO): Ngqongqoshe, siyabonga kakhulu
ngempendulo. Ngabe ukhona yini umbuzo ovuka kule mpendulo? Awukho umbuzo .
. . [Ubuwelewele.] Angizwanga kahle lapho Ngqongqoshe . . . Uthi uyadumala?
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr B J TOLO): Minister, thank you very much for
your answer. Is there anyone with a follow-up question? No question . . .
[Interjections.] I didn’t hear that clearly, Minister . . . Were you saying
you are disappointed?]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Ngithi ngiyadumala njengoba bengangibuzi omunye
umbuzo. Ngize lapha ngizimisele ukuzophendula. [I said I am disappointed
that they are not asking me any follow-up questions. I came here prepared
to answer questions.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr B J TOLO): The Minister is really not happy
that you are not asking follow-up questions. Be that as it may, I think we
will continue. You will ask follow-up questions some other time.

  Government steps to encourage social workers abroad or inactive to return

24.   Ms J Masilo asked the Minister of Social Development:

        1) Whether the Government is taking  any  steps  to  encourage  the
           return of social workers who are  (a)  abroad  and  (b)  in  the
           private  sector  (inactive);  if  not,  what  are  the  relevant
           details;


      (2)   Whether his department has any programme in place to address the
           problem of training social workers; if not, why not; if so, what
           programmes?                                              C335E


The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: The answer to the question is,
as far as social workers that are abroad are concerned, that there are no
measures currently in place to encourage these social workers to return.

In the private sector, yes, the department is in the process of finalising
the retention strategy for social workers. As the first phase in the
implementation of the retention strategy, the re-grading of salaries of
social workers in the Public Service was done and effected.

This not only focused on salaries but also improved and standardised job
descriptions, which also addressed issues regarding career-pathing and
specialisation for social workers. The approval and rolling out of the
retention strategy should address internal concerns of social workers and
attract social workers back to the sector.

To part two of the question, the answer is yes, the department has
programmes in place to address the problems of training social workers as a
means of service delivery improvement, and with a view to re-orientating
social service professionals to meet the current social challenges, as well
as deliver on the mandate of government.

The Department of Social Development has initiated the capacity-building
programme, targeting social service professionals in both government and
the NGO sector. The programme is based on the action-learning approach,
which will bridge the gap between practicing social-service professionals
who have vast knowledge in the field and the new entrants into the
profession, who have a good theoretical background, but limited experience.

It is further aimed at updating social-service professionals on new
developments within the profession and in the sector. A consultative
process was embarked upon whereby all role-players and stakeholders gave
input as to what areas of development need to be covered with the capacity-
building programmes. A curriculum was then developed to address some of the
priorities as the first phase.

The next phase of the programme will be determined upon evaluation of the
current programme, developmental needs of the department and the sector, as
well as the availability of funds.

Consultation has been initiated with an organisation called Asazwe, which
is the association of all social-work institutions of higher learning,
concerning the formal training of social workers to address the limited
number of social workers qualifying from university and concerns with the
sector in this regard. Thank you.


              Development, monitoring and evaluation of houses


25.   Mr E M Sogoni asked the Minister of Housing:
      (1)   Whether  the  developer-driven  project  (which  bypasses  local
          government)  is  the  way  to  go  with  regard  to  development,
          monitoring and evaluation of houses, especially  in  Gauteng;  if
          not, why not; if so, what steps  will  be  taken  in  respect  of
          developers who  give  poor  workmanship  and  ditch  the  project
          because they have run out of funds;


      (2)   whether the National Homebuilders Registration Council (NHBRC)
          has the capacity to monitor and evaluate the quality of homes
          that are built, especially the low-cost houses; if not, what is
          the position in this regard?  C337


The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you very much, Chair.

Ntate Sogoni ke na le bothata haholo ka potso ya hoa, hobane ha re dumele
re le mmuso hore ho be le developa e potang ka kwa le ha Masepala. Re
sebedisana le Masepala hobane re ipoleletse hore ke hona  moo ditokelo tsa
batho di tswang teng. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[Mr Sogoni, I have a problem with your question, because we don’t agree as
government that there should be developers that bypass municipalities. We
work hand in hand with municipalities because we are certain that that is
in the interests of human rights.]

Onke amalungelo abantu aphuma kumasipala. Ngoko ndiyacela, bawo,
kwasekuqaleni ukuba silungise le ndawo yokuba thina simbethisa ngoyaba
urhulumente wezekhaya. Asimbethisi ngoyaba urhulumente wezekhaya.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)



[All the rights of people are given effect by the municipality. Therefore,
I appeal to you, father, from the outset, let us rectify the point that was
made that we sideline the local government. We do not sideline the local
government.]


Having said that, we must admit that where the municipality is not the
developer, it is possible for us to fast-track what it is that we are
doing, but at all times . . .

Kodvwa ngaso sonkhe sikhatsi, masiphala kufanele ngekwemtstfo abukisise
kutsi lomtfutfukisi ngempela wenta konkhe yini lokusemandleni akhe kutsi
akwente. Ngaso sonkhe sikhatsi-ke tsine sihleti lapha kuye lomtfutfukisi
adzimate asinikete loku lebesimcele kutsi asinikete kona.

Ngeke size sifike lapho khona sitawukhandza kutsi sekuphele imali
kulomtfutfukisi, ngobe ngekwemtsetfo wetfu, kufanele ahambe ngalendlela
lebesikale ngayo kutsi asikhombise kutsi utawuphumelela yini kucedza
lomklamo wakhe.
Lomkhandlu wavelonkhe-ke wekubhalisa kwakhiwa kwetindlu, (Translation of
Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[The municipality must at all times ensure that the developer is doing
everything in his power to do it. Therefore, we will always keep asking the
developer until he gives us what we have asked for.

We will never arrive at a situation where the developer has exhausted
funds, because according to our policies, he must work in accordance with
what we have estimated in terms of his indication to us that he will be
able to finish his project.

This National Home Builders Registration Council . . . ]

Ntate Sogoni, eo yona re ipoleletse hore re se re iphile matla hore e ka
tla e fihle diautleteng tse 91. [Mr Sogoni, we have empowered ourselves and
they can come to 91 outlets.]

So we believe that we have the necessary capacity within the National Home
Builders Registration Council to monitor that all the work that it is
supposed to monitor is done on a full-time basis. In terms of the NHBRC
regulations, we require that continuous supervision is exercised by both
the municipality and the provincial government, in the case where they are
the developer, that there is a three-monthly workmanship assessment, that
there is a yearly roof leakage assessment and that there is a five-yearly
major structural defect assessment on the project.

We are tightening up on all these things to ensure that we do not have the
kind of shoddy workmanship that you refer to in the cases where the
developer is outsourced by the municipality or provincial government . . .

Ke ne ke bona e kare ke di qetile ka ofela dipotso tsa hoa . . . [I think
that I have answered all your questions . . . ]

Mr E S SOGONI: I will comply . . . [Laughter.]

                    Mass-participation sports programmes

26.   Ms N F Mazibuko asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

      (a)   What budget has been allocated to the mass-participation sports
          programmes, (b) how successful is the programme in developing
          young people to be successful athletes or sports persons, (c) how
          many young women are participating in this programme and (d) (i)
          how many hub co-ordinators does each province have and (ii) what
          stipend does each co-ordinator receive?
                            C339E

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Thank you very much, hon Chairperson.
The reply to the hon Mazibuko’s question is: (a) that the mass-
participation budget for this current financial year is      R30 million.

The response to question (b) is that we have, thus far, over 0,5 million of
young people of this country participating. It is very hard to get a final
figure because this is taking place at different places and at different
times, all the time.

We have capacitated 917 young people with basic skills, like the
administration of sport and recreation; we have taught them first-aid
skills and some of them have undergone training such as management coaching
in the following federations and activities: basketball, baseball,
indigenous games, rugby, soccer, handball, swimming lessons, athletics,
cricket, boxing, netball, aerobics and general gymnastics.

In each province, we have established a hub that focuses on youth at risk
and, in fact, they participated in the last South African games in
Ethekwini, last September, and all provinces were represented by provincial
teams of the youth at risk.

Our response to question (c) is that 42% of the total number of
participants in these hubs is female and 30% of these women are young
women. All of the women below the age of 35 from the age of 18 we
characterise as young women.

We have a total of 131 hubs throughout the country, spread out as follows:
There are 22 in the Free State; 22 in Gauteng; 16 in KwaZulu-Natal; nine in
Limpopo; 10 in Mpumalanga; 16 in the Northern Cape; eight in the North
West; 12 in the Western Cape and 22 in the Eastern Cape. All hub co-
ordinators receive a stipend of R1 800 per month and all activity co-
ordinators receive a stipend of R1 200 per month. Ke a leboga. [Thank you.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Thank you, Chairperson. Very briefly, coming from the
response of the Minister’s reply: I’ve heard talk of so many sport codes
that are, actually, being given money, but none is given to golf. Where a
lot of money is being . . . [Interjections.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr J B Tolo): Order! We are talking about mass
participation. The question is on mass participation. Thank you, sir. You
may be seated.

                Investigation into a certain local authority

27.   Ms J  F  Terblanche  asked  the  Minister  for  Provincial  and  Local
      Government:

      (1)   Whether he has received the report on the investigation into a
          certain local authority (details furnished); if not, when is it
          anticipated that he will receive the report; if so, what were the
          findings;


      (2)   whether this report will be tabled in Parliament; if not, why
          not; if so, when?                                   C343E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, the
answer to the hon member’s question is that the Minister has received the
report referred to by the hon member. The Minister and the relevant MEC,
hon B Vilakazi, are currently considering the report. Once the government
has finalised its work, a report will be presented to the relevant bodies
or structures.


     Sport and Recreation projects relating to the 2010 Soccer World Cup


28.   Mr D A Worth asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

      Whether his Department has identified specific projects in respect  of
      the amount of R241,5m, as announced by the Minister of  Finance,  that
      will be allocated to the Sport and Recreation Vote in connection  with
      the 2010 Soccer  World  Cup;  if  not,  when  will  such  projects  be
      identified; if so, (a) which projects, (b) who has been put in  charge
      of driving them and (c) what is the estimated completion date in  each
      case?                  C344E
The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Hon Chairperson, the reply to the hon
member is, as follows: To the question whether we have identified specific
projects for the budget of the R241,5 million, the answer is yes. The
Department, together with the Local Organising Committee of the FIFA 2010
World Cup in South Africa, has identified the host cities and stadia that
must be built or refurbished. To this end the R241,5 million is for
planning, design and the initial construction work that must take place in
November this year already.

As far as the second part of the question is concerned, the Development
Bank of South Africa has been entrusted with the driving of these projects
and will be overseen by the Government Technical Unit for the 2010 World
Cup under the leadership of Dr Joe Phaahla.

With regard to the third part of the question, in terms of our agreement
with FIFA, South Africa must be ready for the inspections in July 2008. The
projects themselves – the stadia and road access to the stadia - must be
ready for the test run in July 2009, when we actually take them through the
paces.

According to FIFA, we are way ahead of schedule. In fact, two weeks ago,
the FIFA delegation pleaded with us to slow down, so as not to compete with
2006. I think this is very important for the members and South Africa to
know; that we were told that the next World Cup is going to be in Germany
and therefore 2010 should not compete with 2006. This is what FIFA insists
on. In as far as our construction industry is concerned, they believe that
they will be ready on time to complete whatever they are entrusted to
complete.

Questions transferred from written to oral reply upon request by the
relevant members (Rule 239):



  Individuals requesting HIV/Aids tests at state-run hospitals and clinics

   1. Mr D A Worth asked the Minister of Health: [Written Question No 105]


      (1)   Whether individuals who request to be tested  for  HIV/Aids  are
           allowed to do so at all state-run hospitals and clinics in South
           Africa; if not, why not; if so,




      (2)   whether this applies to the Kestell clinic in the Free State; if
           not,  why  not;  if  so,  what   are   the   relevant   details?
                                                   C223E


The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson . . . e re ke boele ke lebohe potso. Ke
re ha o ya mane dipetleleng tsa mmuso, re tla o thusa ha batla ho etsa
diteko tsa HIV/Aids. Kaofela ha tsona di etsa diteko tse jwalo. Dipersente
tse 89 tsa ditleliniki tsa mmuso le tsona di tla o thusa ka diteko tsa
HIV/Aids, ha o batla hore di etswe. [Thank you once more for the question.
I have said that when you go to the public hospitals, we will assist you if
you want to have HIV/Aids tests. All of them do these tests. Eighty-nine
percent of public clinics will also assist you with HIV/Aids tests, if you
want to have them done.]

I then talk about the Kestell clinic in the Free State. It offers a
comprehensive primary health-care package and that also includes voluntary
counselling and testing.

Tleliniking eno re na le baoki ba babedi ba rupeletsweng ka botlalo ho etsa
mosebetsi wa ho etsa diteko esitana le ho kgothatsa le ho thoba maikutlo a
eo diteko di entsweng ho yena. Baoki bana ba sebetsa ho tloha ka 07:30
hoseng ho fihlella ka 16:00 thapama. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph
follows.)

[In that clinic we have two well-trained nurses to do the job of running
the tests and counselling the person who is being tested. These nurses work
from 07:30 in the morning to 16:00 in the afternoon.]

At no stage are patients denied testing for HIV if they want to be tested.
A total of 20 lay counsellors were trained to assist the two professional
nurses in providing pre- and post-test counselling. We work very well.
Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, I just want to request if the Minister could
give me that reply in writing as well, please?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Mr Worth . . . o tla e fumana karabo e ngotswe, le
ka molomo. Ke a leboha. [You will receive a verbal and a written response.
Thank you.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Worth, did you hear that?

Mr D A WORTH: Yes, thank you, Chairperson.

Mr S SHICEKA: Thank you, Chairperson. To the Minister, as far as testing
for HIV and Aids is concerned, for people who don’t want to go to public
hospitals or clinics because they don’t want to expose themselves, when are
we going to have the technology in our country where you test yourself at
home – which is like the pregnancy test? When is it going to be available
in this country? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson . . . karabo ya ka e itse: [My response
was as follows:]

We must provide pre- and post-testing counselling. If you can
pre-counsel, pre-test and post-counsel yourself, maybe we can consider
that. I don’t know of any person who can pre-counsel and post-counsel
himself or herself. So, I don’t think we are going to provide that, unless
you can assure me that you will offer the facilities for pre-counselling
and post-counselling at home. I don’t want suicides. I thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Questions 3 and 4 will stand over, as will 12.

    Fraud and corruption relating to motor-vehicle registration, driving-
 licence tests and vehicle roadworthiness from 1 January 2004 to the present

14.   Mr D A Worth asked the Minister of Transport:

      Whether any instances of fraud and corruption have been discovered  in
      the Free State with regard  to  (a)  motor-vehicle  registration,  (b)
      driving-licence tests and (c) vehicle roadworthiness during the period
      1 January 2003 up to the latest specified date for  which  information
      is available; if so, (i) (aa) what were the  circumstances,  and  (bb)
      who were the people involved, in each case, (ii) what specified action
      was taken against the persons involved and (iii) what steps are  being
      taken by his department to prevent a reoccurrence of  such  fraud  and
      corruption?                       C280E

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Thank you, Chairperson and hon members. I would
request to summarise the answer because it is too long to be given orally
but I would provide a copy of the full response to the hon member and the
House.

A number of cases were indeed reported in the Free State where fraud and
corruption took place during the period 1 January 2003 up to date with
regards to motor-vehicle registration.

In Viljoenskroon, one testing officer, one NaTIS clerk and one police
officer are being prosecuted. The Traffic Management Directorate of the
Free State Province, together with the audit, implemented new guidelines
for the checking of documentation by supervisors.

The following areas were involved in driving-licence tests: Ladybrand,
Viljoenskroon, Welkom, Winburg, Goldfields and Bloemfontein, East Free
State, North Free State, Odendaalsrus and Kroonstad. People such as
gardeners, owners of driving schools, testing officers and a NaTIS clerk,
amongst others, were also involved.

There were specified actions in which officials were involved in Ladybrand,
Viljoenskroon, Welkom, Winburg and Goldfields and the concerned officials
were arrested and are being prosecuted. This includes an owner of a driving
school, who was recently sentenced to 18 months imprisonment. Offenders
involved in East Free State, North Free State, Goldfields, Senekal and Paul
Roux were arrested, so were those in Odendaalsrus and Kroonstad. The
Directorate of Traffic Management, together with the audit, have embarked
on a process of checking the documentation of supervisors.

In places such as Sasolburg, Welkom and Bloemfontein, there are a number of
vehicles that were declared roadworthy without being tested for
roadworthiness. In Sasolburg, offenders included a NaTIS clerk and testing
officers, and in Bloemfontein, people from a private testing station and
the officials concerned were arrested and are being prosecuted.

I would like to say, with regards to the second question, that in most of
these cases the provincial monitoring body works in collaboration with the
SAPS Organised Crime Unit in Welkom and Bloemfontein. These criminals will
be brought to book and members of staff would be disciplined accordingly.

In addition to the steps that are being taken by the provincial department
to prevent a recurrence of fraud and corruption, the national department is
paying for and has requested the Special Investigative Unit to assist with
the national audit and investigation of driving licences and vehicle theft
with the assistance of the SA Police Service and the National Intelligence
Agency. In collaboration with the Special Investigative Unit, we are
discussing ways of extending this investigation to all registering
authorities and, in some cases, vehicle testing stations where roadworthy
inspections take place.

It was also reported to the department that the Special Investigative Unit
had successes in the Free State, where irregularities relating to driving-
licence fraud took place. As soon as these investigations are completed and
the Director of Public Prosecution has taken the decision to prosecute, we
will make the necessary announcement.

Whilst the Special Investigative Unit and other core workers are dealing
with the crime-related matters on the one side, the Department Transport is
simultaneously wrapping up procedures and legislation to improve the
situation. The details pertaining to these facts would be made available to
the hon members to peruse, as I said initially. Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: I would like to thank the hon Minister for his full reply to
my question. Thank you very much.

The Council adjourned at 17:06.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                           MONDAY, 7 NOVEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister of Defence


          i) Prohibition of Mercenary Activities and Prohibition and
             Regulation of Certain Activities in Areas of Armed Conflict
             Bill [B 42 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 28163 of 24 October 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Defence of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         8 November 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the
         Minister of Finance on 7 November 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.


      2) Prohibition of Mercenary Activities and Prohibition and Regulation
         of Certain Activities in Areas of Armed Conflict Bill, 2005,
         submitted by the Minister of Finance on 7 November 2005. Referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Defence and the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs.

3.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
        Committees viz:

        Budget:


        Asiya, Mr S E (Alt)
        Chikunga, Mr L S
        Cwele, Mr S C (Alt)
        Dithebe, Mr S L
        Fubbs, Ms J L (Alt)
        Gumede, Mr D M
        Mabe, Ms L L
        Mashigo, Ms R J
        Mahomed, Ms F
        Mkongi, Mr B M
        Mnguni, Mr B A (Alt)
        Schippers, Mr J
        Wang, Mr Y


        Constitutional Review Committee:


        Beukman, Mr F
        Burgess, Mr C V
        Chohan-Khota, Ms F I
        Gaum, Mr A
        Jeffery, Mr J H
        Masutha, Adv T M
        Ndzanga, Mr R A
        Njobe, Ms M A A
        Schoeman, Dr E A


        Defence:


        Booi, Mr M S
        Cele, Mr M A
        Diale, Mr L N
        Johnson, Ms C B
        Koornhof, Dr G W
        Madasa, Adv Z L (Alt)
        Matsemela, Ms M L
        Maziya, Mr A M (Alt)
        Monareng, Mr O E
        Montsitsi, Mr S D
        Mngomezulu, Mr G P
        Nxumalo, Ms M D
        Ntuli, Mr S B
        Phungula, Mr J P
        Sotyu, Ms M M  (Alt)
        Schippers Mr J
        Tolo, Bishop L J
        Van Wyk, Ms A


        Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Qualilty of Life and
        Status of Women:


        Direko, Ms I W (Alt)
        Mabena, Mr D C
        Makasi, Ms X C
        Maserumule, Mr F T (Alt)
        Meruti, Ms M V
        Morobi, Ms D M (Alt)
        Morutoa, Ms M R
        Ngele, Ms N J
        Ntuli, Ms B M
        Ngcobo, Ms B T
        Rwexana, Ms S P
        Tshwete, Ms P


        Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
        Status of Children, Youth and Disabled People:


        Bhengu, Ms P
        Chalmers, Ms J
        Gcwabaza, Mr N E
        Kondlo, Ms N C
        Madella, Mr A F (Alt)
        Mohlaloga, Mr M R (Alt)
        Molefe, Mr C T
        Moss, Mr M I
        Newhoudt-Drunchen, Ms W S
        Nzimande, Mr L P M
        Reid, Mr L R R

                          TUESDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 8 November 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bills as section 76
         Bills:


         (i)     Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Amendment Bill [B
              35 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76)


         (ii)    Diamonds Second Amendment Bill [B 39 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 76).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 7 November 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a section 77
         Bill (money Bill):


         (i)     Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 37 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 77).

2.    Introduction of Bills


      1) The Minister of Finance


         ii) (i) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2005] (National
             Assembly – sec 77)


         (ii)    Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              28212 of 7 November 2005.]
         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         8 November 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


COMMITTEE REPORTS




National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
    Patents Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75),
    dated 8 November 2005:

        The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having
        considered the subject of the Patents Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2005]
        (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has
        agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, dated
    25 October 2005:

        The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs having
        considered the Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and
        Retail Sector Education and Training Authority (W&RSETA) for 2004-
        2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005 referred to it, reports that it has
        concluded its deliberations thereon.

