---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 March 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-03-16
---

WEDNESDAY, 16 MARCH 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:01.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.



                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M WATERS: Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the next
sitting day:

  That this House debates the shortage of social workers in the Public
  Service and the NGO sector and the resulting impact of this on service
  delivery. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, on behalf of the ACDP, I give notice that I shall move
on the next sitting day:

  That the House debates government’s new finance policy on service awards
  to service providers and its envisaged implementation in view of the fact
  that government aims to deliver critical services through these organs.
  Thank you.

 THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN ESTABLISHING INNOVATIVE INTERNATIONAL FINANCING
    AND TRADING MECHANISMS TO ADDRESS THE PROBLEM OF DEBT AND ACHIEVE THE
                         MILLENIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS

                                  (Debate)

Mr L ZITA: Chairperson, today we are discussing a very important issue: the
ensemble of factors that have hitherto arrested Third World development. In
particular we are trying to respond to the question put to us by the IPU:
whether we as parliamentarians can play a role in establishing innovative
international and financing trading mechanisms to address the problem of
debt and achieve the millennium development goals. Despite many challenges
the underdeveloped world, including Africa, has begun to make itself felt
on the issues of the developmental agenda of globalisation.

As testimony to this we have this week witnessed the formal launch of the
UK-led Commission for Africa. As the ANC we welcome this development. We
continue to hope that our call for all of us to be our brother’s keeper is
beginning to resonate across whole sectors of the world as an appreciation
of our common humanity. It is important for us to appreciate that
initiatives such as the Commission for Africa are not an act of generosity
by the global powers. They are a result of an all-round campaign by the
peoples of the world, both in the North and in the South, to fight for and
create a different world, to ensure those that assemble annually at the
world social forum that another world is possible. As part of this fight
there is unity, not only of social movements, but also of the states of the
South in the trade negotiations of the World Trade Organisation.

South Africa has been at the centre of these initiatives such as the
establishment of the India-Brazil-South Africa front on the world stage, as
well as playing a critical role in strengthening the cohesion of Africa in
the multilateral trade negotiations system. For the South trade is crucial.
There is a correlation between levels of trade and levels of affluence on
the one hand, and the absence of trade and the accentuation of deprivation
on the other.

Trade is used as a tool in the war for economic and political domination in
the global political and economic system. As with most issues in the modern
capitalist world, behind the veneer and civility of the trade system is a
capricious pursuit by the North to gorge the last remnants of blood from
the people of the South through a system that seeks to freeze the present
power relations in the global economic system.

Africa is part of the global economy. The issue is the manner of our
integration. For instance, sub-Saharan Africa only contributes 1,6% of
world exports and absorbs a meagre 1,9% of world imports. Even though the
continent has been moving towards nontraditional exports, this move remains
precarious. With the exception of Egypt, Mauritius and South Africa the
rest of the continent has sought to integrate itself at the expense of
labour and without any productivity improvements.

Another debilitating factor is the change in the terms of trade. Since the
commodity boom of the early 1970s the trend of the terms of trade for the
continent has been declining in sub-Saharan Africa by 21% from the 1970s
peak. A study by the World Bank on the cumulative impact of this decline
concludes that, as a result of these adverse terms of trade, sub-Saharan
Africa has lost 119% of the regional gross domestic product as well as 51%
and 68% of net resource flows and net resource transfers to the region,
respectively.

Commenting on this report, UNCTAD notes that if these numbers are combined
with leakages from capital inflows into outflows and the accumulation of
reserves, it turns out that in the past decades sub-Saharan Africa has not
received any net transfer of real resources from the rest of the world.

Another reason behind the decline in the terms of trade has to do with the
price reduction of primary products relative to manufactures. The gap
between the prices of these different kinds of products is between one to
two thirds of what it was three decades earlier. Price fluctuations and
volatility in Africa has been double that of East Asia and four times that
of the North, creating uncertainty and, as a result, adverse conditions for
wealth creation – a vicious cycle.

This vicious cycle extends even to the export of manufactured goods; a
function of the fact that the exports of the South are labour intensive
whilst overall global competitiveness is skills and technology intensive.
The weakening of the trade capacity of the underdeveloped world relates
also to the challenge of market access, whilst the rhetoric of neo-liberal
globalists is about the sanctity of open markets and free trade. This is
not matched by practice.

Whilst in some instances there is willingness to encourage trade in primary
commodities, once these are value added there is a whole arsenal of
interventions that northern governments resort to. These range from peak
tariffs and quotas, antidumping and countervailing duties that are imposed
on imports, sanitary and phytosanitary import restrictions, export
subsidies for agricultural and industrial products, as well as various
production and investment subsidies both for agricultural and industrial
products.

If this regime of exclusion could be ended the North would save 2,2% of its
GDP, a total amount of about $470 billion. Underdeveloped countries would
immediately gain an extra 10% of their GDP. For South Africa this could
easily translate into an extra R100 billion annually and R15 billion to our
fiscus. For sub-Saharan Africa the end of subsidies would be equal to a
241% increased injection to the regional GDP. The World Trade Organisation
as it operates today has not done much to undo this unfair global
architecture. The struggle must continue.

The skewed nature of the global trading system has a genesis dating back to
the classical era of imperialism, colonialism and latter- day
neocolonialism. It has been underpinned by a weak and comprador
bourgeoisie, which acts in the main as rent seekers or appendages of
multinational corporations. This is more the case in Africa due to the lack
of maturity of social structures. Together with a weak working class and
the unorganised popular classes, this lack of maturity and of a national
project has caused African leaders and their bourgeoisie not to make use of
the commodity boom of the 70s.

As a response to this crisis a number of proposals have been made. The more
fundamental is the end to agricultural and industrial trade barriers. Key
to the reconstruction of a more equitable trade regime is the need to
transform the financial architecture that oils the global trading system.
Since the Second World War, the World Bank and the IMF have been at the
centre of the world economy. Whilst geared to facilitate the reconstruction
of the world economy after the war, they have developed to become hegemonic
instruments of the North, particularly the United States, and, as a result,
are discredited in the eyes of the underdeveloped world.

According to Paul Streeten, one of the pioneers of development economics, a
number of proposals have been made whose aim is a progressive recomposition
of the global financial architecture. These include the creation of a
global central bank, a global investment trust that would recycle current
account surpluses to capital-starved countries, a global income tax, a
global environmental protection agency, etc. Whilst such developments would
be critical and welcomed, we need to undertake the painstaking effort to
transform and re-orientate the agenda, also of the existing institutions
such as the World Bank and the IMF.

Whilst the global agenda remains critical, there should also be a
continental and national agenda for effective and transformative financial
mediation. The Nepad initiative should provide a framework to the
bolstering of the African Development Bank, whose responsibility should
encompass both infrastructural and ordinary accumulation. Such a
developmental state at the continental level should also spur the evolution
of a developmental state in all the member states of the African Union.

It will take the reconstruction of the present trade regime, its financial
architecture and the elaboration of a developmental state to create the
foundation for progressive development in the underdeveloped world. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA:  Madam Chairperson, I shall speak as an African.
[Interjections.] I shall also speak as a liberal. [Interjections.] More
importantly, I shall speak as an Africanist.

The debt situation in the Third World is dire. The external debt of the
Third World grew fifty-fold between 1968 and the year 2003, when it reached
the dizzy height of US$436 billion. Now, for each dollar that the South
receives, it pays back three to rich countries.

Given absolute debt levels in amounts already paid as debt service, the
poor countries of the South had by 2003 actually paid their debt twice. In
all this, Africa’s situation has been truly traumatic. The question
therefore is: Can the Third World pay back the debt? My answer is: No. Why
do I say this? Because underdeveloped countries currently devote the bulk
of their export income to servicing their external debt. The share of the
South in world export trade has been declining, mainly due to a trend
decline in export prices and the protectionist policies of developed
countries. There is another reason, and that is that most African countries
that qualified for the heavily-indebted poor countries initiative have a
debt export ratio of 300%, whereas 200% is considered the limit for a
manageable debt.

We may then ask the question: Can the Third World meet the Millennium
Development Goals, the MDGs? The answer again is: No, not if the current
trend continues.

For example, since 2000, when the MDGs were adopted, Africa’s dire socio-
economic conditions have worsened, a fact which strongly suggests that,
under the current circumstances, the MDGs are simply unachievable. To quote
a 2005 IPU report:

  Unless the situation improves, it is estimated that sub-Saharan Africa
  will not achieve universal primary education until 2129. It will not be
  able to reduce poverty by half until 2147, and to reduce infant mortality
  rates by one third until 2165.


If current trends prevail, the international mortality rate among children
under five years of age will drop by approximately one quarter by 2015,
which is a far cry from the reduction goal of two-thirds.

The question, which is important today, is: What can countries of the North
do to help? They can simply cancel their debt. Regarding this, there are
antecedents in history. The following few examples will suffice to prove my
point. In the 1950s, Germany had 80% of its debt cancelled, and was allowed
to apply only about 4% of its export income toward the remaining portion.
In the late 1980s, creditor countries cancelled about 50% of Poland’s debt
to assist it to make a transition from socialism to a free market economy.
The USA, in 1991, cancelled US$7 billion of Egypt’s debt in reward for
supporting it during the first Gulf War. More recently, America has
championed with success the cancellation of Iraq’s debt, arguing that it
was largely illegitimate, a situation that clearly applies to most of
Africa’s debt.

Despite the free market and liberal democratic reforms that most of Africa
has undertaken, and despite the fact that most of Africa’s debt qualifies
as illegal and illegitimate, clearly so, Mr Bush apparently thinks that he
should only pursue his objective of spreading freedom where the supply of
oil is threatened.

What most of the Third World has is a mere litany of palliatives and phoney
solutions. The countries of the North can finance the total cancellation of
the Third World’s debt by doing three things: First, stop protectionist
policies that currently cost underdeveloped countries at least US$100
billion a year, which is twice what these countries receive as Official
Development Assistance, ODA. Indeed, rich countries spend more than US$330
billion on domestic subsidies. The Third World only requires about 5% of
that amount to meet the MDGs.

Second, they should cut down their military spending to release funds for
meeting the MDGs. A reduction of just 12% of total world military spending
will free up more than US$100 billion, much more than is required to meet
the MDGs.

Third, they should honour their commitment to devote a meagre 0,7% of their
GDP to ODA, which will generate about US$175 billion a year, far in excess
of what is required to meet the MDGs.

We are debating this to determine what the role of the South African
Parliament is in all of this. Acting through the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
the IPU, the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa should, first, get
parliaments of rich countries to do the three things I have already
outlined above. Second, they should regularly discuss and debate Africa’s
trade and external debt issues, and insist that people participate in
decisions regarding these. Moreover, it should insist on taking part in
trade negotiations, even if only in a consultative capacity, as it
represents the supreme will of the people.

Third, it should insist, through the executive, that heavily-indebted
middle-income countries be included in any proposed solutions or
mechanisms, as they also suffer serious economic and social imbalances, and
owe much higher levels of debt. They should also work for the elimination
of all obstacles to market access or to free and fair trade, and against
the piracy of indigenous people’s knowledge. They should also move for the
establishment of an international tax on financial transactions not aimed
at trading goods and services.

Fourth, they should generate funds for meeting MDGs and to curb the
financial instability to which emerging market economies are very
vulnerable, including our own country. Finally, they should propose the
establishment of an UN-administered worldwide lottery to raise funds to
meet MDGs. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER:  Madam Chair, strangely enough, today I find myself in
agreement with the two previous speakers, so I don’t know whether something
has gone wrong.

The issue before this House today will be on the agenda of the Inter-
Parliamentary Union’s 112th session in Manila. The South African delegation
wishes to share some thoughts with our colleagues to enable us to be
mandated on these important issues.

In 2003, underdeveloped countries, which are home to 85% of the world’s
population, accounted for only 44% of the global GDP, and only 25% of
international trade. It should also be noted that the underdeveloped
countries’ share in global export has declined drastically. There are many
obstacles and challenges that these countries face with regard to
international trade.

Although there are masses of people living in abject poverty, many
underdeveloped countries still have to divert their meagre funds in order
to pay the interest on their external debt. They are therefore not making
any headway with regard to real economic development. This vicious cycle
will continue unless we find ways to address the high debt faced by the
underdeveloped countries, as well as increasing international finance to
these countries.

By 2003, the external debt of underdeveloped countries was      US$2,6
trillion, and the debt service stood at US$436 billion. This high level of
external debt serves as a deterrent to potential foreign investors as they
view these countries as being a high risk.

The Millennium Development Goals commit the international community to an
expanded vision of development that promotes human development as the key
to sustaining social and economic progress in all countries.

Reaching the MDGs within the agreed timeframes remains a monumental task,
which might not be achieved unless drastic steps are taken to address,
among other things, the development finance shortfalls as well as the high
external debt that most underdeveloped countries face.

Parliaments have to be united in their efforts to meet the challenges of
the MDGs. Many Inter-Parliamentary Union resolutions underscore the role of
parliaments in putting pressure on governments, and ensuring that their
commitments and targets are met. Parliaments should use their oversight
roles to monitor the MDGs’ progress reports as well as to ensure that they
are debated in Parliament.

Parliaments around the globe can make a difference and contribute by
playing an active and ongoing role in their respective governments’
efforts, and by ensuring that their countries meet their various
commitments in achieving the MDGs. In this manner, our Parliament can also
make a substantial contribution.

Mr M STEPHENS: Chairperson and hon members, the extent of the debt problem
is well known. However, how to convince and encourage the developed world
to take the necessary action is the question. Parliaments have a crucial
role in championing the eight Millennium Development Goals.

The UDM believes that our role as Parliament should go well beyond the
adoption of the corresponding legislation and appropriate budgetary
allocations when required to do so. We should become proactive in
developing innovative solutions - solutions that the developed world will
buy. We must proceed from the acknowledgement that globalisation is a fact.
Simultaneously, it represents a source of opportunities as well as
challenges, and it has an impact on people’s everyday lives.

The importance of international trade and investment and their direct
influence on the development and wellbeing of the nations of the world
cannot be overemphasised. Nevertheless, we cannot but be concerned at the
fact that the current international trade and investment system is quite
obviously distorted in favour of the developed countries.

If we are to make poverty history and put an end to avoidable   human
misery and suffering, the current global financial and economic model must
be revised. Such a revision must be undertaken only after an exhaustive
study and intensive debate. However, time is of the essence.

The three main sources of funding to empower developing countries, namely
economic growth, debt relief and public assistance, will be unable to
generate the extra US$50 billion to US$100 billion required annually to
achieve the MDGs.

The imperative is for Parliament to set up properly resourced think tanks
to generate innovative solutions. We, the developing countries, must take
charge of the agenda or face being sidelined by the developed world.

A radical solution to the debt problem is required. To succeed, debt
cancellation should be linked to the earmarking of resources thus freed up
for investments related to achieving the MDGs, especially in health,
education and gender equality. It is up to us to make it happen. I thank
you.

Ms H C MGABADELI: Chairperson, I dedicate this speech to the visionaries
who, decades ago, called for an end to racism, tribalism, sexism and all
other such –isms. It is with pride and appreciation of the fallen heroes
and heroines of our struggle for the democratic liberation of our country,
the continent and, indeed, the whole globe that one is standing here today
debating the Millennium Development Goals, as seen not only by the South
African masses, but all the United Nations member states.

Who would have thought that after years of resistance to change all South
Africans - both black and white, governing together for people’s power and
equality before the law, in a country where peace and friendship is what we
all look for and work for - would this day come together and say: Let us
align our parliamentary minds with those of the other parliaments towards
addressing the problem of debt and achieving the Millennium Development
Goals for a better life for all?

Who would have thought that all South Africans, black and white, through
their Parliament, would be sitting like this, trying to find better ways
and means of sharing in their country’s wealth with the rest of the globe
without incurring debts? Aluta Continua!

Without any waste of time, one would zoom into, first, recognising some of
the instruments that our government has put in place to ensure that the
country’s goals are met. I would really request everybody to realise that
we do have instruments here. These instruments are going to be of great
help in seeing the Republic of South Africa, as a member state of the UN,
participate meaningfully in ensuring that these Millennium Development
Goals are achieved.

In doing so, we will spell out, step by step, instruments as we tackle them
goal by goal. Secondly, we would like to remind our hon members of what the
goals are that we are talking about. We will check the distance travelled
towards achieving them, and we will also look at how do we continuously
utilise the networks and the linkages that exist. These linkages with the
international community were cultivated during the hard times of the
apartheid era. They were some of the pillars that saw us achieve this
democracy around whose warm fires we are now able even to debate the issues
of millennium development goals as a country, as a government and as a
parliament whose motherland is one of the member states of the United
Nations.

What are these goals? Let me remind you of the goals that we are talking
about. They are, to eradicate poverty and hunger; to achieve universal
primary education; to promote gender equality and empower women; to reduce
child mortality; to improve mental health; to combat HIV/Aids, malaria, TB
and other diseases; to ensure environmental sustainability; and, lastly, to
develop global partnerships for development.

Let us look into our own government and our own Parliament. What are these
instruments? There is a list of them, but I will just cite a few. In
eradicating poverty, the Department of Transport sees extreme poverty as
often linked to people and communities being completely stranded, with
public resources and services being inaccessible. The intervention
strategy, as an instrument of eradicating these, involves a yearly
expenditure of R4 billion on transport subsidies.

The recapitalisation programme of R7 billion over five years is designed to
extend safe and affordable transport to poor communities. The Department of
Labour, on the other hand, through its National Skills Development
Strategy, deals with skilling human resources for the total eradication of
poverty, which is a long-term strategy beyond 2015. With regard to goals
three, four, five and six - as you heard me tabulating - I will just quote
that through the National Policy Framework for Women’s Empowerment and
Gender Equality, we are able to do this.

We will be able to achieve this through international resources, such as
the gender-related development index, which pays attention to and mobilises
all other departments towards the attainment of this goal.

When it comes to ensuring environmental sustainability, let us again look
at the Department of Transport. It places emphasis on public transport to
increase the use of certain modes in order to circumvent the one-car, one-
person practice, which aggravates the emission of carbon dioxide.

When it comes to the last goal, which is to develop global partnerships for
development, we will take it when we are looking at the linkages. I would
like us to look at the distance that we have travelled towards achieving
this, as we are expected to have achieved these goals by 2015.

It is imperative for all hon members to visit President Thabo Mbeki’s state
of the nation address of February 2005 and identify  indications of the
distance we have travelled. Among other indications, we would like to
highlight the following, within the context of this debate; the “decisive
advances”, as he called them. The first one is eradicating poverty and
underdevelopment within the context of a thriving and growing first
economy, and the successful transformation of the second economy.

Secondly, he quotes the Rand Merchant Bank on domestic output. We achieved
the 10-million mark in December last year in terms of South Africans who
gained access to potable water since 1994. He also quotes City Press on
education.

Thirdly, the CEO of Anglo American South Africa, Lazarus Zim, indicated
that large resources will be utilised to empower a great number of black
enterprises and to develop a global partnership for development.

Fourthly, he quotes the Expanded Public Works Programme, worth
R1, 5 billion, which created over 76 000 job opportunities and provided
thousands of those enrolled with the skills that will stand them in good
stead as they will have learned from such programmes.

There is long list of measurable indications that the development goals of
the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa, as well as the United
Nations Millennium Development Goals, are achievable. That is, if and when
members of Parliament get driven by acts of patriotism, humaneness and
commitment to the defence of the motherland.

Hon members, just go back to the state of the nation address and understand
it as having a one-unit relationship with the UN Millennium Development
Goals, then you will realise that nothing is impossible.

Budget Votes will be presented to us a few weeks from now by the different
departments. We call upon all loving South African parliamentarians to make
it their role to crosscheck as to what the financial resources are utilised
for, within the context of our goals and the UN development goals.

When it comes to developing global partnerships, which is one of the
aspects I will address, we are saying that attending different progressive
conferences whose purposes are in line with what we are striving to achieve
– for example, the 112th IPU Assembly-will further strengthen the exchange
of ideas towards cancellation of such debts. We cannot just howl from
nowhere; we must create a base where we are going to debate these issues.

The other important aspect would be to carefully identify needs for
entering into bilateral agreements with countries whose intentions are
towards minimising the gap that exists between those two economies.

We should become a parliament that adds value to conventions such as the AU
Convention on Prevention and Combating Corruption and we should become
serious contributors to putting in place monitoring systems to monitor the
success of such conventions and many other structures.

In conclusion, I want to say, make every step you take, every word you
utter, every moment you spend as a public representative a value-adding
gesture towards our goal of transforming our society to meet the basic
imperative goals that were foreseen as far back as November 1989 in
Sechaba, which was an official organ of the ANC, and I quote:


  The times demand decisive and clear-sighted leadership at every level -
  in the factories and other workplaces, at the local, regional and
  national level. Only thus can we reap the fruits of the new possibilities
  created through struggle. To be effective, such leadership must be firmly
  rooted in organisations of the people, accountable to the people, and
  committed to the cause of the people.


Then will we achieve the Millennium Development Goals. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]


Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, what is not surprising is the emphasis placed
by the World Bank, the IMF and the world donor community on the role of
parliaments in poverty reduction strategies and reaching the Millennium
Development Goals.

Multiparty democratic parliaments that rule by consent and that are not the
pawns of kleptocratic, centralised, presidential-style executive
governments in Africa are essential building blocks of development
progress. These parliaments need to be nurtured.

I think it is essential not to fall into the trap, however, of looking for
simon-pure before turning on the aid flows, but certain basic standards and
structures do need to be in place. Trends at least must be flowing in the
right direction. Transparency, proper accounting and demonstrable public
benefit need to be in place. We must remember that donor governments also
need to be able to sell these ideas and costs to their parliamentarians in
their democratic parliaments.

Finally, I want to say that multilaterism is essential to the developing
world, but we in the ACDP believe that we must be careful that we do not
spend all our resources, time and energy on multilateralism and focus only
on the general good, and fail to deal with South Africa’s own particular
challenges and opportunities. Bilaterlism is vital, but it is also vital
for us to pursue our own interests and development goals. And what is good
for South Africa is good for our region. Remember that the multilateral
lead times are very long but we have urgent priorities in our own country.
I thank you.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Deputy Chairperson, the Inter-Parliamentary Union was
established in 1889 as an organisation of parliaments of sovereign states.
Our Parliament must play a vital role in the core business of the IPU and
contribute to the development of Third World countries and our own
development.

In the course of our liberation struggle, we sacrificed many lives to
improve the living conditions of our people, and we may not fail them. The
position is clear: The struggle continues until the last inch of our land
is equitably redistributed to us.

We are our own liberators. We must wage a socialist revolution from all
fronts to deal with the remaining forms of oppression. Land dispossession
is central to our cause, while economic injustice is an integral part of
it.

Parliament and our people must take a firm and non-negotiable position that
slavery, colonialism, land dispossession and, today, neo-colonialism had
put us in this quagmire of external debt, and it must be cancelled. These
debts have brought about the economic and social deterioration of our
country, all other debtor countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and the world.

The main culprits, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, must
be transformed to meet the material needs and conditions of the Third World
countries. Their policies lack flexibility and the conditions of their
adjustment programmes leave much to be desired.

Our goal of economic growth must be strengthened by enforcing strict
principles of corporate governance. Initiatives to mobilise large funds
should be taken seriously to meet the objectives of the Millennium
Development Goals. I thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Chairperson, the G7, comprising the United States,
Japan, Britain, Germany, France, Italy and Canada, or the G8 which includes
Russia, has been pressurised to be committed to debt relief to impoverished
countries by 2015, in line with the Millennium Development Goals.

Agreement has been reached to look at case studies of heavily indebted poor
countries, and a willingness to allow debt relief of 100% to multilateral
debts has been indicated, though the US has voiced opposition.

Britain has shown a serious commitment to this debt relief in Africa. The
recent visit by Britain’s finance minister, Gordon Brown, in pursuing a new
modern Marshall Plan, has resulted in the writing off of Mozambique’s debt
of R900 million, and an undertaking to pay 10% of that debt to
international lenders and its multilateral lenders. A meeting was convened
in South Africa between Brown and our hon Minister of Finance, amongst
other key role-players, to discuss how to alleviate poverty, illiteracy,
health problems and trade impediments.

The MF takes this opportunity to applaud Britain, which has undertaken to
share the debt of 70 countries. I refer to the words of Gordon Brown.
Voicing their commitment, he said:

  Justice promised will forever be justice denied unless we remove from
  this generation the burden of debt by past generations.

Poverty relief is the means to clearly promote development. Nelson Mandela
has correctly said that, like slavery and apartheid, poverty is not
natural. It is man-made and can be overcome and eradicated by the actions
of human beings. Sub-Saharan Africa alone owes R430 billion to multilateral
lenders.

However, the MF feels that other than this debt relief by rich countries,
we developing countries in our own capacity need to realise that we have
the tools to promote our development. We need to firmly eradicate the laws
of the apartheid regime that shackled non-whites to low-credit facilities.
As Parliament, we should adamantly reject the past and legislate laws and
policies that not only place all South Africans on an equal footing but
also motivate trade, the establishment of global relations and the
settlement of debt.

BEE stands to assist businesses that are already established, but its
primary focus needs to be shifted to small businesses. This is our way of
joining Mandela’s campaign to make poverty history. In so doing, we echo
the words of Minister of Foreign Affairs Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma that what
is crucial for our success is to identify new resources for development,
consolidate competing development funds and ensure substantial debt relief.

The MF calls upon the House to commit itself to bring into action laws and
policies that influence international financing and trade mechanisms that
address debt and the millennium development goals. I thank you.

Mr I VADI: Chairperson and hon members, you might have been surprised by
the anti-Bush rhetoric that came from the hon Nkem-Abonta of the DA. I will
tell you what is the source of that. He has taken virtually all the
proposals made by the Cuban representative for the discussion paper that
has been prepared for the Inter-Parliamentary Union conference.

So, the sudden somersault to the left indicates that there is no principled
position that the DA is taking. [Applause.] I also wonder if that speech
was cleared by the hon Tony Leon. I think he will get shivers down his
spine. [Interjections.]

This debate is timely and appropriate because in a few days from now, the
South African delegation is going to be participating in the 112th session
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in Manila. So, this debate serves as a
prelude to the global discussions, and what we could do is to assist our
delegation to crystallise its views and ideas on the matter.

This debate also gives us an opportunity to reflect deeply on some of the
pressing problems facing the world today, particularly those confronting
the poor nations of the world.

One of the most important issues confronting the Third World countries is
the debt burden, and all speakers have indicated that and spoken about it.
The point has been made that in 2003 the debt of poor countries stood at
US$2,6 trillion. To service this debt alone, these countries had to pay
US$436 billion.

Debt servicing costs have increased dramatically over the years, with the
countries of the South having paid those in the North five times more in
debt service than in actual aid received.

Today the foreign debt is economically and socially unbearable for these
countries. They are trapped in a never-ending effort to pay the loans and
the interest on the loans. This forces them to cut back on socially
necessary spending on education, health, welfare and infrastructure
development, which all help to improve the quality of life of the poor. The
consequence of this is that the poor of the world have become poorer, and
the rich richer.

The key questions that confront us, therefore, are: What are the
parliaments of the world doing about this particular problem? What are we
going to be doing about it as the South African Parliament and as ordinary
parliamentarians active in the field?

Over the years, many plans had been developed to deal with this burden of
humanity, but in recent times we have seen renewed global interest in the
fight against poverty and relieving poor countries of the debt burden.

A key objective of these efforts was to develop an international trading
and financial system that is rule-based, predictable and nondiscriminatory.
Efforts have to be made to deal comprehensively with the debt problem of
these countries in order to increase the developmental aid.

It is already becoming clear that at the current levels of official
development assistance to poor countries, the Millennium Development Goals
will not be achieved by 2015. We are way off the target mainly due to
shortfalls in development aid, the burden of debt servicing and the lack of
economic growth in poor countries.

So, after nearly two decades of various economic approaches to the plight
of humanity, over 1,2 billion people still live on less than one dollar a
day. Almost 900 million people continue to live in poverty, 18 million more
than 20 years ago, and 10 million children will die of preventable
diseases, which means 21 deaths per minute. The gap between the rich and
the poor has widened even further.

So, what must be done? There are a few practical measures that are just
unavoidable. We must generate a sense of urgency, collective thinking and
collective action on issues of global poverty.

Firstly, the South African delegation to Manila must ensure that rich
countries agree to a 100% debt write-off for the poorest countries in the
world. This should extend beyond the odious debt of undemocratic regimes
and must include the current debts of poor countries. Is this possible?
Absolutely!

If South Africa could write off Namibia’s debts, so could other countries
that are much wealthier than us. A point has been made already that both
Poland’s debt and a percentage of Egypt’s debt were also written off
recently.

If in the course of one day in November last year the Paris Club could
agree to cancel a large chunk of Iraq’s debt, without any conditions, with
no democratically elected government in place and no track record of the
interim government, it can be done for all other states who are poor.

So, politicians linked to the rich nations of the world can act when they
want to and if it’s in their immediate interest. But we must challenge the
inconsistencies in the provision of debt relief for poor countries. We must
challenge the global hypocrisy on this score. What is good for Iraq must
also be good for Mozambique, for example.

Secondly, the South African delegation to Manila must insist that rich
countries honour their international commitments to the poor, which they
have made on international platforms. This means that they must double the
development aid so that almost US$50 billion per annum can reach the poor
of the world over the next 10 years. Again, can this be done? Absolutely!

Most Scandinavian countries today have already reached this target, but it
is the G8 nations who have not moved fast enough in this direction. Why
not? The answer is simple: The political will is just not there. Therefore,
we must mount political pressure on them to honour the deal for the poor.

Thirdly, our delegation to Manila must support calls for rich countries to
break down their trade barriers, to reduce tariffs on products and to open
their markets, particularly in agriculture, to developing countries.

They must call for a fair, inclusive and equitable multilateral trade
system, based on transparent norms and principles. Protectionism must
become a thing of the past for all states in the world, not just for the
rich.

Finally, our Parliament must support initiatives such as the Commission of
Africa, spearheaded by the British Prime Minister Tony Blair, Minister
Trevor Manuel and several other African leaders. The commission has set out
bold steps and tangible plans for Africa’s recovery, for reduction in
poverty and for promoting social development. It calls for improved
governance and capacity-building, peace and security, investment in
Africa’s people and more trade and further trade with and on the continent.
The rich of the world must do these things, and it must be done now!

Third World countries must also commit themselves to democratic and clean
governance, adherence to a human rights culture, the effective use of
public resources aimed at improving the lot of their citizens and
integrating and diversifying their economies.

The momentum for reform must come from within the developing world itself.
Only then can we honourably call upon our development partners to meet
their commitments.

Practically, what can this Parliament do? Firstly, it must embody and
express the popular hopes and aspirations of our people, particularly the
poor. It must serve as a platform for the voiceless in society. It must
advance the needs of the poor in society.

Secondly, our Parliament must never surrender or weaken its oversight and
monitoring functions. It should keep a watchful eye over government’s
spending to ensure that it is in keeping with the principles of good
governance, sustainable development and poverty alleviation.

Thirdly, our Parliament must lobby the Pan-African Parliament so that a
common voice can be constructed on debt cancellation and relief, reducing
poverty and promoting economic growth and development.

Finally, our Parliament can give serious consideration to supporting the
call for a new source of funding, such as an international tax on military
trade, which could generate funds for aid and development purposes.

What I am suggesting is an approach that is more proactive, action-oriented
and forward-looking. It’s about developing continental and global
solidarity with the poor of the world and using political power more
creatively to advance the interests of the poor. It’s about Parliament
increasing partnerships with other parliaments, governments and civil
society.

In this way we can give concrete expression to the clause in the Freedom
Charter which says:

There shall be peace and friendship in the world.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:58.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly:

1.    Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

   The following papers have  been  tabled  and  are  now  referred  to  the
   relevant committees as mentioned below:


   1) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on  Trade
      and Industry and to the Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts  for
      consideration:


      Report of the Auditor-General on  the  Performance  Audit  of  Overall
      Management Measures at Ntsika  Enterprise  Promotion  Agency  [RP  11-
      2005].


   2) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health
      for consideration:


      Strategic Plan of the Department of Health for 2005-2008.


   3) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on  Sport
      and Recreation. The Report of the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
      Statements is referred to the Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts
      for consideration:


      Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2003-2004,
      including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements for 2003-2004.


   4) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Science
      and Technology:


      Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory Council for
      Innovation for 2003-2004.


   5) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home
      Affairs:


      Report of the Independent Electoral Commission on the National and
      Provincial Elections for April 2004.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1. The Minister of Science and Technology

   Strategic Plan of the Department of Science and Technology for 2005-6 to
   2008-2010.


2. The Minister of Social Development

   Strategic Plan of the Department of Social Development for 2005-6 to 2009-
   2010 [RP 28-2005].

National Assembly:

1. The Speaker


   Letter from the Minister of Finance dated 08 March 2005 to the Speaker of
   the National Assembly, in terms of section 8(5)(a) of the Public Finance
   Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the
   tabling of Consolidated Financial Statements.


   LATE TABLING OF CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS


   I am writing to advise that the tabling of the Consolidated Financial
   Statements in terms of section 8(3) of the Public Finance Management Act
   (PFMA) will be delayed, and to request an extension for the tabling
   thereof in Parliament.


   Section 8(3) of the PFMA stipulates that “The Minister must submit the
   Consolidated Financial Statements and the Audit Report on those
   statements within one month of receiving the report from the Auditor-
   General, to Parliament for tabling in both Houses”. The timing for the
   tabling referred to in this case is the end of October 2004. Section
   8(5)(a) requires me to provide written explanation setting out the
   reasons for failure to submit the statements timeously.


   Please be advised that the causes for the delay are due to the following:


   The year ending 31 March 2004 is the first year in which such
   consolidated financial statements are required. Departments and entities
   are thus exposed to the complexities attached to this requirement for the
   first time, and formats for the redraft of the consolidated financial
   statements posed a challenge to all stakeholders;
   The consolidations done on the previous years’ information raised serious
   issues with regard to the integrity of the information, thus a more
   thorough approach was needed this year;
   Most public entities did not comply with the deadline for submitting the
   statements;
   The National Treasury and the technical team of the Auditor-General’s
   Office needed to resolve the disagreement on the nature of the audit
   opinion, which was resolved on, 28th February 2005; and
   The Auditor-General has not been available due to other commitments and
   has accordingly been unable to review the consolidated financial
   statements. We have however, received a commitment that the AG will
   accommodate us by mid March 2005.


   The National Treasury intends to table the Consolidated Financial
   Statements in terms of section 8(3) of the PFMA before the end of March
   2005. I have instructed the National Treasury to put in place mechanisms
   to ensure non-recurrence of these problems.


   The National Treasury and the Auditor-General have discussed the matter
   and both parties agree that the delayed publication will allow for the
   issues to be addressed comprehensively, thus laying a good foundation for
   the future.


   Kind regards


   Trevor A Manuel, MP
   Minister of Finance

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly:

1.    First Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Unsigned Audit
   Reports, dated 8 February 2005:

The Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts  having  considered  the  Legal
Opinion of the Parliamentary Legal Advisers  on  the  legality  of  unsigned
audit reports submitted to Parliament  for  tabling,  and  the  validity  of
audit reports signed by means  of  an  electronic  signature  or  a  company
rubber stamp, reports as follows:

The  Committee  has  been  experiencing  a   practice   by   some   of   the
Parastatals/Departments  where  Annual  Reports  containing  unsigned  audit
reports from external auditors are tabled in Parliament.  This  practice  is
of great concern to the Committee as it might  have  legal  implications  on
the status of these reports.

These  led  to  the  Committee  requesting  a   legal   opinion   from   the
Parliamentary Legal Advisers  on  the  validity  of  such  reports  and  the
validity of an audit report signed by means of an electronic signature or  a
company ’s rubber stamp.

From the legal Opinion received, it is clear that such reports might  be  in
contravention of the Common law, South African Audits Standards  (SAAS)  and
the Electronic Communications and Transactions Act, 2002.

The Committee therefore recommends that:

An audit report tabled  in  Parliament  must  be  signed  by  an  authorized
auditor either in his/her personal name or in the name of the Company;
If an electronic signature is used  the  report  must  be  certified  to  be
correct by an officer in the service of the Company;
Where a Company uses a rubber stamp, an official of the  company  must  also
sign the report;
That Departments and Parastatals should comply with these requirements; and
Reports that do not conform to these standards will  be  rejected  and  sent
back.

Report to be considered.


2.    Second Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Correctional
   Services, dated 9 February 2005:

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts having considered  the  report  of
the Correctional Services, reports as follows:

   1. Medical Expenditure (para 4.2.3, page 52)


   The Auditor-General was unable  to  verify  the  validity,  accuracy  and
completeness of medical  expenditure  amounting  to  R630  million  paid  to
Medcor.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer:


Immediately  takes  all  appropriate  steps  to  finalise  the   outstanding
agreement with Medcor, as well as all other  outstanding  matters  currently
limiting the extent to  which  the  Auditor-General  can  audit  the  Medcor
expenses;
Ensures that full and complete records of payments made to  Medcor  for  the
2004/05 financial year audit are provided to the Auditor-General;
Compiles and maintains an accurate membership database;
Limit the employer contributions  to  the  maximum  amount  permissible  per
member per month in line with the rest of the public service;
Ensures compliance with schedule 7 of the Income Tax  Act  (Act  No.  58  of
1962) relating to taxation of medical aid fringe benefits;
Considers the possible liability to the state should  Medcor  not  have  the
necessary funding levels that are required in terms of  section  35  of  the
Medical Schemes Act, Act No. 131 of 1998.

2. Internal Control (par 4.2.5, page 53)

Internal control shortcomings were reported for the third year in a row,
including a lack of management reviews, and non-compliance with laws and
regulations.

The Committee is aware of a number of corrective actions that the
Accounting Officer can consider, including –

Revisiting and updating all policies and procedures;
Ensuring proper monitoring structures and accountability at all levels;
Implementing and monitoring proper management controls, especially in  terms
of overtime;
Ensuring that individual performance contracts of staff include measurable
key performance areas that are revised on an annual basis; and
Investigating alternative systems to address the control  shortcomings  with
respect to leave administration especially relating  to  process  flows  for
approval.

However,  these  are  regular  management  actions  required  of  accounting
officers and should not be pointed out by a committee of Parliament.

The Committee therefore  recommends  that  the  Accounting  Officer  ensures
that:

He takes all appropriate steps to fully  comply  with  the  requirements  of
section 38 of the Public Finance Management Act, or run the  risk  of  being
guilty of financial misconduct in terms of section 81 of the Act.

If  the  Accounting  Officer  is  unable  to  comply   with   any   of   the
responsibilities determined for accounting officers  in  the  aforementioned
section, he must promptly report the inability, together  with  reasons,  to
the Minister and the National Treasury. 1

The Accounting Officer should inform the Committee and the  Auditor  General
of the progress made with regard to  addressing  the  problems  of  internal
controls capacity.

3. Information technology (par. 4.2.5, page 53)

A number of weaknesses were reported by the  Auditor-General  regarding  co-
ordination on  management  levels  between  the  Department  and  the  State
Information Technology Agency (SITA) with respect to  the  various  software
and hardware needs of the Department.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer urgently ensures –

proper consultation and co-ordination with SITA;
an appropriate service level agreement with SITA;
proper consideration of the cost benefit analysis  relating  to  the  change
over to Microsoft solutions, including aspects such as the purchasing  costs
of software/hardware and data conversions required;
compliance with the SITA Act; and
The finalisation of the IT strategic plan,  which  has  to  incorporate  the
finalisation of a disaster recovery plan.

4. Consultants (par 5.14, page 127)

The Committee is concerned about the return on investment received  for  the
Department ’s training expenditure of  R4,471 million  during  the  year  in
question.  The  Committee  is  also  concerned  that  the   Department   had
apparently overlooked the opportunity to make use of  the  services  of  the
SA Management Development Institute (SAMDI) – the designated  public  sector
management training institution  –  seeing  that  the  training  related  to
leadership development of junior and middle managers.

The Committee recommends that in future the  Department  ensures  that  they
give full  consideration  to  the  services  available  from  public  sector
institutions such as SAMDI and National Treasury.

5. Unauthorised Expenditure (Reference 02/03 AFS - Note 1.2,  page  125  and
Note 12 page 130)

There was no unauthorised expenditure disclosed for the 2003/2004  financial
year. With respect  to  the  unauthorised  expenditure  of  R41,642  million
incurred during the previous year, the Committee took note  that  the  funds
were spent on essential services for prisoners.

In the light thereof that the Accounting Officer managed to  contain  excess
expenditure during the last year, the Committee recommends  that  Parliament
authorise the amount of R41,642 million in respect of the previous year.
However, the Committee noted that in numerous instances of virement  in  the
various programmes and sub-programmes which seem to indicate lack of  proper
planning and budgeting controls.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer:

Improves the budgetary controls within the Department; and
Takes disciplinary action against all officials causing overspending.

6. Possible fraudulent qualifications

The Committee is not satisfied with the slow progress being  made  with  the
investigation  into  possible  fraudulent  qualifications.   The  extent  of
overpayment and unjustified remuneration is still unknown.

The Committee is  of  the  opinion  that  this  investigation,  reported  in
2000/01 already, has to be completed.  If  this  is  not  possible,  reasons
must be provided to Parliament, as well as a commitment  to  a  finalisation
date.

7. Leave utilisation and overtime (par 5.9, page  121)  and  overtime  (page
104, tables 2.3 and 2.4)

In the case of three comparable departments, the following  information  was
disclosed to Parliament in their respective annual reports for  the  2003/04
financial year

|Comparison of the Department of Correctional Services, the South African|
|Police                                                                  |
|and the Department of Defence (DCS, SAPS and DOD)                       |
|                                    |           |            |           |
|                                    |DCS        |SAPS        |DOD        |
|                                    |           |            |           |
|                                    |32,832     |139,023     | 75,913    |
|Filled staff establishment          |           |            |           |
|                                    |           |            |           |
|                                    |209,069    |602,241     |258,492    |
|Sick days leave                     |           |            |           |
|                                    |           |            |           |
|                                    |           |            |           |
|Estimated R value of sick leave     |59,591,000 |167,475,000 |50,282,000 |
|                                    |           |            |           |
|                                    |69,530     |58,014      |30,405     |
|Disability days leave               |           |            |           |
|                                    |           |            |           |
|                                    |           |            |           |
|Estimated R value of disability     |21,868,000 |20,058,000  |4,500,000  |
|leave                               |           |            |           |
|                                    |           |            |           |
|Average of:                         |           |            |           |
|Sick leave vs FILLED staff          |6          |4           |3          |
|establishment in days               |           |            |           |
|                                    |           |            |           |
|Disability leave days vs FILLED     |2          |0           |0          |
|staff establishment in days         |           |            |           |


The Committee wishes to  emphasize  the  responsibility  of  the  Accounting
Officer for the management of leave and overtime in terms of  the  PFMA  and
the Public Service Act.  The Committee will in future focus  on  the  proper
management of leave and overtime, specifically whether -

proper compliance with policies and  procedures  in  respect  of  leave  and
overtime and the necessary controls to enforce compliance are  in  place  to
ensure that leave and overtime are not misused;
the responsibility  for  monitoring  and  authorizing  overtime  is  clearly
assigned;
human  resource  information  exist,  capable  of  meeting  the   needs   of
management with regard to various issues such as leave use and cost; and
all reasonable  means  of  eliminating  the  need  for  overtime  have  been
assessed.

8. Monitoring of Progress

In view of the monitoring role of the Audit Committee, as determined by  the
PFMA and  the  Treasury  Regulations  pertaining  to  the  internal  control
environment, the Committee wishes to recommend that the Audit  Committee  on
a quarterly basis monitor and evaluate the progress  made  with  respect  to
all of the above areas of concern  identified.   The  Audit  Committee  must
report thereon in the next annual report of the Department.

9. Vacancies and personnel turnover (par 4.1.3,  page  46,  and  par  4.1.9,
page 48)

The Annual Report indicated  that  out  of  an  approved  and  funded  staff
establishment of 35,675, only 32,832 departmental posts were filled  at  the
end of the financial year under review.  An additional number of posts  have
subsequently been approved, bringing the approved establishment to 48,674.

The Committee  recommends  that  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Correctional
Services consider:

monitoring the  progress with  the  filling  of  all  vacancies,  especially
critical top management positions;
ensuring that, overall, the issues raised by the Committee in  this  Report,
are addressed in the Department’ s next strategic plan,  and  are  monitored
for implementation.

Report to be considered.


3.    Third Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: APAC
   Conference, dated 8 February 2005:



Report of the Standing Committee on  Public  Accounts  (SCOPA)  on  the  6th
Annual Conference of the Association of Public  Accounts  Committees  (APAC)
held in Nelspruit, Mpumalanga Province from 3 to 6 October 2004.

The SCOPA having attended the Conference, report as follows:

      1. Terms of Reference

The SCOPA was invited to attend the 6th  Annual  ACPAC  Conference  and  the
Annual General Meeting held in Nelspruit, Mpumalanga Province from  3  to  6
October 2004. The Committee was represented  by  the  multiparty  delegation
consisting of the following members:

Mr. F Beukman (NNP: Chairperson);
Mr. V Smith (ANC);
Ms. L Mabe (ANC);
Mr. D Gumede (ANC);
Mr. R Mofokeng (ANC);
Mr. G Madikiza (UDM);
Dr. M Van Dyk (DA);
Mr. E Trent (DA);
Mr. B Kannemeyer (ANC);
Mr. E Pule (UCDP);
Mr. P Gerber (ANC);
Mr. E Molefe (Support Staff);
Mr. L Pakati (Support Staff);
Mr. P Netshendama (Support Staff); and
Mr. D Ramurunzi (Support Staff)

     2. Background

The APAC was established in July  1997  with  the  intention  of  empowering
members of the Standing Committees of  Public  Accounts  and  their  support
Staff. This would be achieved by offering  orientation  to  newly  appointed
members of  the  Public  Accounts  Committees,  training  and  commissioning
research on matters of interest to the Association.  However,  the  ultimate
mission of APAC is to assist members in  understanding  oversight  processes
and  principles  within  the  South  African  Constitutional  framework  and
parliamentary  practices,  as  well  as   the   financial   management   and
performance management systems.

The Conference

The APAC holds an annual Conference and General Meeting  where  progress  in
oversight by its members is monitored and experiences are shared.  The  2004
Conference, with  the  theme  ‘Celebrating  10  yrs  of  Transparent  Public
Accountability and Moving towards Effective Oversight and Accountability  in
the Next Decade’ which was  held  in  Nelspruit,  Mpumalanga  from  3  to  6
October, was attended by representatives from Australia,  Provincial  Public
Accounts Committees, SCOPA  National  and  the  following  SADCOPAC  members
(Botswana, Lesotho,  Seychelles,  Tanzania,  Malawi,  Mozambique,  Zimbabwe,
Swaziland and Kenya).

Welcome and Opening of the Conference

The Executive Mayor of Mbombela Municipality, Ms.  R  Mhaule,  welcomed  the
delegates and thanked  APAC  for  its  decision  to  host  its  2004  Annual
Conference in  Nelspruit.  The  Conference  was  officially  opened  by  the
Chairperson of the Association, Mr. V Smith, MP,  who  encouraged  delegates
to critically examine and unpack the concept  of  accountability,  oversight
and performance and come  up  with  solutions  on  how  APAC  could  make  a
difference in improving the life of ordinary citizens of this country.

Panel Discussions and Commissions.

The Conference  was  divided  into  three  Commissions,  viz.  Strengthening
oversight  ability  and  effectiveness  of  the  legislature;   An   African
Perspective on oversight by Legislatures; and Implementation  challenges  of
the Municipal Finance Management Act, with each Commission  allocated  three
guest speakers.

There were two further  guest  speakers  who  presented  papers  on  general
themes of interest to the Conference, viz. ‘Relationship between  SCOPA  and
the Accounting Standard Board’, which  was  presented  by  the  CEO  of  the
Board,  Ms.  E.  Swart;  and  ‘Celebrating  10  yrs  of  Transparent  Public
Accountability and Moving Towards Effective Oversight and Accountability  in
the Next Decade’, which was presented by the Auditor-General, Mr. S Fakie.

Commission/ Theme 1: Strengthening oversight ability  and  effectiveness  of
the legislature.

Ms. S Lucas, APAC EXCO member, chaired the  discussions  and  the  panelists
were, Prof. T Sono (APAC EXCO member), Ms. M.N Matladi (Chairperson  of  the
SCOPA, North West Legislature) and Prof. Stan Sangwena (Chairperson  of  the
Public Service Commission).

Presentations

In their presentations the  panelists  noted  critical  areas  that  are  an
essential part of improving the oversight ability of legislatures  and  they
identified the following as the main priorities for action:

Appropriate skills of members;
Committees should be suitably resourced;
Awareness programs on ethics and good governance;
That legislatures and Parliaments should ensure that section 92 and  133  of
the Constitution of 1996, which relates to Cabinet and  Executive  Council’s
accountability to both Parliament  and  Legislatures,  are  effectively  and
continuously complied with;
That Parliament and Legislatures should clarify the roles of those who  have
to account to them;
Performance  measurement  must  be   employed   as   a   tool   to   enhance
accountability;
The effectiveness of statutory bodies must be maximized;
Promotion of intergovernmental co-ordination, viz.  to  monitor  performance
of a particular sector across the provinces, e.g Education;
The roles of SCOPA should  be  reviewed,  especially  in  regard  to  budget
process;
Lack of follow-ups on previous Committee Resolutions; and
Conflict between  party  loyalty  and  the  obligation  to  hold  government
accountable;

Commission’s Recommendations

Commission 1 resolved that, subject to the availability  of  resources,  the
following resolutions should be implemented by SCOPA as soon as possible:

Appropriate skilling, capacity building & empowerment of MPLs/MPs and
support staff;
Provision of resources to committees and support staff (equipment, etc);
Follow up & effective tracking system on resolutions of SCOPA & involvement
of Treasury and the Office of the Auditor-General in order to assist on the
implementation of resolutions and checking the implementation of the
previous year's resolutions during the next audits (Chapter 9 institutions,
e.g. Public Service Commission) and reporting by the Audit Committee to
SCOPA in terms of the implementation of resolutions;
Strengthen the working relationship between the Public Accounts Committees
and other portfolio committees;
Refining the House rules of the different Legislatures to give maximum
support to committees;
Sharing of information by SCOPA (bringing SCOPA committees' reports from
Legislatures to APAC);
Assistance to provincial Public Accounts Committees by APAC, e.g. capacity
building workshops; and
Establishing Memoranda of Understanding with external institutions where it
assists SCOPA to operate effectively.

Commission/ Theme 2: An African Perspective on oversight by Legislatures.

Mr. M Seloane, APAC EXCO Member, chaired the discussions on this theme  with
panelists  Dr. H Mateme (APAC EXCO  Member),  Mr.  Z  Mkabile  (Chairperson,
Public Accounts Committee, Eastern Cape) and Mr. P Loney  (Member  of  Lara,
Deputy Speaker, Australia).

Presenters

The Panel in their presentation noted the following:

There is no distinctive difference on African perspective on oversight.
Principles of oversight are the same, and conditions of dealing with
oversight are different;
For any oversight function of a legislature to be efficient  and  effective,
certain standards and norms must exist. These basic norms include  conducive
legal framework, appropriate institutions and structures for  implementation
and other instruments to enhance implementation;
There is a need  for  oversight  as  it  deepens  democracy,  promotes  good
governance, reinforces  transparency,  monitors  alignment  between  policy,
planning, budgets and  implementation,  ensures  the  effective,  efficient,
economical and equitable  delivery  of  services  and  holds  the  executive
accountable;
That although liberalisation from  colonialism  in  Africa  started  in  the
1960s,  literature  indicate  that  the  concept  of  oversight  in  African
governments started showing only in the 1990s;
That African Governments are not the only ones grappling with the  issue  of
oversight;
That structures such as APAC, SADCOPAC and other  related  organisations  on
the Continent should find their way into  PAP  and,  in  unison  with  other
government structures,  make  good  governance  a  reality  on  the  African
Continent;
Concerned with the quality  of  responses  put  forward  by  the  accounting
authorities on  matters  raised  by  the  legislature,  and  in  some  cases
responses had not been forthcoming at all;
The presence of the Executive Authority  at  the  oversight  meetings  might
give rise to an improvement in the quality of the responses put forward;
The investigative power of the Public Accounts Committees should  be  backed
up with a legislated power to summons witnesses and  demand  the  production
of documents; and
If Public Accounts Committees are to achieve  the  objective  of  being  the
primary  mechanism  for  scrutiny  of   government,   members   working   on
Parliamentary Committees need to be able to distinguish between their  roles
as members of parties, and their role as a Committee member.

Commission’s Recommendations

Commission 2 resolved that:

There is a need for research on the structures and processes of financial
oversight by Parliaments and Legislatures in Africa.

Commission/ Theme 3: Implementation  challenges  of  the  Municipal  Finance
Management Act

Ms. R Mabena, APAC EXCO Member, chaired the discussions on this  theme  with
panelists  Mr.  K  Kumar  (Chairperson,  IMFO),  Ms.  N  Hlangwana,  (Mayor,
Mafikeng) and Ms. J Downs (APAC EXCO Member).

Presenters

The Panel in their presentation noted the following:

That the MFMA is going to assist in improving the  accountability  of  local
government;
That in order for it to be successfully implemented we need to be  aware  of
possible constraints and problems in order to plan  for  them  and  to  make
provision  for  capacity  building  and  extra  budget  allocations,   where
necessary;
That there would be major challenges in  the  implementation  of  the  MFMA.
These relate to:

Severe capacity constraints at several levels;
There are no uniform information systems set up to facilitate the  reporting
required either for the PFMA or the MFMA;
Weak Internal Audit and Audit Committees. It  might  be  difficult  to  find
properly qualified people in rural municipalities  where  salaries  may  not
attract people with the requisite skill levels. The same  applies  to  Audit
Committees, there may not be people living in rural areas who  are  able  to
serve on an Audit Committee;
Oversight Committees. Those municipalities that set up  public  accounts  or
oversight committees will more than likely be starting with very low  levels
of experience and skills;
Provincial Governments have often  been  reluctant  to  intervene  in  local
government and may be slow to make the necessary interventions.
Frequent reporting requirements and unrealistic deadlines;
Implementation performance expectations are based on the performance of  the
more developed municipalities; and
The Act is very generic and does not address  the  unique  needs  or  crises
facing  various  municipalities,  such  as:  139  interventions,   lack   of
capacity, etc.

3.3.3.2 Commission’s Recommendations.

Commission 3 resolved that:

There should be a forum where the Premier and/or MEC for Local Government
meet with mayors on the one hand and a collective forum of the above and
the Heads of Departments of Local Government departments and
municipalities;

There should be a uniform interface for Information Technology Systems. The
National Treasury would be requested to issue guidelines on the software,
ensure a uniform interface capacity building and SCOPA’s should assess the
impact of capacity building programs;

SCOPA’s public hearings should include municipalities in order to hear
their assessment of the programs;
National Treasury and all relevant role-players must set in their
regulations minimum qualifications as standards for officials.
SCOPA’s should monitor the MFMA’s implementation and ensure that enough
attention is given in all three spheres to cost drivers;
APAC should strongly support Public Accounts Committees in Local
Government;
APAC should raise funds to hold workshops for representatives from national
and provincial Public Accounts Committee’s and representatives from Local
Government Public Accounts Committees;
APAC is uniquely positioned to assist Local Government Public Accounts
Committees with training and the new EXCO should consider interaction with
Local Government and National Treasury regarding the guidelines to be
issued by National Treasury; and
APAC EXCO to investigate and report to relevant authority on the
accountability arrangements.



The Launch of the booklet on the MFMA.

Mr. F Beukman, member of the APAC EXCO formally introduced a booklet on  the
Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA) to APAC members. The  booklet  deals
with the role of the national and provincial public accounts  committees  at
the local government level.

   5.  The Annual General Meeting.

Election of the Office Bearers

The following members were elected to serve on the  Executive  Committee  of
the Association:

With Portfolio

Chairperson: Mr. V Smith (SCOPA: National);
Deputy Chairperson: Ms. R. T Mabena (Mpumalanga);
General Secretary: Ms. N Abrahams (Eastern Cape);
Deputy Secretary General: Ms S Lucas (Northern Cape);
Treasurer: Mr. M Seloane (Gauteng);

Without Portfolio

Mr. M Holford (Limpopo);
Mr. D Ngidi (Kwazulu-Natal);
Mr. T Marais (Northern Cape);
Mr. J Geldenblom (Western Cape);
Ms. S Kekana (Limpopo);
Prof. T Sono (Gauteng);
Ms. S Mereeotlhe (Mpumalanga);
Mr. Z Mkabile (Eastern Cape); and
Ms. J Downs (Kwazulu-Natal).

6. Conclusion

The members of the delegation would like to extend their appreciation to
the organizers of the events and the Mpumalanga Public Accounts Committee
for their hospitality.

Report to be considered.


4.    Fourth Report of Standing Committee on  Public  Accounts:  Competition
   Commission, dated 15 February 2005:

INTRODUCTION

The Standing Committee on Public  Accounts,  having  considered  the  Annual
Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements  of
the Competition Commission for the year  ended  31  March  2004,  tabled  in
Parliament on 22 September 2004 and referred to it, reports as follows:

AUDIT OPINION

The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the  Auditor-
General, and trusts that future audit opinion shall be equally unqualified.

GENERAL MATTERS:

The committee further noted with concern that the Commission:
retained accumulated surplus funds, but that approval from National
Treasury has not yet been obtained; and
had more than doubled its depreciation charge from R919 612 to R2,147 754
owing to the office relocation of the Commission, which may also lead to a
penalty for the cancellation of lease the agreement of which penalty will
amount to approximately R7,2 million during the next financial year.


RECOMMENDATION
The  Committee  recommends  that  within  two  weeks  of  receipt  of   this
resolution, the Commissioner should submit to SCOPA:


the reply by National Treasury to their request for retention of the
accumulated surplus funds,  and if permission has been denied the
Commissioner must furnish proof that the surplus funds have been  returned.



CONCLUSION

The Committee is of the view that except for the aspect  highlighted  above,
no further interaction with the Competition Commission  would  be  necessary
for the financial year under review.

The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of  the
Auditor-General.

Report to be considered.


5.    Fifth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  South  African
   Reserve Bank, dated 16 February 2005:

INTRODUCTION

The Standing Committee on Public  Accounts,  having  considered  the  Annual
report  and  the  Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the  Financial
Statements of the South African Reserve Bank for  the  year  ended  31 March
2004, tabled in Parliament on 28 September 2004 and referred to it,  reports
as follows:

AUDIT OPINION

The  Committee  noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by   the
Independent Auditors,  and  trusts  that  future  audit  opinions  shall  be
equally unqualified.

CONCLUSION

The  Committee  is  of  the  view  that  no  further  interaction  with  the
accounting authority of the South African Reserve Bank is necessary for  the
financial year under review.

The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of  the
Independent Auditors.

Report to be considered.


6.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND
   TOURISM ON BUDGET VOTE 27, DATED 15 MARCH 2005

The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism having
considered Budget Vote 27 of the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism, wishes to report as follows:

Having been briefed and having deliberated on Budget Vote 27 of the
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2005/6 financial period
in terms of Rule 201 (c) of the National Assembly, which states that:
A Portfolio Committee may monitor, investigate, enquire into the and make
recommendations concerning any such executive organ of the state,
constitutional institution or other body or institution, including the
legislative programme, budget, rationalization,  restructuring,
functioning, organization, structure, staff and policies of such organ of
state, institution or other body or institution. 1, the Portfolio Committee
on Environmental Affairs and Tourism reports as follows:

1. INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW


Members of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism  and
the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs  were  briefed  at  a
joint meeting on Budget Vote 27 of the Department of  Environmental  Affairs
and Tourism. The Departmental  briefing  focused  on  policy  and  strategic
objectives and  the  2005/06  Budget  allocation  to  its  interrelated  six
programmes.  These  include  Programme  1:  dealing   with   Administration,
Programme 2: dealing with Environmental Quality  and  Protection,  Programme
3: dealing with Marine and Coastal Management,  Programme  4:  dealing  with
Tourism, Programme  5:  dealing  with  Biodiversity  and  Conservation  and,
Programme 6: dealing with Social Responsibility and Projects.


2. JOINT BRIEFING ON BUDGET VOTE 27 FOR 2005/06 FINANCIAL PERIOD


On 16 February 2005, the Department of  Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism
briefed members of the Portfolio  Committee  on  Environmental  Affairs  and
Tourism and the Select  Committee  on  Land  and  Environmental  Affairs  on
Budget Vote 27 for the 2005/06 financial period. The  Departmental  briefing
generally focused on  the  2005/06  budget  allocation  to  programmes  such
Administration, Environmental Quality and  Protection,  Marine  and  Coastal
Management,   Tourism,   Biodiversity   and   Conservation    and,    Social
Responsibility and Projects

2.1 BRIEFING ON PROGRAMME 1: ADMINISTRATION
The Chief Operation Officer, Ms PM Yako, briefed members  of  the  Portfolio
and Select committee on 2005/06 budget related to administration  programme.
Her presentation focused  on  budget  allocation  to  subprogramme  such  as
Minister and the Deputy Minister works, offices of the director-general  and
chief operation  officer,  international  coordination,  corporate  affairs,
planning and coordination, communication, internal audit and office  of  the
chief financial officer. 2
BRIEFING ON PROGRAMME 2:  ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY AND PROTECTION
The Deputy Director-General of  the  environmental  quality  and  protection
programme, Ms J Yawitch, briefed members of both the  Portfolio  and  Select
committees on the  2005/06  budget  related  to  environmental  quality  and
protection. Her presentation focused on budget allocation to  sub-programmes
such as management, regulatory services,  pollution  and  waste  management,
contributions and financial assistance. 3

2.3. BRIEFING ON PROGRAMME 3: MARINE AND COASTAL MANAGEMENT
Members of the Portfolio and Select committees were briefed on  the  2005/06
budget allocated  to  the  marine  and  coastal  management  programme.  The
presentation focused on the 2005/06 budget allocated to sub-programmes  such
as government  assistance,  levies,  harbour  fees,  permits  and  licenses,
interest on investment, sale of confiscation, fines & penalties  and  marine
activities card, administration, resource management, research,  monitoring,
control  and  surveillance,  marine   patrol   and   research   vessels   4.


2.4. BRIEFING ON PROGRAMME 4: TOURISM
The DDG of the tourism programme,  Dr  P  Matluo,  briefed  members  of  the
Portfolio and Select Committees on the 2005/06  budget  related  to  tourism
programmes. His  presentation  focused  on  budget  allocation  relating  to
subprogrammes such as management, tourism support, tourism  development  and
contribution.5

2.5. BRIEFING ON PROGRAMME 5:  BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
The DDG of the biodiversity and conservation programme,  Mr.  F  G  Mketeni,
briefed members of both the Portfolio and Select Committees on  the  2005/06
budget  related  to  the  biodiversity  and  conservation   programme.   His
presentation  focused  on  budget  allocation  to  sub-programmes  such   as
management  and  support,  biodiversity  and  heritage,   biodiversity   and
conservation,  resource  use,  protected  areas,  park  infrastructure   and
transfers to statutory bodies.6

2.6. BRIEFING ON PROGRAMME 6: SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND PROJECTS
Members of the Portfolio and Select Committee were finally  briefed  on  the
2005/06 budget related to the social responsibility and projects  programme.
The presentation focused on the 2005/06 budget allocation to  sub-programmes
such and antartic and island research,  government  motor  transport,  land,
building  and  structures  and  financial  assistance  to  poverty   relieve
projects. 7
DELIBERATION ON BUDGET VOTE 27 FOR 2005/06 FINANCIAL PERIOD
On the 11 March 2005, the Portfolio Committee on Environmental  Affairs  and
Tourism  deliberated  and  resolved  on  Budget  Vote  27  for  the  2005/06
financial year, presented by the Department in the joint  meeting  with  the
Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on 16 February 2005.  The
Chairperson, Ms E Thabethe, indicated that the purpose of  the  meeting  was
to deliberate, seek clarity and resolve on Budget Vote 27  for  the  2005/06
financial period related to programmes and subprogrammes of  the  Department
of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.



The deliberation, clarity  seeking  questions  and  responses,  as  well  as
resolutions during the Committee meeting,  focused  on  the  2005/06  budget
allocation to departmental programmes such as administration,  environmental
quality  and   protection,   marine   and   coastal   management,   tourism,
biodiversity & conservation and, social responsibility  &  projects.  Having
deliberated and having  sought  clarity  related  to  budget  allocation  to
departmental programmes, the Portfolio Committee  on  Environmental  Affairs
and Tourism noted that:



3.1. The aim  of  the  Administration  programme  is  to  provide  strategic
direction and oversee the overall management of the entire  department.  The
2005/06 budget allocated will enable this programme to  provide  the  number
of new posts required for  core  areas  as  indicated  in  an  institutional
review.

3.2. The Environmental Quality and Protection programme aims  at  protecting
the constitutional right of all South African to an environment that is  not
harmful to health and well-being through  legislative  and  other  measures.
The 2005/06 budget allocated will enable this  programme  to  put  in  place
practicable measures to ensure the implementation of National  Environmental
Air Quality and Environmental Impact Assessment as well  as  the  evaluation
procedures to assess the Buyisa –e- Bag Section 21 Company.

3.3. The Marine and Coastal Management Programme provides  guidance  to  the
development and conservation  of  the  marine  and  coastal  management  and
ensures  sustainable  utilization  of  marine  and  coastal  resources.  The
2005/06 allocated budget, if used effectively, will enable  this  programmme
to deal with  challenges  related  to  the  allocation  of  fishing  rights,
transformation,  employment  equity,  retention  of  scientists  and  skills
development.

3.4. The Tourism programme aims at creating the conditions  for  sustainable
growth and development.  The  2005/06  allocated  budget  will  enable  this
programme in its  2005/06  activities  to  deal  with  challenges  of  black
economic empowerment score card and the development of  a  training  package
for tourism entrepreneurs as well as the development of NEPAD strategies  to
encourage tourism in the rest of Africa.

3.5. The Biodiversity and Conservation programme is aimed at  promoting  and
conserving  South  Africa’s  biological  diversity,  cultural  heritage  and
sustainable utilization of resources for the benefit of South Africans.  The
2005/06 allocated budget will enable this programme to  develop  a  national
biodiversity strategy  and  plan  and  the  implementation  of  an  invasive
species strategy, approved in December 2004.
3.6. The Social Responsibility  and  Projects  programme  provides  projects
that are targeted  at  infrastructure  development,  job  creation,  poverty
alleviation and community training and development within the  framework  of
the extended Public Works Programme.  The  2005/06  allocated  budgets  will
enable this programme in its 2005/06 activities to increase  the  number  of
people participating in  the  projects  and  put  in  place  monitoring  and
evaluation systems to assess the impact and sustainability of the  projects.


4. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and  Tourism,  having  been
briefed on 16 February 2005 and having  deliberated  on  11  March  2005  on
Budget Vote 27 of the  Department  of  Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism,
related  to  budget  allocation  to  programmes  such   as   administration,
environmental  quality  and  protection,  marine  and  coastal   management,
tourism, biodiversity & conservation and, social responsibility &  projects,
concludes and recommends as follows:

4.1. Administration Programme
Noting that the aim of this programme is to provide strategic direction  and
oversee the overall management  of  the  department,  and  noting  that  the
expenditure has increased from  R127,  4  million  in  2001/02  to  R337,  2
million in 2002/03, then fell to R128, 2 million in 2004/05, is  recommended
that  the  Department  should  appear  before  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
Environmental Affairs and Tourism and  the  Select  Committee  on  Land  and
Environmental Affairs during the second term of  the  parliamentary  session
and committee week to brief them on its overall short, medium and  long-term
strategic plan and details of work  in  the  implementation  of  sustainable
development priorities and  as  indicated  in  the  2004  Johannesburg  +  2
conference.

4.2. Environmental Quality and Protection Programme
Noting that the draft  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  (EIA)  regulations
were published for public comment in December 2004 and that March  2005  was
targeted as the date of finalization of the regulations, it  is  recommended
that the Department of Environmental and Tourism should  appear  before  the
Portfolio and the Select Committees to brief them on the  progress  made  in
respect of  the  finalization  of  EIA  regulations,  development  of  waste
information  system   and   waste   management   planning   guidelines   and
implementation and asbestos regulations.

4.3 Marine and Coastal Management programme
Noting that Marine and Coastal Management programme of  the  Department  has
published on the 1st March 2005 19 policies to guide the 2005 allocation  of
commercial fishing rights for public  comments  and  will  be  publishing  a
report by April 2005 on options for future management  of  fishing  harbours
and, by mid December 2005 long-term fishing rights will be allocated, it  is
further recommended that during the 2005 Second Term  of  the  Parliamentary
session and committee week, the  Department  of  Environmental  Affairs  and
Tourism  should appear before the Portfolio and Select Committees  to  brief
them on each of the published 19 fishing policies and report on options  for
the future management of fishing harbours.



Tourism   programme
Noting that the black economic empowerment score card will  be  launched  in
May 2005 during the Tourism Indaba to be held in Durban, the  Department  of
Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism  should  appear  before  the  Portfolio
Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism and the Select  Committee  on
Land and Environmental Affairs  to  brief  members  on  the  black  economic
empowerment score card, institutional strategies, processes  and  mechanisms
to be put into place ensure successful implementation.

4.5. Biodiversity and Conservation programme

Noting that the biodiversity and conservation national action programme  has
been completed to address land  degradation  and  poverty  eradication,  the
Department of Environmental Affairs  and  Tourism  must  appear  before  the
Portfolio Committee and Select Committee to brief them on progress  made  in
respect of National Action Programmme (NPA).

4.6. Social Responsibility and Projects programme

Noting that the social responsibility and  projects  sub-programme  provides
for projects which are targeted at infrastructure development, job  creation
and  community  training,  it  is  recommended  that   the   Department   of
Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism  should  appear  before  the  Portfolio
Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism and the Select  Committee  on
Land and Environmental Affairs  to  brief  them  on  the  progress  made  in
respect of the Extended Public Works Programme,  monitoring  and  evaluation
systems to be  used  to  assess  projects  location,  beneficiaries  of  the
Extended Public Works programme.

The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism wishes to
express its gratitude to the Minister for leading the Departmental
officials during the joint briefing sessions, dated 16 February 2005.
Thanks is also extended to the former Director-General, Dr C Olver, and
Acting Director- General, Ms P B Yako, and Departmental teams for
presenting the 2005/06 Budget Vote 27, and for providing professionalism in
answering questions raised by members at meetings.

7.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on the Study
   Tour of Alexkor, a state-owned diamond mining company in Alexander Bay,
   Northern Cape, dated 16 March 2005:

The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, having undertaken a study
tour of Alexkor on 1 and 2 November 2004, reports as follows:


A.    Study Tour part of programme


1.    Alexkor is a state-owned diamond mining company in Alexander Bay,
      Northern Cape, that accounts to parliament through the Public
      Enterprises Portfolio Committee.


2.    As part of the August 2004 programme of the Committee, “ Towards
      Developing a Longer-Term Programme: Setting the Foundations”, the
      Committee decided to undertake visits to all the state-owned
      enterprises (SOEs) that fall within our portfolio. The aims of these
      visits, basically, are:

       • To get a better sense of the SOEs and the nature and scope of our
         portfolio.
       • To get a better understanding of the extent to which the SOEs are
         fulfilling the government’s mandate, particularly the new stress on
         the developmental role of SOEs.
       • To develop a strategic framework to guide the Committee’s programme
         over the next few years.
       • To develop a more effective oversight role for the Committee.


3.    Depending on the overall programme of Parliament, the Committee hopes
      to complete this initial study tour programme of the SOEs by June this
      year.


4.    The study tour of Alexkor took place on 1 and 2 November 2004. Those
      who took part are Mr Y Carrim (chairperson), Mr I Davidson, Mr C
      Gololo, Mr P Hendrickse, Mr S Kholwane, Ms N Kondlo, Mr J Louw, Mr S
      Manie, Mr K Minnie, Ms N Mnandi, Ms D Ngcengwane and Mr R Nogumla.


5.    The study tour followed shortly after Alexkor presented its Annual
      Report to the Portfolio Committee. This brief report is partly related
      to the issues raised in the consideration of Alexkor’s Annual Report.
      In addition to the general aims of the SOE study tours set out in
      section 2 above, the visit to Alexkor is also aimed at getting a
      better understanding of:


      • The contribution of Alexkor to the economy and society of the
        Namaqualand region.
      • Progress in respect of transferring government functions from
        Alexkor to local and provincial government.
      • Progress in respect of settling the land claims dispute.

6.    The Committee had meetings with the Mr Rain Zihlangu, the CEO, and
      the management of Alexkor, the Kuboes and Sandsdrift communities, and
      representatives of the National Union of Mineworkers, United
      Association of Workers of South Africa, women’s empowerment groups and
      land claims committees.   The Committee also visited the land and sea
      mining sites of Alexkor and the diamond sifting plant, and dairy,
      ostrich, oyster and citrus farms, and the silos and fodder mixer. The
      Committee also visited the Johan Hein Primary School.



B.    Alexkor: Towards Greater Focus on Core Activities


1.    Alexkor is a state-owned diamond mining company in Alexander Bay in
      the Northern Cape. The core business of Alexkor is “the economic
      exploitation of diamonds and associated support elements. Its
      businesses include diversified agricultural operations and commercial
      services to the local and surrounding communities”. These operations
      are split into two divisions, Alexander Bay Mining and Alexander Bay
      Trading.


2.    From an operating loss of R31,7 million in the 2001  financial year,
      Alexkor subsequently made operating profits each year, with an
      operating profit of R26,2 million in the 2004 financial year, under
      the management of its new CEO, Mr Rain Zihlangu.


3.    Alexkor does land and marine mining.  Alexkor recently restructured
      marine mining to allow for private contractors. There are currently 35
      boats and 38 shore units. The boats employ between 4 and 6 people
      each. The company focused on black economic empowerment and the
      employment of retrenchees when issuing contracts. The contractors are
      involved at different stages and play different roles in the mining,
      processing and evaluation of the diamonds. Alexkor Diamdel and the
      evaluator for the contractors do the evaluation of diamonds. To ensure
      the safety of the marine operation each boat is required to have a
      diver with an advanced certificate. There are currently approximately
      370 divers operating.  Since 1928, De Beers Corporation has acted as
      the marketing channel for the diamonds mined.


4.    Alexkor has 18 entities engaged in non-core activities. These non-
      core activities include running guest houses, holiday resorts, dairy,
      ostrich, oyster, fruit and parsley farms, and a fuel station. Alexkor
      is also involved in maize and wheat production. Over the past few
      years, many of these entities have been transformed from loss-making
      enterprises to profitability and employ a substantial number of
      people. Some 28 000 ostriches have been slaughtered. The ostrich farm
      has export accreditation. The ostrich farm also produces a huge number
      of eggs and has been able to reduce the mortality rate of the
      ostriches from 80% to 25%. The oyster farm produces a large quantity
      of market-sized oysters. Some 653 000 were sold over a ten month
      period. The oysters are sold all over South Africa under different
      labels.


5.    Alexkor essentially owns and manages Alexander Bay, in which slightly
      over 3000 people live. It provides services that are normally provided
      by local and provincial government. This includes electricity, water,
      sanitation, health, education, transport, sport and recreation.
      Alexkor also takes responsibility for a museum and an airport.
      Alexkor is negotiating with the Richtersveld municipality and
      provincial government to hand over these responsibilities to them.


6.    The Alexkor management explained that the government’s restructuring
      plans for Alexkor include selling 51% to a strategic equity partner,
      giving the community 10% and retaining 39%. In view of the
      negotiations on the land claims, this has been put on hold.


7.    The Alexkor management explained that there are significant
      disparities in salaries between what Alexkor offers and the norms in
      the industry. These disparities, it was said, have largely been shaped
      by the history of apartheid employment and practices in the sector.
      The company undertook a national market scan which also revealed
      disparities. This information was presented to the Board. It was found
      that the majority of pay scales and bands would need to be corrected.
      It was estimated that this would have major financial implications for
      the company. The Committee recommended that the Company introduced
      corrective action within a time plan so that the apartheid wage gap is
      corrected.


8.    The management said that the company recognises the importance of
      building a second-tier leadership and has introduced a Protégée
      Internship programme. Twenty people are employed from the local
      community and assigned to different managers. Six of the interns are
      women. Alexkor also provides bursaries to students from the local
      community. These students are earmarked for senior positions. Four of
      the 10 bursaries have been provided to women.


9.    The Committee congratulates Alexkor, and in particular its dynamic
      new CEO, Mr Rain Zihlangu, for the remarkable turnaround effected over
      the past two years. Of course, difficulties persist and much more
      needs to be done, but it is clear to the Committee that the progress
      achieved under the new leadership is commendable. The Committee
      visited most of Alexkor’s core and non-core entities, and, overall,
      the problems notwithstanding, is impressed with what is being done.
      The restructuring of the marine mining sector seems quite successful
      to the Committee. Its beneficiaries certainly welcome this.  While
      supporting Alexkor’s approach of moving towards shedding its non-core
      activities and focusing specifically on diamond mining, the Committee
      feels that there has to be a very carefully phased strategy to achieve
      this. Alexkor is intricately woven into the fabric of the Richtersveld
      communities and if its withdrawal from its non-core activities is not
      handled sensitively, the community will experience hardships. In
      respect of the municipal functions Alexkor currently fulfils, these
      should be transferred in a phased and balanced way that takes account
      of the current capacity of the Richtersveld municipality.  While
      recognising the constraints of the provincial government, the
      Committee feels that it might be easier for Alexkor to forego the
      provincial government functions it fulfils; certainly it seems that
      the provincial government has less of a case not to, in a phased
      manner, take some of these responsibilities over from Alexkor.
      Whatever the situation, the transfer of these responsibilities has to
      be effected without negatively affecting the communities. They have
      very little anyway.


C.    Meeting the Communities


1.    In view of the crucial role that Alexkor plays in the economy and
      society of Richtersveld, the Committee met with some of the
      communities living there. About 180 people attended a public meeting
      in Kuboes. There was a much smaller meeting in Sandrift. The key
      issues raised at these meetings are covered below.


2.    Several people complained about the lack of adequate services and
      facilities. These included issues regarding schooling, health, roads,
      transport and sports facilities. They held Alexkor responsible for
      this.


3.    A significant number of people said that the government did not show
      adequate respect for and did not offer enough support for the Nama and
      Khoisan languages.  Several people focused not just on language, but
      on the culture and customs of the Nama and other people which they
      feel are being allowed to disappear. People feel they are being
      marginalised.


4.    It was claimed that Alexkor did not employ local people, but instead
      hired people from outside the local community. It was also claimed
      that the wealth created by Alexkor is not being re-invested in the
      community, but transferred outside the area.


5.    The Committee also visited the Johan Hein Primary School.  The major
      issues raised were around the lack of classrooms and teachers and the
      need for a policy on the use of Nama in schools in the region.


6.    In various ways, it emerged that relations between “Coloured” and
      African people in some of the areas were somewhat tense, and needed to
      be addressed.  In particular, it was claimed that an African nurse was
      forced to leave the Sandrift clinic because she was not acceptable to
      the local community on racial grounds.


7.    While appreciating the frustrations of significant sections of the
      community with their living conditions, the Committee feels that too
      much of the responsibility for this is being placed on Alexkor. The
      Committee explained during the meetings that many of the issues being
      raised by the community should be addressed to the municipal and
      provincial government. The Committee feels that more needs to be done
      by all three spheres of government to improve conditions for the
      people of the Richtersveld. Also, more need to be done to address the
      language and cultural concerns of the communities as part of the
      overall nation-building project, and not in ways that reinforce the
      communities’ alienation. There is clearly a need to develop better
      relations between the “Coloured” and African communities.  The
      Committee is to forward the concerns raised during these meetings to
      the local councillor, relevant MPL and MP, municipality and provincial
      government. The “National Question” issues will also be raised with
      the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of
      Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities and the Pan South
      African Language Board.


D.    Land Claims


1.    The Richtersveld community have submitted claims to the land on which
      Alexkor is situated.  In October 2003 the Constitutional Court found
      in favour of the community. The government is negotiating with the
      community to finalise a restitution package. The Alexkor management
      explained that the land claims had created a “degree of uncertainty
      for workers and community members over employment and the provision of
      services”.  The search for a strategic equity partner for Alexkor has
      been suspended pending the outcome of negotiations on the land claims.


2.    Both at the public meetings and in meetings with some of the
      representatives of the land claims organisations, concern was
      expressed at the time it is taking to resolve the land claims issues.
      In public meetings, there were appeals to the Committee to intervene.


3.    The Committee had previously met with representatives of the land
      claims organisations, and has also discussed the matter with the
      Minister of Public Enterprises, Mr Alec Erwin, and officials of DPE.
      It seems to the Committee that there are too many structures, with
      differing demands, seeking to pursue the land claims, and that there
      is a need for a greater degree of unity among the people pursuing the
      claims. The Committee is aware that sensitive negotiations are
      underway between the government and representatives of the
      communities, and hopes that an amicable settlement will be found soon.



E.  Women’s Empowerment in Mining

1.    To encourage women to take part in mining, in August 2003 Alexkor
      offered mining contracts in Witvoorkop to women’s groups. The
      organisations involved in the Witvoorkop mining operations are
      Arriesdift Smallscale Miners, Jomaree, Kgotsong, Tarras Trading,
      Mountain Desert Developing Company, Alexkor, and Alexkor Development
      Foundation.


2.    In a meeting with the Committee, the women’s groups raised their
      difficulties with the project.  Among the issues raised were the
      following:


      • The lack of participation of women in the project.
      • The lack of involvement of women in decision-making.
      • The lack of openness and transparency in finances.
      • The behaviour of the sub-contractors.
      • The failure of women to benefit financially from the project.
      • The lack of technical capacity of women.
      • Labour disputes.


3.    The Committee feels that the empowerment of women in mining is
      crucial in view of the broader gender equity goals of the government
      and parliament, and the overwhelming dominance of men in the mining
      sector.  The Committee therefore welcomes Alexkor’s decision to
      empower women in mining.  However, the Committee explained at the
      meeting that it would not be able to immediately address the concerns
      of the women’s groups, but would send a sub-committee to follow-up on
      the matter. The Committee stressed that its role would not be to
      resolve the differences, but to facilitate co-operation among the
      stakeholders so that they can settle their differences.  A sub-
      committee comprising Ms Ncumisa Kondlo and Ms Nana Mnandi subsequently
      visited Alexkor on 17 and 18 January and engaged with all the
      stakeholders involved in the women’s empowerment project.  The
      Portfolio Committee adopted a report on this visit on 2 March. Among
      the proposals are:


      • Alexkor seconds a staff member to work with the women’s groups to
        address their specific concerns and improve their technical
        capacity.
      • Alexkor takes responsibility to ensure that all stakeholders
        understand the contract.
      • Audited financial statements from the sub-contractors who worked on
        the mine be made available as soon as possible.
      • A clear business plan be developed through proper consultation with
        all the stakeholders. Consideration should be given to ensuring
        that the women’s groups gain financially from the project by a set
        amount targeted for each financial year.
      • A sub-contractor be identified who will continue with the mining,
        as the contract is still valid for three years. The powers of the
        sub-contractor be limited and clearly defined.
      • The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) assists in order to
        settle the problems and monitor progress.
      • Where appropriate, the provincial government should play a role.
      • The public representatives in the area should also play a role.

4.    The Committee has since raised the matter with the Director-General
      of DPE and the DPE official responsible for Alexkor, and they have
      agreed to follow up on the issues.  The matter has also been raised
      with the Minister. The Committee requested DPE to keep the Committee
      abreast of developments and formally report to parliament in six
      months’ time on progress.   The NCOP Select Committee on Labour and
      Public Enterprises is to visit Alexkor soon and has also been apprised
      of the issues, and is to follow up on them.

F. Relatively Good Labour relations

1.    The Committee met with representatives of the National Union of
      Mineworkers (NUM) and the United Association of South Africa (UASA).


2.    Both unions said that relations with Alexkor had improved
      significantly since Mr Rain Zihlangu took over as CEO. They said that
      there is now a high degree of consultation between the unions and
      management.


3.    The unions feel that there should be more co-operation between
      Alexkor, the unions, the community and the provincial government to
      improve service delivery and development in the area.


4.    The unions feel that priority should be given to appointing qualified
      local people to jobs at Alexkor in order to stop the current skills
      flight.


5.    The unions feel that Alexkor should offer more contracts to local
      people as part of their empowerment programme.


6.    The unions are concerned about the salary disparities within the
      company. This includes workers getting different salaries for doing
      the same jobs.


7.    Of course, it is to be expected that unions and management will
      differ. As these relations go, Alexkor management and the unions seem
      to have a very co-operative, productive relationship at the moment.
      The unions seem to recognise the value of the broader role Alexkor
      plays in the community, and want to work with management to see the
      community as a whole, not just union members, benefit. The specific
      role of Alexkor in the local economy and society seems to give union-
      management relations its specific character. Relations seem good at
      present, but how permanent this is going to be, is not easy to say.


G.  Conclusion

1.    Visiting Alexkor was very valuable for the Committee. In many ways,
      it was a unique experience. The Committee now has a much better sense
      of the nature and scope of Alexkor’s activities and the challenges
      that they and the communities they are engaged with are facing. The
      visit will certainly assist the Committee to be more effective in our
      oversight role.


2.    Ours was, of course, a limited two-day study tour. While we gained
      useful insights, we also want to guard against being too definitive in
      our observations and recommendations.


3.    It seems to us, though, that the current CEO of Alexkor, Mr Rain
      Zihlangu, has performed extremely well. From what the Committee can
      tell, it is to be seriously regretted that he is leaving the company
      on 31 March this year. The Committee is certainly concerned that
      Alexkor has not been grooming a second-tier leadership, especially one
      that is sufficiently representative in demographic terms. Given
      Alexkor’s challenges, it is vital that an energetic and effective CEO
      succeeds Mr Zihlangu.


4.    The Committee will certainly act on all the commitments it has made
      in this report. As explained in section D3, a subcommittee of the
      Committee has already followed up with a further visit to Alexkor in
      January, and as explained in section D4, the Committee has already
      acted on some of its recommendations.


5.    It has to be stressed, however, that while the Committee will raise
      the relevant issues in this report with the Richtersveld municipality,
      the Northern Cape provincial government, the relevant public
      representatives and other authorities, it does not have the authority
      to ensure that these structures and individuals act on these issues.
      Of course, the Committee has an oversight responsibility over the
      Ministry and Department of Public Enterprises, and in regard to the
      issues in this report raised with DPE, the Committee will actively
      monitor developments. But the Committee also feels that all the
      stakeholders we met during our study tour need to do more to address
      the challenges facing them. Of course, the Committee will play its
      part, but so must the people of Alexander Bay.

H. Appreciation

1.    The Committee expresses its sincere appreciation to Mr Zihlangu and
      his team at Alexkor for the considerable hospitality they accorded us
      and the efficient organisation of the programme of the study tour. Our
      appreciation is also accorded to all the people we met for the manner
      in which we have been received.


2.    We also thank Mr Ekshaan Jawoodeen from the Parliamentary Research
      Unit for the initial report from which this report was drawn.

8.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on the
   “Strengthening Legislatures in Response to Globalisation and
   International Security Issues” Conference, dated 16 March 2005:

The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, having
attended the “Strengthening Legislatures in Response to Globalisation and
International Security Issues” Conference in the Philippines, on 2 and 3
December 2004, reports as follows:

A.  Aims of the Conference

1.    The Chairperson of the Public Enterprises Portfolio Committee, Yunus
      Carrim, was invited to offer a paper and chair a session of the
      “Strengthening Legislatures in Response to Globalisation and
      International Security Issues” Conference held in Manila, Philippines
      on 2 and 3 December 2004.  The Conference was organised by the Centre
      for Legislative Development, International.


2.    In view of the effort and cost involved in getting to the conference
      and the fact that it was for just two days, the chairperson negotiated
      with parliament to also spend two extra days on a study tour of the
      electricity and transport public utilities in the Philippines and meet
      with MPs from the Philippines to get a sense of how they fulfill their
      oversight role in respect of public utilities.


3.    Essentially, the Conference aimed to increase awareness of the impact
      of globalisation and international security issues, post 9/11, on the
      practice of legislative oversight and on the nature of parliamentary
      democracies.  The Conference aimed to encourage greater co-operation
      among MPs and other stakeholders across the world to strengthen
      legislatures to respond to the challenges of globalisation and
      international security issues.


4.    The Conference included sessions on:

      Balancing Security and Democracy
      Legislative Awareness of the WTO (World Trade Organisation)
      Legislative Sensitivity to Gender and Globalisation
      Usefulness of Legislative Support Services
      Capacity of Legislative Committees
      Effectiveness of Legislative Oversight
      Adequacy of Budgetary Allocation
      A New Agenda for Legislative Strengthening

5.    There were 110 participants from 21 countries.  The majority were
      MPs.  Those who participated included parliamentary staff, academics
      and representatives of capacity-building organisations, NGOs and donor
      agencies.

B. Key Issues

1.    The historical, political, cultural and other contexts of the
      parliaments from which the MPs present at the conference came
      differed.  The MPs came from different parliamentary committees.  The
      speakers represented a cross-section of the ideological spectrum.
      Despite the diversity of the participants, a fair degree of consensus
      emerged on what the key challenges were and what the broad responses
      to these should be.


2.    Participants generally felt that there was an increasingly close
      relationship between globalisation and international security issues.
      There was general agreement that governments were increasingly taking
      major decisions on globalisation and international security issues
      without legislatures exercising effective oversight of these
      decisions. The threat of terrorism can be effectively tackled without
      eroding human rights and fundamental principles of democracy – and
      legislatures have a crucial role to ensure this. Legislatures, it was
      stressed, need to be strengthened to play a more effective oversight
      role with regard to globalisation and international security issues.

3.    Legislators, it was felt, needed to be sensitive to the manner in
      which globalisation and security issues have started to challenge
      traditional concepts and interpretations of what constitutes national
      sovereignty, democracy and human rights.

4.    Legislators have a major responsibility to pursue the state’s
      obligation to protect its citizens from all kinds of threats to their
      physical security and well-being while, at the same time, ensuring
      that civil liberties are respected and upheld in all circumstances.

5.    Legislators need to recognise that global and local responses to
      international security issues have to be sensitive to the historical,
      cultural and socio-political contexts of countries as sovereign and
      democratic entities.

6.    There is a need, it was acknowledged, to better understand the
      historical, structural, cultural and ideological roots of
      international terrorism, and to seek both short-term and long-term
      solutions that do not polarise people on ethnic-religious-racial
      lines. While the “positive” sides of globalisation tend to undermine
      the threat of terrorism, the “negative” sides tend to exacerbate the
      threat. Reducing the security threat is difficult without greater
      economic and social development of the developing world and the
      reduction of global inequalities. However, at the same time
      development and the reduction of global inequalities are difficult
      without reducing the security threat. Obviously, reducing global
      inequalities will not automatically reduce the threat of terrorism –
      there are major cultural-religious-ethnic-ideological issues at stake,
      but it will be a major contributing factor.

7.    There was general consensus that globalisation and the post-9/11
      global response to terrorism were serving to attenuate the role of
      parliaments, and yet strong parliaments were needed for countries to
      reap the benefits of globalisation and counter the threat of
      terrorism.  While recognising some of the sensitivities, the
      Conference felt that it was crucial that the public actively
      participate in decision-making on basic globalisation and security
      issues.

C. Challenges in Effective Oversight in South Africa

1.    The Chairperson of the Public Enterprises Portfolio Committee
      presented a paper on “Challenges in Effective Parliamentary Oversight
      in a Developmental Democracy: The Public Enterprises Portfolio
      Committee”.

2.    Among the key issues dealt with in the paper are the following:

      • The impact of globalisation on the democratic transition in South
        Africa.
      • The activist potential of parliamentary committees in South Africa.
      • Challenges in effective parliamentary oversight of state-owned
        enterprises.
      • Ways of strengthening legislatures in response to globalisation and
        international security issues.

3.    Key aspects of the paper dealt with issues raised in the Public
      Enterprises Portfolio Committee’s “Report on the Annual Reports of the
      Department of Public Enterprises and the State-Owned Enterprises ”,
      published in the ATCs of 22 February 2005.

D. Ways of Strengthening Legislatures

1.    Among the issues to be considered in strengthening legislatures in
      response to globalisation and international security issues are the
      following:

      • MPs and parliamentary staff need to be more aware of globalisation
        and international security issues, especially as they impact on
        their respective countries. The gender aspects of these issues also
        need to be fully understood.
      • MPs and parliamentary staff need to drastically improve their
        technical and political understanding of these issues.
      • Parliamentary committees in the economic and security clusters need
        to co-operate more within and across clusters and across both
        Houses, including by sharing information and organising joint
        briefings and public hearings.
      • Adequate budgetary and other resources have to be allocated by
        parliaments to committees so that they can effectively fulfill
        their oversight roles.
      • Parliamentary committees need to scrutinise the impact of these
        issues on the budgets approved by parliaments.
      • National parliaments need to co-operate more with state/provincial
        and local governments on these issues.
      • Parliaments need to contribute to empowering the public on these
        issues and encouraging them to actively participate in
        communicating their views to the parliaments.
      • Parliaments need to strengthen their links with civil society
        organisations and individual experts.
      • Parliaments need an enhanced role in oversight of trade and
        security agreements negotiated by governments. Parliaments need to
        consider a more active say in decisions about macro-economic policy
        decisions, which are usually made by governments in consultation
        with international multilateral institutions. One possible approach
        is to require legislative approval of representatives to multi-
        lateral institutions.
      • But the pursuit of a more effective oversight role for parliaments
        does not mean that parliaments need to be crudely confrontational.
        Some aspects of globalisation and security issues are better dealt
        with at the level of the executive, others at the level of
        parliament. There needs to be some broad consensus on this, and on
        the nature of both oversight and co-operation between legislature
        and executive. In the context of globalisation, there is also a
        need for the legislature and executive to creatively co-operate in
        the national interest.
      • Regional, continental and international inter-parliamentary forums
        should be more effectively used to tackle these issues. These
        organisations should also seek to be represented in multilateral
        institutions, where appropriate, and link more effectively with
        transnational civil society movements.

E. Public Utilities in the Philippines

1.    The Committee Chairperson met with representatives of the electricity
      and railways public utilities of the Philippines, the Philippines-
      South Africa Business Council and two MPs from committees dealing with
      public utilities. There is no South African embassy in the
      Philippines; there was very limited time to organise a study tour
      programme; and those who tried to assist were, unfortunately, not able
      to do enough; so the programme turned out to be limited in value.


2.    In general, public utilities in the Philippines have been undergoing
      major transformation over the past fifteen years; they are
      increasingly in private hands through privatisation or in other ways.
      The stakeholders consulted had differing views on the effects of
      privatisation in the Philippines, but the issues raised included in
      the following:


      • A privatisation programme must fall within an overall national
        development plan for the country, and should not simply be embarked
        upon to reduce the budget deficit.
      • Contracts have to be carefully crafted to ensure that private
        sector buyers fulfill the obligations defined by the state.
      • Foreign investors should be brought in in a way that does not
        sacrifice the sovereignty of a country, and there should be clearly-
        defined obligations to empower local companies.
      • Most national regulators are too weak to exercise their roles
        effectively. Privatisation programmes should not be effected until
        regulators are capacitated.
      • The effects of privatisation are difficult to tell. There seem to
        be mixed outcomes; in some cases ordinary people have benefited, in
        others not.


3.    The stakeholders met were very impressed when informed of the South
      African model of free basic water and electricity services and the
      extent of delivery.


F. Conclusion


1.    It was very useful to attend the Conference, and much was gained.
      However, the separate study tour programme was disappointing and not
      particularly productive, but in the circumstances there was little
      that could be done about this.


2.    Clearly, there is a lot of overlap between the debates we are having
      in our parliament about strengthening our oversight role and the
      debates in other parliaments. Interestingly, though, our committee
      system is much more powerful than that of most other parliaments
      represented at the Conference, and even has constitutional protection,
      and we might want to exchange more with these parliaments on our
      perspectives on and models and experiences of parliamentary
      committees. The discussions within our own portfolio committee on
      parliamentary oversight of state-owned enterprises seem to be unique
      to our own country – and this is perhaps related to the extent to
      which the state in our country controls major entities providing basic
      services, our current state-led investment path and the model of the
      developmental state we are seeking to implement. But it is likely,
      given the impact of globalisation, that other developing countries
      will, over time, also follow aspects of our overall path, and the
      debates we are currently having in our Committee will probably be of
      relevance to them. Essentially, the Conference suggested, once again,
      how important it was for our country to have closer links with other
      African and developing countries. We have both lessons to offer and
      lessons to learn.


1 See section 40(5) of the PFMA.

1See, Rules of the National Assembly, 4th Edition, January 2004, 53

2 For a detailed breakdown of financial allocation to subprogramme refer to
Budget Vote 27 in 2005 Estimates of National Expenditure

3 For a detailed breakdown of financial allocation to subprogramme refer to
Budget Vote 27 in 2005 Estimates of National Expenditure

4 For a detailed breakdown of financial allocation to subprogramme refer to
Budget Vote 27 in 2005 Estimates of National Expenditure

5 For a detailed breakdown of financial allocation to subprogramme refer to
Budget Vote 27 in 2005 Estimates of National Expenditure

 6 For a detailed breakdown of financial allocation to subprogramme refer
to Budget Vote 27 in 2005 Estimates of National Expenditure

7 For a detailed breakdown of financial allocation to subprogramme refer to
Budget Vote 27 in 2005 Estimates of National Expenditure




