---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 21 June 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-06-21
---

TUESDAY, 21 JUNE 2005
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

           ELECTION OF THE ROTATING DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I have been informed that we won’t have
motions. We shall now proceed to the election of the second Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP, to fill the post vacated by the Premier of Free
State, the hon Ms B Marshoff.

There will now be an opportunity for nominations for the second Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP, in terms of section 64(3) of the Constitution.

I now call for nominations.

Mr T S P MAKWETLA (Mpumalanga): Hon Chairperson, thank you for the
opportunity. I rise to nominate hon Mbhazima Samuel Shilowa, the Premier of
Gauteng, to the position of the Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP. I
thank you.

Mrs F B MARSHOFF (Free State): Chairperson, I rise to second the name of
the Premier of Gauteng, Mbhazima Samuel Shilowa, as the Rotating
Chairperson of the NCOP.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The nomination by the Premier of Mpumalanga
has been seconded by the Premier of the Free State, the hon Marshoff. The
name nominated is that of the Premier of Gauteng, the hon Mr Mbhazima
Shilowa. Could the proposer please hand the nomination form to the Table.
Are there any further nominations? No.

Only one candidate has been nominated, namely, the hon Mbhazima Shilowa.
The nomination is in order and in terms of item 5 of Schedule 3 of the
Constitution, I accordingly declare the hon Mbhazima Shilowa duly elected
second Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP.

On behalf of all delegates present here, I congratulate the hon Sam
Mbhazima Shilowa on being elected as the second Deputy Chairperson of the
NCOP. [Applause.] I shall now call upon heads of the delegations.

Ms B N DLULANE (Eastern Cape): Thank you, Chairperson. I rise on behalf of
the Eastern Cape. Comrade Sam Shilowa is a leader who has a strong working
class background. He was a member and a leader of a Cosatu affiliate and
rose to the apex of Cosatu as the Secretary-General. At this present
juncture he is a leader as the Chairperson of the ANC in the Gauteng
province, and also Premier of Gauteng.

Ndisukumela ukuthi, sikuthembile ukuba uza kubuya uze kubhexesha nakule
Ndlu, nje ngoko uqhele ukwenza phaya eGauteng, singakunyuli nje uhlale
phaya eGauteng. [I am standing here to say we trust that you are going to
come back and take charge in this House as well as you usually do in
Gauteng; we must not elect you to stay there in Gauteng only.]

We are thinking that at one time or the other you must have a session with
us, chairing this House. Thank you so much. [Applause.]

Mrs B MARSHOFF (Free State): Thank you, Chairperson. Chairperson, Deputy
Chair, MECs, leaders of delegations and hon members, as the outgoing Deputy
Chairperson I wish to congratulate Premier Shilowa on his appointment as
the Rotating Deputy Chairperson for the next cycle.

The NCOP plays an invaluable role in protecting the interests of provinces
and local government. To our people the NCOP is recognised as the
instrument that serves both, facilitating the oversight function of
provincial legislatures and local government.

The enhanced role of the NCOP offers new opportunities in shaping the role
of national, provincial and local government in the development of the
country and in deepening participatory democracy.
The NCOP represents the ideals for which our people fought to ensure that
their voices, however humble, would be heard. I again want to take this
opportunity to congratulate my colleague here on his appointment as the
Rotating Chairperson, and I wish him everything of the best and all the
success for the term in which he is going to serve. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mr E M SOGONI: Thank you, hon Chairperson. On behalf of the people of
Gauteng, we express our profound congratulations to the Premier of Gauteng
on his election as the eighth Rotating Chairperson of the NCOP. We are
convinced that as Gauteng assumes this Chair, it will be able to define its
role and the path the future Rotating Chairpersons will play.

It cannot continue to be symbolic, when our people out there are crying out
for delivery of constitutionally mandated services. The challenge,
therefore, that confronts us is:

   to build an effective people’s Parliament, that is responsive to the
   needs of the people, and that is driven by the ideal of realising a
   better quality of life for all people of South Africa, and to strive to
   achieve the goals of the Freedom Charter.

This House, therefore, must – in the context of this vision of Parliament -
strive to carve out its own niche and role in order to achieve this goal,
thus creating space for the people to govern themselves. Thank you.

Mr Z C NTULI: Sihlalo, ngizoqala ngokuxolisela abaholi baKwaZulu-Natali
ngokungaphumeleli kwabo ngenxa yokuthi balungiselela ukuvakashelwa
uMongameli wezwe njengoba kukhona okuthile afuna ukukhuluma ngakho.
[Chairperson, I will start by apologising for the leaders of KwaZulu-Natal,
who are unable to attend due to the fact that they are making arrangements,
as the President of the country is paying them a visit because there is
something he wants to talk about.]

Oh behalf of KwaZulu-Natal, we are very pleased to support the election of
the hon Mr Shilowa, Premier of Gauteng province, as the Rotating Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP. We have all the confidence in hon Mr Shilowa’s
ability and integrity as one of our esteemed leaders in the NCOP.

We further pledge that we will accord him all the necessary respect and co-
operation that will assist him and other NCOP office bearers to discharge
their duties with excellence and distinction, confident of the loyal
support of our province. I take the opportunity to congratulate him on such
an important bestowal of trust. Ngiyabonga. [I thank you.]

Dr T S FARISANI (Limpopo): Chairperson, on behalf of the people of Limpopo,
all the way from the Kruger National Park in the east to Mapungubwe in the
west, all the way from Beit Bridge to just north of the Carousel; from all
our six districts of Waterberg, Capricorn, Vembe, Mopani, Sekhukhune and
Bohlabela; on behalf of children, the youth, the middle-aged and the
veterans; on behalf of the poor and the poorest of the poor, and those who
are beginning to make it through out democratic dispensation, we want to
bring our congratulations to the hon Mbhazima Sam Shilowa.

He has been tried and tested in the trenches of the struggle. He has not
mushroomed overnight; but it has taken years to bring him to a position
where he is regarded as a mature and focused leader by all of us in Limpopo
and, we believe, across the country.

Finally, we know that he is not misplaced in this position because he is
socially focused, politically directed and economically creative. His
presiding here in assistance to you, Chairperson, will be another milestone
in the deepening of our democracy. It is my honour to associate myself with
all those who are celebrating this election of Mbhazima Sam Shilowa. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Perhaps I should remind a number of you that
the hon Premier was born and bred in Limpopo. Am I correct, Premier?
[Laughter.] He was born around the area of Tzaneen. I could hear that
Moruti Farisani didn’t want to say that, but I must remind a lot of people
that his parents are actually still there. He very often goes to Limpopo,
too, to visit.

Mr T S P MAKWETLA (Mpumalanga): Chairperson, hon members, allow me to join
fellow delegates to this second Chamber of Parliament, the NCOP, to
congratulate the Premier of Gauteng, hon Mbhazima Shilowa, on his election
as the Rotating Deputy Chairperson of this House.

Mr Shilowa prides himself on and relishes the fact that he is the longest-
serving Premier in this House and therefore deserves the title of “chief
Premier”! [Laughter.] That is what we have bestowed on him this afternoon.
It is therefore fitting indeed that the House be strengthened in its
leadership through the contribution to its work by someone who is a veteran
of the NCOP.

Close to three months ago the NCOP undertook to take its work to the people
by visiting the province of Mpumalanga for a week. We wish to commend and
congratulate the House, its leadership and members for the enthusiasm and
commitment to their duties. Last week we received a detailed report of the
work done during this visit. We pledge to follow up the many issues,
observations and recommendations raised and aimed at improving our work.

It is indeed needless to say that, for as long as this Chamber exists, our
collective mind and creativity are needed to optimally use the opportunity
presented by this House to enrich our democracy.

In this regard, the contribution by the executive arms of provinces to
input by legislatures and into decisions and legislation passed by the NCOP
is an ongoing challenge. And I have no doubt that Premier Mbhazima Shilowa
will, in the course of his duties, bring his experience to bear in
improving the quality of our work in this regard. Once again, the
Mpumalanga delegation to this House wishes Premier Shilowa a pleasant and
enjoyable experience during his innings as Rotating Deputy Chairperson of
the NCOP. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G THIBEDI (North West): Chairperson, hon Premiers and members of the
NCOP, from the outset, let me put on record an apology on behalf of the
Premier or North West, Premier Ednah Molewa, who could not make it to this
important occasion.

On behalf of the North West province, it is indeed a great pleasure for us
to extend the words of congratulations to our recently elected Rotating
Deputy Chairperson in the person of Premier Mbhazima Shilowa. We are very
grateful that he has been elected to this office and we want to wish him
the best of luck in the execution of his duties.

We have not doubt that the NCOP will be the richer for your astute
contributions, Mr Shilowa, and of course you will in the process enrich the
deliberations. We want to align ourselves with Limpopo when they say you
went through all the stages of the revolution in your development. Some of
us who worked with you in the labour movement can say without fear of
contradiction that your election to this important position is necessary.

It is an awesome challenge to you to participate on behalf of the Premiers
of our country and we express our unwavering support to you. We trust that
you will succeed in this undertaking. We know that you have succeeded in
the past under very difficult conditions. There is no reason for us to
believe, now, that you won’t succeed.

May I take this opportunity, once more, to wish all the best for all of
you. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K SINCLAIR: Hon Chairperson, on behalf of the Premier and the people of
the Northern Cape, it’s indeed a privilege to bring this message of
congratulations and support to you, Premier Shilowa, on your election as
the Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP.

This message of support comes from the biggest province, the Northern Cape,
to the leader of the smallest province, Gauteng. [Laughter.] This, hon
Premier Shilowa, is only in terms of geographical area, as you know.

However, the people of our province have big hearts. That’s why all 823 000
of them congratulate you and the 8,8 million people of Gauteng that you
represent as Premier. As you would know, Mr Premier, it is not about being
big or small, here all provinces are equal in their participation. It is
indeed the reality of one province, one vote. We wish you well during your
term of office and we trust that our very noble Vision 2009 will further
come to fruition during your term. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, Ministers, Premiers and Speakers who are
here, comrades and colleagues, we don’t have to repeat what has been said
earlier by other speakers from other provinces but we also want the House
to note that this election takes place when Minister Pandor is in the
House. She is the former Chairperson of the House. So this is another
blessing for Premier Shilowa.

Our province congratulates you on your election as the Rotating Deputy
Chairperson. We are looking forward to the day when you will take the
Chairperson’s seat and actually walk the talk. We assume that that day is
not very far. Once more, we wish you all the best. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J LANDINGWE (Salga): On behalf of the chairperson of Salga, its
executive committee and all its members, it is my honour and privilege to
congratulate the Premier of Gauteng, our beloved Comrade Sam Shilowa, on
his election to the position of second Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP.

As Salga, we represent a sphere of government that is closest to its people
and we anticipate a positive, healthy and long working relationship with
your office, sir. I wish you well in your office. Thank you, hon Chair.

SOSISWEBHU LOMKHULU WEMKHANDLU: Ngiyabonga, Mgcinisihlalo lohloniphekile,
Sekela Sihlalo we-NCOP, boNdvunankhulu, Tindvuna kanye Nemasekela eTindvuna
lakhona la. Ngitsandza kutsi, egameni lembutfo we-ANC, lophetse 70% kulo
lonkhe lelive laseNingizimu Afrika, sihalalisela Ndvunankhulu Mbhazima
Shilowa kutsi akhetfwe, njengobe aphakanyiswe nguBabe Makwetla -
Ndvunankhulu waseMphumalanga, wasekelwa nguMake Marshoff - Ndvunankhulu
waseFree State.

Tsine njengembutfo we-ANC sitsi bani ngumhlahlandlela, ube ngumshokobezi.
Kube bekuya ngami njengaSosiswebhu Lomkhulu waleNdlu, bekufanele kutsi
lethemu letako ingapheli ungakahlali kuleso situlo ubambe tintsambo
taleNdlu.

Ngiyati kutsi Make Marshoff abebambekile njengobe bekulihlandla lakhe
lekucala kutsi abe nguNdvunankhulu kulela laseFree State. Kodvwa wena,
njengobe Babe Makwetla asashito, lihlandla lakho lesibili lekutsi ube
nguNdvunankhulu. Sekunyenti kakhulu lokwentile eGauteng. Siyati kutsi
losekusele nje kutsi ufake lesitimela lesisheshisako kuphela. Ngako-ke
utaba nesikhatsi lesinyenti sekutsi ugcugcutele balingani bakho,
boNdvunankhulu labanye kutsi njengobe i-NCOP iyaye iphume iyewuhlangana
nebantfu lapha phansi kuhle kutsi nabo bonkhe labanye boNdvunankhulu,
bosishiyagalolunye, babe yincenye yaloko. Kuhle sibabone babe khona lapho
njengobe neMtsetfosisekelo wetfu usho lapha kuSekshini 42(4) kutsi:
Umkhandlu Wetifundza Wavelonkhe umele kuciniseka kutsi tintfo letistintsa
tifundza tiyanakwa ezingeni laHulumende Wavelonkhe. Ukwenta loku ngekufaka
sandla ekwakhiweni kwemtsetfo welive lonkhe nangekuniketa sive sonkhe
inkhundla yekutsi sibuke tindzaba letitsintsa tifundza.

Siyacela-ke, kutsi Babe Shilowa kube nguwe logcugcutela boNdvunankhulu
kutsi abayisebentise leNdlu ngendlela lefanele. Ngiyabonga, Mgcinisihlalo.
[Tandla.] (Translation of Siswati speech follows.)

[Thank you, hon Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Premiers,
Ministers and Deputy Ministers who are here. I would like to say, in the
name of the ANC, which has a 70% majority rule in the whole country of
South Africa, we congratulate Premier Mbhazima Shilowa on being elected; he
was nominated by Mr Makwetla, the Premier of Mpumalanga, and the nomination
was seconded by Mrs Marshoff, the Premier of the Free State.

We as the ANC say: Be a pioneer, and be an activist! If it was up to me as
the Chief Whip of this House, the following term would not be finished
before you sit in that chair and is in charge of this house.

I know that Mrs Marshoff is busy, because it is her first time as Premier
in the Free State. But, as Mr Makwetla has said, it is your second time as
a Premier. There is a lot that you have done in Gauteng. We know that what
is left for you is only to introduce the fast train. Therefore you will
have plenty of time to encourage your colleagues, other Premiers, as the
NCOP sometimes meets people at the grassroots level and it is good that all
the other Premiers, all nine of them, are a part of that. It is good to see
them there as our Constitution says in section 42(4):

  The NCOP represents the provinces to ensure that provincial interests are
  taken into account in the national sphere of government. It does this
  mainly by participating in the national legislative process and by
  providing a national forum for public consideration of issues affecting
  the provinces.


We therefore ask, Mr Shilowa, that you be the one to encourage the Premiers
to use this House in the proper manner. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]]

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chair, you know and everybody is aware that this very
strong and wonderful House, united as a House of the provinces of this
country, is also composed of different political tribes. And in this House
there is a river that runs through it with the one powerful political tribe
on that side and the other ones, of which we are the largest, on the other
side. [Laughter.]

It also follows that when important people like the Rotating Deputy Chair
are elected, those on this side of this dividing river are not consulted so
when I stand up I stand up unconsulted. But I am in a terrible predicament
because, firstly, it was my Premier who proposed Mr Shilowa and, secondly,
I have known him as a man of strong will and a man that has been successful
in many endeavours.

Therefore, I have no hesitation on behalf of the DA team in this House, all
10 of us, in congratulating Mr Shilowa on his election today. We look
forward to his - and I thought when I turned these facts over in my head
that I am going to ask him to make sure that he does - sitting in that
chair as a full-blown Deputy Chair from now on. But I am refraining from
offering that advice, but I am sure it is a feeling that has been going
round the House.

Ek sou in my plig versuim as ek nie ook die uitgaande Ondervoorsitter,
Premier Marshoff, bedank vir haar werk, én ook gelukwens dat sy die status
van dié Huis en van ons land ook hoog gehou het waar sy was; veral nou die
dag toe sy ons land se volkslied so mooi beskerm het. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I would be remiss in my duty if I did not also thank the Deputy
Chairperson, Premier Marshoff, for her work and also congratulate her on
maintaining the status and reputation of this House and of our country
where she was. I am thinking particularly of the other day, when she
defended our country’s national anthem so wonderfully.

Siyambongela uPremier Shilowa. Siyethembna ukuthi uzothatha la mandla
esephethe ukukhombisa abantu bonke la ehamba khona ukuthi le Ndlu akusiyo
indlu encane kuneNational Assembly kepha yiNdlu ephambili yePhalamende. [We
congratulate the Premier Mr Shilowa. We hope he will use his strength to
show everybody wherever he goes that this House is not inferior to the
National Assembly, but that it is also an important House of Parliament.]

He must not forget that we are the upper House and please make sure that
those people who keep thinking that we are an addendum to the National
Assembly get the facts right. You are now a Deputy Chairperson of the upper
House of Parliament. Congratulations, sir.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Except that, Mr Watson, Mr Mbhazima Shilowa is
the second Deputy Chair, not the Deputy Chair. [Laughter.] The Deputy Chair
is Mrs Hollander.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Kuyithuba elihle leli ukuzwakalisa ukweseka uMnu uShilowa
egameni le-IFP. Ngiphinde ngithi nawe Gauteng awumncane njengokuba
kuphikelelwe kuphindelelwa ukukhetha kuwena abaholi abasezingeni
eliphakeme. Zolo lokhu besisazesula izinyembezi ngeqhawekazi, indodakazi
eyasishiya eyayiqhamuka khona eGauteng. Kuthe kungakabi phi insizwa
yakwaShilowa lo Mkhandlu wabona kufanele ukuthi iqokwe ukuzokwelekelela.

Shilowa mfowethu, angifuni nokuthi ngithi Premier, kufuneka ngikubize
ngomfowethu ukuze kuzwakale kahle. Uma ngithi Premier abaningi bazocabanga
ukuthi ngiyakubaleka. Ubuholi onabo eGauteng sinethemba ukuthi uzobuletha
la ngoba sengathi usufikile ezingeni lokuba ngumholi.

Angikhumbuli amaqembu amancane eGauteng ekhala ngobuholi bakho ngoba
usibiza sonke uma unomhlangano ukhulume nathi sonke njengeGauteng.
Ngiyathemba ukuthi nalapha uma ulinikiwe lelo thuba sizokubona uhlala
laphaya esihlalweni ubukana nathi ubhekana nezinkinga esibhekene nazo
ezibhekene nezwe. Ngakho-ke, egameni le-IFP siyakuhalalisela mfowethu.
Sithi phambili, izindlela zikhanye zonke kuwena kufane nangalesiya sikhathi
sikwazi kuCosatu. Wawuthi uma uqhamuka naleliya kepisi lakho, bathi nango-
ke umfo kaShilowa. Nango-ke, usefikile nalapha. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: This is a good opportunity to support Mr Shilowa in the name
of the IFP. I again say to you, Gauteng is not so small because high-
profile leaders are continuously selected from among you. Just yesterday we
mourned the death of a heroine, a daughter who had left us, who was from
Gauteng. All of a sudden the son of Shilowa was elected by this Council to
come and help.

Mr Shilowa, my brother, I do not even want to call you “Premier”, I have to
call you “my brother” so that this can be heard clearly. If I say “Premier”
most people would think that I am distancing myself from you. We hope that
the leadership you have shown in Gauteng will also be seen here as it shows
that you have reached the stage of being a true leader.

I do not recall small parties complaining about your leadership at any
stage, because if you have a bone to chew with us, you would call us all as
Gauteng to a meeting. I just hope that even here, if you were given the
chance again, we will see you occupying that seat, facing both the problems
of the country and us. Therefore, in the name of the IFP we congratulate
you, my brother. We say forward, may it go well with you as it did when you
were with Cosatu. During those times, whenever you approached with your
famous cap, they would say, “There comes the son of Shilowa”. Here he is,
he has also come here. [Applause.]]

Nkskz A N D QIKANI: Mhlalingaphambili namalungu onke akhoyo, siyi-UDM
siyavuyisana noMnu Shilowa ngokuba enyuliwe namhlanje ukuba abe nguSekela-
Sihlalo wale Ndlu oQingqelwe ixesha.

Ndiye ndacinga ukuba mhlawumbi kuza kwenzeka impazamo, okanye kubekho
usizi, ukuze uMbhexeshi oyiNtloko anyule nalapha kwi-UDM . . . [Kwahlekwa.]
. . . ukuze nayo, njengoko imelwe ngumntu omnye, khe isifumane isihlalo.
[Kwahlekwa.] Kodwa ke ngenxa yokuba sikhona simile, sithi masivuyisane naye
uMnu Shilowa. Ndiyacinga ukuba ngenye imini uMbhexeshi oyiNtloko uya
kusibonelela nathi. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech
follows.)

[Mrs A N D QIKANI: Chairperson and all members present, we, the UDM,
congratulate Mr Shilowa on his election today as the Rotating Deputy
Chairperson of this House.

I thought maybe there would be a mistake, or pity would be shown, so that
the Chief Whip would elect from the UDM as well . . . [Laughter.] . . . so
that, as it is represented by one person, it would get the chairpersonship!
[Laughter.] But because we are present and standing, we say: Let us
congratulate Mr Shilowa.
I think the Chief Whip will one day also consider us. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Rre J O THLAGALE: Motlotlegi Modulasetulo, batlotlegi Ditona tse di fano le
Ntlo e e tlotlegang, ke ema mo boemong jwa lekoko la UCDP go akgola
motlotlegi Mbazima Shilowa, Tonakgolo ya Gauteng, mabapi le go tlhopiwa ga
gagwe kwa ntle ga kganetso jaaka Motlatsa-Modulasetulo yo o dikologang wa
NCOP, le go tlhagisa tsholofelo e re nang le yona ya gore ka maitemogelo a
gagwe a a sephara, o tla dira tiro e ka matsetseleko a a lebeletsweng mo go
ena. Ke rata gape go mo tlhomamisetsa gore rona ba UCDP, re mo solofetsa
tirisanommogo le tshegetso ka dinako tsotlhe. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.]
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Mr J O TLHAGALE: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers and the august House, on
behalf of the UCDP I would like to congratulate hon Mbazima Shilowa, the
Premier of Gauteng, on his unanimous appointment as the Rotating Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP, and convey the hope that with his vast experience
he will do his job with excellence. I would also like to assure him that he
has of the support and co-operation of the UCDP at all times. Thank you.]
[Applause.]]

Rev E ADOLPH: Hon Chairperson, national Ministers, Premiers, distinguished
guests, and with all protocol observed, Premier Shilowa, I want to
congratulate you on this appointment of second Rotating Deputy Chairperson
of the NCOP.
On behalf of the ID we want to tell you that we have trust in you. You have
established yourself as a fine developmental leader. Coming through the
rank and file of the ANC it is not easy to achieve what you have achieved
through leading by example. But there is a saying that no man is an island
and I assume that behind your success as a leader you have a strong woman.
Do you agree, sir?

I am talking about somebody that you can always fall back on and rely on as
your support system. We do appreciate her. We wish you wisdom and guidance
and we are sure that you will use our vision to bring Parliament to the
people very effectively. Perhaps it is a coincidence or perhaps it is
significant that this weekend we have the first taste of bringing
Parliament to the People in Gauteng in Kliptown. That might be a sign.

U is ‘n leier met baie goeie eienskappe op wie mens kan peil trek en
vertrou. Die hele Huis plaas hul vertroue in u hande en ons sê vir u baie
welkom, en sterkte. [You are a leader with very fine characteristics, on
whom one can rely and whom one can trust. The entire Council put their
trust in you; we welcome you and wish you everything of the best.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: In terms of my speakers’ list, Premier, I am
sure they have forgotten to put you on, but I am very generous. I cannot
just skip you. This House wants to hear your response. I will give you five
minutes to respond to the congratulatory speeches.

The ROTATING DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M S Shilowa): Thank you,
Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Ministers and Deputy
Ministers here present, representatives of various political parties who
have already spoken, Premiers and hon members.

Vhahali vha shango Vho-Farisani. Ndo vha ndi tshi khouri vha tshi amba nga
ha Limpopo, vha do thoma Thavhani dza ha-Tshilowa, Mopani; ri tshi ya
hayani. Zwino ndi khou pfa vha tshi sokou amba fhedzi bulege dzinwe vha
litsha hafhala thavhani dzashu dza ha-Tshilowa. [Hon Farisani, I had hoped
that when you spoke about Limpopo, you would start with the Tshilowa
Mountains, Mopani, on our way home. Instead you spoke only about other
places, leaving out our own Tshilowa Mountains.]

Also, thanks Premier Marshoff. I was not aware of the reason why you were
wearing red today. I now understand that it was for a proper handover to
me. Thanks to Premier Makwetla, I can wish for no better nomination than
from a brand new chairperson of our movement. [Applause.]

It is clear that having been elected to another position you did not forget
some of us. But let me say on behalf of the people of Gauteng that I wish
to thank you for electing me to be the next Rotating Deputy Chairperson of
the NCOP. Together with the leadership of the NCOP, we need to look at how
we can take forward the work done during the tenure of my predecessors.

There are a few issues, though, which I wish to raise that may need to be
considered by the leadership of the NCOP. I think that the former leaders
of the NCOP, like Terror Lekota and Comrade Naledi Pandor, even though they
may be in another House, will share my view on these issues and agree with
me. There are simply four issues. The first one is that I think we need to
use this period to say what role a Rotating Deputy Chairperson should play.
Is it merely a symbolic role or is there more that was envisaged when we
included it?

I believe that more was envisaged and I would want to be able to meet with
the leadership of the NCOP at least once every two to three months to look
at what issues are emerging from provinces and how they can be taken
further because this is a House of provinces.

Therefore it is important that from time to time we sit together to say
what issues are emerging from the ground in each of the provinces and how
we can get them onto the agenda of the NCOP. [Applause.]

Secondly, we need to find a way to balance the need for provincial special
delegates, including MECs, to attend sittings especially during Budget
Votes and identify key policy issues for debates where we can learn from
one another.

I am not a fan of bringing MECs along simply because the Minister for
Safety and Security, for example, is going to be presenting his Budget Vote
and therefore every MEC should come here. I am not a fan of that. I have
nothing against it, but I think what would help this House more is if we
were to say, Minister Pandor is coming; let us ask her to come and talk,
not on her Budget Vote, but about what are the key policy questions we need
to look at with regard to education. And let us bring each province MEC to
talk about what they have been doing to deal with the challenges in
education, what problems they are facing and what we are able to do
together.

I think, in that way we would learn more from one another. So it is not
simply a matter of saying my Minister is going to be there, can I give
support? That is important, but it is really more about what the key policy
questions and problems are that we are facing, because it is only through
that that each province can then learn from one another.

The third issue that I thought I needed to raise is the issue of the
tagging of Bills. I think that, whoever does the tagging of Bills, as the
NCOP we must guard against a situation where people run away from Bills
coming to the NCOP and therefore tag them differently; and/or where having
tagged them differently, when they are brought into the NCOP, the NCOP is
then stampeded into having to adopt those Bills.

So, as long as I am the Rotating Deputy Chair, we won’t be stampeded into
adopting a Bill, which we have not been given enough time as provinces to
consider on that particular basis. But I think we need to go a step further
to say there is no reason why certain Bills, if you take the Integrated
Framework Bill for intergovernmental issues, should not emerge from here,
be dealt with here and be introduced here. Because its primary interest is
to look at how provinces could be represented and heard on those particular
issues. So, for me, these are the issues that we need to address.

The last issue that I thought I also needed to raise is simply to ask how
do we move beyond this House being seen as the sister House of the National
Assembly? You cannot decree that you are an upper House; that we are a
better House. Depending on how we conduct ourselves, we will either be seen
as . . .

. . . iBhunga leSizwe laMaphondo, okanye iNdlu apho izinto ezithile
ezinxulumene namaphondo . . . [. . . the National Council of Provinces, or
the House where certain issues affecting the provinces . . .]

. . . can better be dealt with, and it really is going to depend on what it
is that we do to deal with that.
Before I sit down I once more extend an invitation to all of you to join me
on 26 June as we unveil the Walter Sisulu Square of Dedication in Kliptown
where I will have as my special guests all veterans who played a role in
the liberation of our country, as well as the representatives and families
of Chief Albert Luthuli, Yusuf Dadoo and Father Trevor Huddleston, who were
the first recipients of Isithwalandwe. I am hoping that regardless of your
political persuasion you will find time to come and honour Uncle Walter.
Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Premier. The House, the NCOP,
is indeed a small House as they have said, but it has huge responsibilities
in terms of the Constitution. I do not have to repeat that; I think you
know that very well. You are quite well-versed with the Constitution.

The NCOP presiding officers will soon arrange a meeting to brief you on
some of the issues that we are dealing with, and we have quite correctly
mentioned some of the difficulties that we have and we will be prepared to
sit down with you and look at them.

I do not want to deal with those matters at the present moment. All
presiding officers of this House will work closely with you to make this
institution a very vibrant institution because it is a House that takes
care of the interests of the provinces. I wish to congratulate you on your
election and thank you very much for your response.

The Council adjourned at 15:48.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           WEDNESDAY, 15 JUNE 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism

     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 6 June 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:

         (i)     Defence Special Account Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2005]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)

National Council of Provinces

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council

      (1)   Bill passed by National Assembly on 15 June 2005 and
         transmitted for concurrence:

         (i)     Close Corporations Amendment Bill [B 6B – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)

       The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Economic and
         Foreign Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.


TABLINGS


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

      Notice of investigation in Abaqulusi Municipality, in terms of
    section 106 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act
    No 32 of 2000).

      Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
    Administration.


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
    on the Re-determination of the Boundaries of Cross-Boundary
    Municipalities Bill [B 12 - 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated
    14 June 2005:

      The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration, having
        considered the subject of the Re-determination of the Boundaries of
        Cross-Boundary Municipalities Bill [B 12 - 2005] (National Assembly
        – sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
    on the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Bill [B 3B - 2005]
    (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 14 June 2005:

      The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration, having
        considered the subject of the Intergovernmental Relations Framework
        Bill [B 3B - 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it,
        reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Older
    Persons Bill [B 68 – 2003] (National Council of Provinces – sec 76),
    dated 14 June 2005:

      The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
        subject of the Older Persons Bill [B 68 - 2003] (National Council
        of Provinces - sec 76), referred to it and classified by the Joint
        Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B 68A - 2003].

      The Committee further reports that it would like concerns regarding
        the costing of the Bill noted, despite the Committee and the
        majority of provinces having received briefings on this aspect of
        the legislation from the national Department of Social Development.



      In their final mandates Gauteng and the Northern Cape noted that the
        implementation of this Bill will have implications for the
        provinces in that the projected estimates exceed the Department’s
        budgetary allocation.

      The Free State noted that due to financial constraints the province
        will implement the Bill in a phase-in process.

      In their final mandate KwaZulu-Natal raised the concern that the
        costing exercise completed by the national Department of Social
        Development has not yet been approved by National Treasury or the
        Financial and Fiscal Commission, and no indication has been given
        by National Treasury that the Bill is affordable to the national
        fiscus.


                            FRIDAY, 17 JUNE 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism

     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 14 June 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:

         (i)     Patents Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2005] (National Assembly –
              sec 75)


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 16 June 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:
         (i)     Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 20 – 2005]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)

     (3)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 16 June 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a Money Bill:

         (i)     Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 77)


                            TUESDAY, 21 JUNE 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 21 June 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as a section 76
         Bill:


         (i)     National Credit Bill [B 18 – 2005] (National Assembly –
                 sec 76)

2.    Translations of Bill submitted

    (1)     The Minister of Finance

         (i)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op Belastingwette [W 19—2005]
                (National Assembly—sec 77)

           This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Taxation
           Laws Amendment Bill [B 19—2005] (National Assembly—sec 77).

    (2)     The Minister of Trade and Industry

        (i)      Wysigingswetsontwerp op Beslote Korporasies [W 6—2005]
                (National Assembly—sec 75)

                 This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
                 Close Corporations Amendment Bill [B 6—2005] (National
                 Assembly—sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council:


     (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 21 June 2005 and
        transmitted for concurrence:


             i) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2005] (National
                Assembly – sec 77)


            ii) Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 20 – 2005] (National
                Assembly – sec 75)


          The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on Finance
          of the National Council of Provinces.



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      Report of the Government Employees Pension Fund (GEPF) for 2003-2004,
      including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
      Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 153-2004].


2.    REPORT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN DELEGATION TO THE 112TH IPU ASSEMBLY IN
      MANILA, 3-8 APRIL 2005


1.    Introduction


A number of activities and meetings preceded the official start of the
Assembly. These included meetings of the Executive Committee of the IPU,
the Steering Committee and cultural activities organized by the host
country. In communication sent to parliaments the following agenda was
submitted to help delegations prepare for the 112th Assembly:


Agenda

    ▪ Election of the President and Vice-Presidents of the 112th Assembly.
    ▪ Consideration of possible requests for the inclusion of an emergency
      item in the Assembly agenda.
    ▪ General debate on the political, economical and social situation in
      the world with the overall theme of The impact of domestic and
      international policies on the situation of women.
    ▪ The role of parliaments in the establishment and functioning of
      mechanisms to provide for the judgement and sentencing of war crimes,
      crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism, with a view to
      avoiding impunity (Committee on Peace and International Security).
    ▪ The role of parliaments in establishing innovative international
      financing and trading mechanisms to address the problems of debt and
      achieve the Millennium Development Goals (Committee on Sustainable
      Development, Finance and Trade).
    ▪ The role of parliaments in advocating and enforcing observance of
      human rights in the strategies for the prevention, management and
      treatment of HIV/AIDS pandemic (Committee on Democracy and Human
      Rights).
The South African delegation was as follows:


Members


Mbete, B (Speaker and Leader of the Delegation)
Bapela, K O
Coetzee, R
De Lille, P
Mgabadeli, H C
Mahlawe, N M
Njikelana, S J (additional, as IPU Committee rapporteur)
Themba, M P
Van der Merwe, J H

Officials

Hahndiek, K
Paulse, C
Barnard, A
Mamabolo, A M

2. Inaugural ceremony of the 112th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary
   Union

The inaugural ceremony of the 112th IPU Assembly took place on 3 April. The
Ceremony was addressed by the President of the Republic of the Philippines,
H.E. Mrs Gloria Macapal-Arroyo and Mr Robert Orr, Assistant Secretary-
General for policy planning, United Nations.

Address by Mr Robert Orr

Presenting the message from the UN Secretary-General, Mr Orr said that
world leaders would meet at a summit in New York to review progress since
the Millennium Declaration. Decisions there would set the world on course
to halve global poverty in ten years, reduce the threats of war and
terrorism and reform the United Nations in an unprecedented way. He asked
each developing country to adopt and start to implement comprehensive
national strategies and to complete the Doha round of trade negotiations by
2006 in order to reach, by 2015, the agreed target of spending 0.7 per cent
of GDP on official development assistance. He invited all states to
complete and sign comprehensive conventions on terrorism and nuclear
terrorism, and to form a UN Peacebuilding Commission.

Address by the President of the Republic of the Philippines, H.E. Mrs
Gloria Macapal-Arroyo

The President said that the Assembly had gathered to celebrate democracy
and parliamentarians across the world who had dedicated their lives to
building the fabric of democracy. Pressing issues for the Assembly were:
the eradication of poverty, strengthening security in the face of terrorism
whilst preserving individual liberty, globalisation and equality for all.
She welcomed the biggest delegation of women parliamentarians in the twenty-
year history of the association. She declared the 112th Assembly open.


3.    Africa Group


Six geopolitical groups are active within the IPU. The geopolitical groups
exist to facilitate the work of the IPU. The Africa Group, which is one of
the geopolitical groups, convenes meetings of all African parliamentary
delegations attending IPU Assemblies in order to discuss issues of mutual
interest.


Emergency item


The meeting discussed the eight proposals which were submitted for
inclusion as emergency items in the agenda of the Assembly.

A decision was taken to support the proposal put forward by Algeria. Other
delegations, including South Africa, felt however that the proposal by
Algeria was reactive as it dealt only with rebuilding countries devastated
by natural disasters and did not address the issue of how countries should
plan and prepare themselves to deal with natural disasters, and proposed
that there should be built into the proposal an element of proactiveness.

The meeting then agreed that the delegation of Algeria should meet the
delegation of Turkey which had submitted a broader proposal on the same
topic, with a view to coming up with a new wording taking into
consideration the concerns raised in the meeting of the African Group.


 Filling of vacancies


   a) Elections to the Bureaux of the Standing Committees


The Officers of the three Standing Committees were due for election at the
end of the 112th Assembly. The Africa Group agreed that the incumbents in
the Bureaux of the Standing Committees who were from the African Group and
who were eligible for re-election, be nominated to continue in their posts
and complete their four-year terms of office.


     b) Presidency of the IPU

Two candidates had presented themselves as candidates for President of the
IPU. The two candidates are Mr P F Casini of Italy and Mr G Versnick of
Belgium. The election of the President of the IPU will take place during
the 113th IPU Conference in October 2005 in Geneva.

The delegations of the Parliaments of Egypt and Morocco expressed their
support for Mr Casini and urged the African Group to put its weight behind
him. Other delegates felt that they were not against the candidature of Mr
Casini in principle but that they would like Mr Casini to address the
African Group.


4.    Governing Council


The Governing Council met on 4 and 8 April 2005. The Council heard the
report of the President of the IPU on his activities since the 175th
session of the Governing Council, and the annual report of the Secretary
General on the activities of the IPU in 2004. The Council examined the
request for reaffiliation to the IPU submitted by the Parliament of
Georgia, and decided to readmit the Parliament of Georgia as a member of
the Union.

The Council also examined reports on the following issues:

Speakers’ Conference

The Speakers’ Conference is scheduled for 7 to 9 September 2005. All the
preparations for the Conference are being made by the Preparatory Committee
set up by the Union’s governing bodies. The Committee will hold its final
meeting in Libreville, Gabon from 20 to 22 May 2005. On that occasion, the
Committee will address four major issues, namely,

    ▪ The draft declaration for the Speakers’ Conference
    ▪ Follow-up to the 2000 Speakers’ Conference
    ▪ Review of the handbook on Framework for democracy
    ▪ Co-operation between parliaments and the United Nations


Meeting of Women Parliamentarians


The tenth Meeting of Women Parliamentarians took place on 3 April and was
attended by 120 women from 79 different countries. Ms Mgabadeli, Ms de
Lille and Ms Themba attended the meeting. Men parliamentarians also
participated in the meeting. The Meeting of Women Parliamentarians
celebrated its twentieth anniversary. The Meeting was briefed on the work
of the Gender Partnership Group on the activities relating to monitoring
the participation of women at the IPU, examining the budget from a gender
perspective and monitoring the situation of parliaments without women
members. In this regard, the Group held a dialogue session with the
delegation from Kuwait.

The Philippines and South Africa were recognized as some of the countries
with progressive gender laws.


Gender Partnership Group


The Group studied the composition of delegations attending the 112th IPU
Assembly in Manila and previous IPU statutory meetings. As at 7 April 2005,
out of the 614 delegates attending the 112th IPU Assembly, 165 were women
(26.9%). At the 112th Assembly, the 12 all-male delegations were from the
Parliaments of Algeria, Bolivia, the Democratic Republic of Korea, El
Salvador, Iceland, Kuwait, Mali, Malta, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia and the Syrian Arab Republic. The Group engaged in dialogue with the
delegation of Kuwait regarding progress made in the promotion of women’s
rights in that country. It took note of recent developments in Kuwait and
expressed its support for a bill currently under consideration at the
Majles Al Ummah which would grant women the right to vote and to stand for
elections at both the local and national levels.


Committee on the Human Rights of Parliamentarians


The Governing Council adopted, on the recommendation of the Committee on
the Human Rights of Parliamentarians, a report with resolutions relating to
17 countries on individual human rights cases. Parliaments were urged to
follow up in whatever manner they may deem appropriate on one or more of
the resolutions on individual human rights cases.


Committee on Middle East Questions


The Committee agreed that prospects for peace in the region had
considerably improved in recent months, although it was too early to talk
of significant steps forward. The Committee also discussed the possibility
of an IPU mission being sent to the region at the time of the Palestinian
legislative elections on 17 July 2005 and expressed the hope that
discussions on the subject under way in the Executive Committee of the IPU
would lead to the establishment of an IPU presence on that occasion.


Committee to promote respect for international humanitarian law


The Committee discussed the results of the regional parliamentary
conference on Refugees in Africa: The challenges of protection and
solutions held in Cotonou (Benin) in June 2004. The African Parliamentary
Union (APU) will be discussing follow-up to the Conference at the meeting
of its Executive Committee in May 2005. It was agreed that contacts with
national parliaments should be enhanced within the framework of the APU’s
follow-up mechanism. Furthermore, emphasis was also laid on the importance
of engaging sub-regional parliamentary assemblies in Africa to ensure
efficient implementation of the Cotonou results. A practical booklet on the
Conference was produced by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), and the APU will be distributing it to its members.


Consultants’ report on communications strategy


The IPU took the first step to develop a corporate branding and
communications strategy. Saatchi & Saatchi Geneva was chosen to prepare a
strategic analysis with specific proposals, inter alia, on how to make the
IPU better known and its mission and work better understood.

The consultants identified charter and structure, leadership, attitude and
resources as issues to be addressed.

They also observed that the level of investment in communications must be
increased in order to raise the profile of the organization. Leadership of
the organization must be visible, and the President, Executive and senior
members of the Secretariat must be directly involved in brand-building and
communications and be willing to commit the necessary time.

Future Inter-Parliamentary Union meetings

The Governing Council approved the following meetings:

14 – 19 October 2005   113th Assembly and Related Meetings
            Geneva

7 – 12 May 2006              114th Assembly and Related Meetings
      Nairobi (Kenya)


Amendments to the Statutes


The Executive Committee proposed to the Governing Council that when
considering requests from potential members for cancellation of former
debts owing to the Union, particular consideration should be given to the
following: whether the parliament in question has relinquished a single-
party system in favour of a multi-party one, the amount of time that has
elapsed since previous membership of the Union, the severity of the
economic circumstances prompting the request, and the external factors
causing those circumstances, such as recent civil strife. The Governing
Council approved in principle a new rule in that regard.

5.    The 112th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union

The Assembly met on 4, 5, 7 and 8 April. At the first sitting of the
Assembly on 4 April, Mr Franklin M Drilon, President of the Senate
(Philippines) was elected President by acclamation and took the chair.

The Assembly held a general debate on the political, economic and social
situation in the world with the overall theme of “The impact of domestic
and international policies on the situation of women”. During the general
debate, a number of speakers from different parliaments took the floor. The
Speaker and Mr Coetzee participated in the general debate on behalf of the
South African delegation. The Speaker also chaired part of the morning
session of the Assembly on Monday, 4 April.

In her speech, the Speaker said that African leaders needed to be commended
for adopting positions which favoured women especially in the African Union
(AU). 50 per cent of AU’s commissioners were women. In the South African
Government, 41.2 per cent of Ministers were women. Resources were needed to
turn policies into better lives for women. International and national
policies were good and effective only if those committed to them allocated
resources for their implementation. They would be effective when
parliamentarians played the necessary oversight role to ensure that the
executive complied with the international conventions ratified by
individual countries.

In his speech, Mr Coetzee said that the situation of women was best in
those countries which had a culture of protecting the individual rights of
every person. One underlying factor in the pandemic of HIV/AIDS in Sub-
Sahara was the fact that many women did not have the power, either physical
or social, to control what happened to their bodies. The empowerment of
women in the fight against HIV was two parts of the same struggle.

The Assembly was also addressed by Ms Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of
UNICEF.

Ms Bellamy said that there had been an 18 per cent decline in child
mortality since 1990, but the marginalisation and exploitation of children
continued. She appealed to delegates to use their power to create real and
lasting improvements for children. Beyond charity, there was a need for
acts of law and leadership by legislators. Powerful interests wished to
spend money on the military and bureaucracy. However, there were even
stronger reasons to fight for women and children, to enable them to realize
their full potential and protect them from abuse. A UNICEF report in 2005
had identified conflict, poverty and HIV/AIDS as the key challenges facing
children and women. It had found that more than one billion children were
being robbed of their childhood by these three forces.

Half a million women died in childbirth every year. HIV/AIDS spread ever
more rapidly amongst women, whilst the use of systematic rape as a weapon
of war was increasing. One of UNICEF’s Millennium Development Goals was the
empowerment of children and women.

6.    Consideration of possible requests for the inclusion of an emergency
item in the Assembly agenda

Eight items, all on natural disasters, were submitted by Sri Lanka,
Algeria, Japan, Chile, Hungary, Turkey, Indonesia, and the Islamic Republic
of Iran. After discussion, the nine sponsors finally agreed to submit the
following item to the Assembly:

Natural disaster: The role of parliaments in prevention, rehabilitation,
reconstruction and the protection of vulnerable groups.

The item was unanimously agreed to and referred to a Drafting Committee. Mr
Bapela represented the South African delegation on the Drafting Committee.
The Drafting Committee examined various proposals and prepared a draft
resolution which was subsequently adopted by the Assembly. The resolution
is attached as annexure “A”.

7.    First Standing Committee on Peace and Security
The Committee considered the following agenda item:
The role of parliaments in the establishment and functioning of mechanisms
to provide for the judgement and sentencing of war crimes, crimes against
humanity, genocide and terrorism, with a view
to avoid impunity.

The Committee had before it a report and a draft resolution prepared by the
co-rapporteurs, as well as amendments and sub-amendments to the draft
resolution that had been submitted within the statutory deadline.

Mr Van der Merwe and Ms Mahlawe represented the South African delegation on
the Committee.
Following the debate, the Committee appointed a Drafting Committee. The
Drafting Committee examined the draft resolution submitted by the
rapporteurs and proposed amendments, as well as sub-amendments and amended
the draft resolution accordingly. The drafting committee then prepared a
draft resolution which was considered by the Standing Committee and adopted
by consensus.
The plenary sitting of the Assembly adopted the draft resolution (attached
as annexure “B”) unanimously.
The Committee proposed to the Assembly the inclusion on the agenda of the
114th Assembly a subject item entitled “The role of Parliaments in
strengthening the control of trafficking in small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition”, and the appointment of the following persons as co-
Rapporteurs: Mr Francois-Xavier de Donnea (Belgium) and Mrs Ruth Oniango
(Kenya). The proposals were subsequently approved by the Assembly.

8. Second Standing Committee on Sustainable Development,  Finance and Trade


The Committee considered the following agenda item:
The role of parliaments in establishing innovative international financing
and trading mechanisms to address the problem of debt and achieve the
Millennium Development Goals.
The Committee considered a report and draft resolution prepared by the co-
rapporteurs, as well as amendments and sub-amendments.
Ms De Lille and Ms Mgabadeli represented the South African delegation on
the Committee.
Following the debate, the Committee appointed a Drafting Committee. The
Drafting Committee examined the draft resolution submitted by the
rapporteurs and proposed amendments. The drafting committee then prepared a
draft resolution which was considered by the Standing Committee and adopted
by consensus.
The draft resolution (attached as annexure “C”) was subsequently submitted
to the plenary sitting of the Assembly and unanimously adopted.
The Committee proposed to the Assembly the inclusion on the agenda of the
114th Assembly a subject item entitled “The role of Parliaments in
environmental management and in combating global degradation of the
environment”, and the appointment of the following persons as co-
Rapporteurs: Mr Shuichi Katoh (Japan) and Mr Jose Thomaz Nono (Brazil). The
proposals were subsequently approved by the Assembly.

9.    Third Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights
The Committee considered the following agenda item:
The role of parliaments in advocating and enforcing observance of human
rights in the strategies for the prevention, management and treatment of
the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
The Committee had before it a report and a draft resolution prepared by the
co-rapporteurs, as well as amendments to the draft resolution.

Ms Themba and Mr Coetzee represented the South African delegation on the
Committee. Mr Coetzee participated in the debate.
Following the debate, the Committee appointed a drafting Committee. The
drafting Committee examined the draft resolution submitted by the
rapporteurs and enhanced it with some of the proposed amendments. The
drafting committee then prepared a draft resolution which was considered by
the Standing Committee and adopted by consensus.
The draft resolution (attached as Annexure “D”) was subsequently adopted by
consensus by the plenary sitting of the Assembly.
The Committee proposed to the Assembly the inclusion on the agenda of the
114th Assembly a subject item entitled “How parliaments can and must
promote effective ways of combating violence against women in all fields”,
and the appointment of the following persons as co-Rapporteurs: Mrs Maria
Antonia Martinez Garcia (Spain) and Mrs Hyehoon Lee (Republic of Korea).
The proposals were subsequently approved by the Assembly.

10. Committee on the Human Rights of Parliamentarians

The South African delegation requested an opportunity to be heard by the
Committee on the Human Rights of Parliamentarians, which is  investigating
a complaint about the manner in which a former member of the National
Council of Provinces (NCOP), was removed as a permanent member after the
Provincial Legislature of the Western Cape had passed a motion of no
confidence in her, as a result of which the party that nominated her
recalled her as a permanent delegate.

Mr Van der Merwe had prepared and forwarded to the Secretary of the IPU
Parliament’s written reply to the complaints. Mr Van der Merwe, Ms Mahlawe,
and Mr Hahndiek appeared before the Committee in person. Mr Van der Merwe
stated Parliament’s case and reacted to various questions by Committee
members. The Committee has not yet, however, made known their verdict to
the Governing Council.”

11. Bilateral meetings

The following bilateral meetings took place:

    ▪ The Speaker met the Speaker of the Zambian Parliament wherein it was
      agreed that a meeting of SADC country delegations should be convened
      at each IPU Assembly.

    ▪ The Speaker met the delegation from the Ivory Coast to discuss the
      peace process in that country.

    ▪ Mr Van der Merwe met the delegation of Israel. The delegation met
      their counterparts from Palestine to discuss the political situation
      in that country.

12. Observations and conclusions

The general organisation and security of the Assembly was commendable. The
delegation wishes to express gratitude for the hospitality accorded by the
South African Embassy staff in the Philippines, the Philippine Ambassador
to South Africa, and the people of Philippine.

The quality of inputs and participation of all speakers at the Assembly and
the South African delegation in particular is laudable.

During the debates, the ever-growing potential and visible momentum of
parliaments to contribute to world peace, stability and a better life for
all and the need to enhance cooperation between the IPU and the UN were
highlighted.

13.   Challenges

    ▪ It is important for adequate preparations to be done for
      international events such as this.


    ▪ South Africa as a country should add more value in its contribution
      to the proceedings of the IPU and also benefit from the IPU.

    ▪ Adequate interest and publicity on IPU within our Parliament should
      be generated.


    ▪ The IPU presents an opportunity of cross-pollination of ideas and
      further triggers and emphasises the need to craft local programmes of
      the legislature and integrate them with global activities in such a
      way that there is visible reciprocation.

14.   Recommendations

The National Assembly should:

   a) ensure the provision of adequate resources and better planning in
      order for the National Assembly to contribute to a better world for
      all through the IPU.

   b) develop short, medium and long-term strategies and plans on its
      participation in the IPU.

   c) establish a joint National Assembly/National Council of Provinces
      structure that will consistently strategise, plan and implement above
      plans and other activities at international level.

   d) Appoint a core of 3-4 representatives to IPU for the rest of the term
      of the current Parliament, and another group of 8-9 representatives
      on rotation basis.


   e) Assign the Presiding Officers to take the responsibility for the
      above recommendations and report to the National Assembly on an
      annual basis.

                                ANNEXURE “A”

                             NATURAL DISASTERS:
  THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN PREVENTION, REHABILITATION, RECONSTRUCTION AND
                     THE PROTECTION OF VULNERABLE GROUPS
            Resolution adopted unanimously by the 112th Assembly
                           (Manila, 8 April 2005)
The 112th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
Concerned that earthquakes, tsunamis, torrential rains, heavy snows, high
winds (including typhoons and tornados), floods, landslides, volcanic
eruptions, forest fires, droughts, locust infestations and other serious
natural disasters are a great transnational threat to all people, that
socially vulnerable poor people in developing nations particularly
vulnerable to disasters are frequently the ones who suffer great damage and
become internally displaced persons or refugees after a natural disaster
strikes, and that the secondary effects of natural disasters, such as food
shortages and the deterioration of sanitary conditions, become enduring and
serious problems,
Aware that all disasters, including man-made disasters, are a direct threat
to human beings; and that from the viewpoint of guaranteeing human
security, it is essential when they strike to ensure that aid truly
addresses the suffering of those affected by the disaster, and to increase
the capacity of individuals and local communities to take the initiative,
Taking note that over 270 000 innocent citizens of Indonesia, Sri Lanka,
India, Thailand, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Maldives, Bangladesh, Somalia,
Kenya, Tanzania and other countries were killed on 26 December 2004 as a
result of the major earthquake off the coast of Sumatra and the tsunami in
the Indian Ocean, that tens of thousands of people are still missing, and
that many hundreds of others lost their lives as a result of the
aftershocks in Indonesia three months later,
Expressing its sincere condolences to those who lost loved ones in the
tsunami disaster and the aftershocks, as well as to the people, parliaments
and governments of the nations affected by the disaster,
Praising the leadership role played by the affected nations in responding
to the disaster and holding in high regard the speedy cooperation
demonstrated by the international community in carrying out relief
activities in response to the United Nations appeal for emergency support,
Appreciating the fact that the United Nations and its specialised agencies,
such as the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World Health
Organization (WHO), the World Food Programme (WFP), and the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and other institutions such as the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and the Asian Development
Bank (ADB), as well as governments and so many international humanitarian
organisations, have come forward immediately to provide urgent humanitarian
assistance to meet the needs of the victims of the tsunami disaster and to
provide emergency health care, shelter and food to the people of the
affected countries, and expressing respect and thanks to the United Nations
Secretary-General for his prompt action to visit the affected countries in
order to carry out an on-the-spot investigation into the devastation and
havoc caused by the tsunami,
Recalling the Declaration on Action to Strengthen Emergency Relief,
Rehabilitation, Reconstruction and Prevention in the Aftermath of the
Earthquake and Tsunami Disaster of 26 December 2004, adopted at the special
meeting held in Jakarta on 6 January 2005 of the leaders of the member
States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in the
aftermath of the earthquake and tsunami, and the numerous other discussions
that have taken place on this subject at the international level,

Recalling the resolution adopted by the 108th IPU Conference, held in
Santiago in 2003, on international cooperation for the prevention and
management of transborder natural disasters and their impact on the regions
concerned,

Aware that the damage from the recent earthquake and tsunami was worsened
due to the lack of a tsunami early warning system in the Indian Ocean rim
area and the lack in the affected area of disaster prevention awareness
regarding the cause-and-effect relationship between major earthquakes and
tsunamis,

Noting that the Special Session on the Indian Ocean Disaster held at the
World Conference on Disaster Reduction (Kobe, Japan, 18–22 January 2005)
emphasised the importance of comprehensively evaluating all the lessons
learned from the tsunami disaster and continuing international and regional
dialogues and discussions to build an early warning system,

Noting that a report of UNICEF estimated that over one third of those who
died in the recent earthquake and tsunami were children, and deeply
concerned that the surviving children who have suffered from the disaster
are now being exposed to such threats as human trafficking and infectious
diseases,

Emphasising the importance of emergency humanitarian relief activities
promoted in response to this tragedy by UNICEF, the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), WHO and others, for both the survival and
the protection of children,

Reconfirming the importance of a multifaceted contribution by parliaments
and parliamentarians to emergency humanitarian relief for women and
children who are vulnerable in post-disaster situations,
Recognising the need for psychological assistance and counselling to
eliminate the mental trauma for millions of innocent victims of major human
disasters, and acknowledging the effectiveness of the various kinds of
support provided by non governmental organisations,
Considering the importance of international cooperation, solidarity and
partnership, as well as good governance at all levels, in strengthening
global disaster reduction activities,
   1. Calls upon the international community to renew its determination to
      prevent disasters where possible and to minimise the impact of
      unavoidable natural disasters by making maximum use of past lessons
      learned in order to prepare for natural disasters, which can strike
      anywhere in the world, and to achieve the common desire of all
      humankind to prevent extensive damage, and particularly the loss of
      life;
   2. Proposes that nations around the world that are frequently struck by
      disasters further strengthen their cooperation in disaster prevention
      efforts; encourages them to provide and share know-how, expertise,
      technology, and other information for the establishment of an early
      warning system; and urges concerned governments to move forward with
      concrete efforts to establish a tsunami early warning system in the
      Indian Ocean region under international coordination, administered by
      United Nations entities, including the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
      Commission (IOC) of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
      Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the International Strategy for
      Disaster Reduction (ISDR);
   3. Calls upon the parliaments of every nation to urge their governments
      to support, in partnership with the United Nations, effective projects
      conducted by international organisations such as the International Red
      Cross and Red Crescent Movement, UNICEF, IOM, the United Nations Human
      Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT), WHO, and the United Nations
      Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) to support children, women, the
      poorest and other members of society who are vulnerable in post-
      disaster situations;
   4. Proposes that the parliaments of affected nations and international
      organisations involved in relief efforts call upon governments to
      implement plans for the protection and survival of children, including
      (i) measures to combat human trafficking and to support family
      reunification, (ii) the establishment of child protection facilities
      and temporary housing for single-parent families, (iii) services to
      relieve psychological trauma, (iv) measures to control infectious
      diseases, and (v) nutritional support for children;
   5. Calls upon the parliaments of the affected countries and their
      neighbours to protect from human trafficking, infectious diseases and
      other secondary damage children who have been orphaned or who remain
      unidentified after the disaster, by disseminating information, inter
      alia by drawing society’s attention to this matter and educating the
      government and police, and by appealing to their national governments
      to take institutional preventive measures, including the proper and
      prompt strengthening of the legal system, for example through the
      temporary suspension of adoption procedures;
   6. Urges the parties concerned to be particularly attentive to the
      importance of local ownership of the reconstruction process; suggests
      that efforts should be made at all levels to promote the participation
      of vulnerable populations in planning, decision-making and operational
      activities, thereby making reconstruction more effective and
      strengthening local democracy; and urges all concerned in the
      reconstruction effort to take steps to create societies and economies
      that are environmentally and ecologically sustainable;
   7. Urges the United Nations and other institutions of the international
      community, and particularly donor countries and the international
      financial institutions, to honour their pledges of funding and
      assistance in support of the national rehabilitation and
      reconstruction efforts of affected countries; and encourages IPU
      Member Parliaments whose governments have made pledges of assistance
      to take decisive steps towards their realisation in a timely and
      urgent manner;
   8. Strongly urges all parties engaged in the rehabilitation and
      reconstruction process to be rigorous in the fight against every form
      of corruption, including profiteering, in the drafting and management
      of all programmes;
   9. Calls upon the countries affected by the tsunami disaster to be
      responsible, accountable and transparent and to provide the
      international community as quickly as possible with death tolls and
      all other relevant information regarding the resulting damage in order
      to ensure the delivery of aid suitable for the actual situation and to
      facilitate decisions relating to the distribution of assistance; and
      further calls upon the affected countries to make every effort to
      ensure that such assistance is used as quickly as possible for the
      direct benefit of the tsunami victims, and is used conscientiously to
      rebuild their respective nations;
  10. Recognises the important role played by both the print and the
      electronic media in providing updated information regarding the
      tsunami disaster, in encouraging the world community to provide
      assistance to the tsunami victims and in disseminating all relevant
      information on this disaster; and urges the media to do the same in
      all disaster situations;
  11.Calls upon all countries to be prepared to face such natural
      disasters in the future and to help developing countries to acquire
      natural disaster warning systems and natural disaster preparation
      plans; and further calls upon scientifically developed countries to
      share information on such disasters with the rest of the world, the
      United Nations and appropriate international institutions;
  12. Calls upon the parliaments of every nation to support all disaster
      prevention measures, humanitarian aid and long-term reconstruction
      assistance implemented by governments, international organisations
      and others; and urges governments to take part in the international
      coordination of assistance in order to ensure the efficient use of
      available resources, without prejudice to bilateral support and aid
      provided by individual countries or international organisations to
      afflicted nations;
  13. Calls upon Member Parliaments to urge their governments to draw up or
      strengthen existing legislative policies relating to the creation,
      training and support of local field disaster response teams in all
      areas, and particularly disaster-prone areas, to predict, prepare
      for, plan for and prevent natural and man-made disasters, to cope
      with and mitigate the effects of the resulting damage, and to
      relieve, rehabilitate and resurrect areas affected by disasters,
      employing inter alia the following methods:
           (a)   Capacity-building through the establishment of early
           warning systems and hazard mapping, and by determining escape
           routes, setting up evacuation centres and preparing disaster
           prevention measures;
           (b)   The establishment of quick and efficient disaster
           reporting mechanisms, providing information on inter alia the
           extent of the damage, the number of affected families, and the
           number of dead, missing and injured people, prioritising the
           needs to be met, coping with and minimising the damage, and
           distributing relief supplies such as food, non-food items,
           emergency shelter materials and provisions for rehabilitation,
           including financial aid, housing and loans;
           (c)   Creating emergency medium- and long-term rehabilitation
           plans, giving particular consideration to women, children, the
           elderly and other members of society who are most vulnerable in
           every aspect of a disaster;
  14. Calls upon Member Parliaments to create strategically located
      regional disaster training, logistics and reaction centres, inter
      alia to train local field disaster response teams, to share
      international technical know-how, expertise, technology, and other
      information relating to disaster prevention, training and management,
      to pre-position emergency equipment for quick delivery and use by
      international response teams that respond immediately in affected
      areas using information previously gathered on disaster-prone areas,
      and to coordinate, mobilise and liaise with local field disaster
      response teams in the affected areas; and further urges collaboration
      between these regional disaster training, logistics and reaction
      centres and international humanitarian organisations such as those of
      the United Nations, its affiliates and agencies, and the
      International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, without prejudice
      to bilateral support and aid provided by individual countries or
      international organisations to afflicted nations;
  15. Invites all Member Parliaments of the IPU to take urgent action to
      follow up on the recommendations contained in this resolution, and
      thus reaffirm their commitment to provide steadfast support for all
      initiatives, especially during times of extreme emergency, and to
      preserve the sanctity of life, alleviate human suffering, and uplift
      the dignity of all peoples.

                                ANNEXURE “B”

 THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN THE ESTABLISHMENT AND FUNCTIONING OF MECHANISMS
  TO PROVIDE FOR THE JUDGEMENT AND SENTENCING OF WAR CRIMES, CRIMES AGAINST
     HUMANITY, GENOCIDE AND TERRORISM, WITH A VIEW TO AVOIDING IMPUNITY
            Resolution adopted unanimously by the 112th Assembly
                           (Manila, 8 April 2005)
The 112th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
Deeply concerned by the fact that in today’s world, many regions and whole
societies are brutally affected by the persistence of war crimes, crimes
against humanity, genocide and/or terrorism, all of which are serious
crimes of concern to the international community as a whole,
Convinced that there is no justifiable cause for those abhorrent crimes,
Considering that, in keeping with the principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, international human rights law, international humanitarian
law and international criminal law, appropriate instruments have been
developed, and that it is of paramount importance to ensure that their
provisions be enforced, in conformity with the international obligations
assumed by States,
Recalling in this respect the particular importance of ensuring respect for
the rights and fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
Geneva Conventions for the protection of victims of war of 12 August 1949
and their Additional Protocols, the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and other instruments, treaties and
agreements ensuring respect for human dignity, as well as the human rights
norms of customary international law as reflected by state practice,
Considering that under international law, no statutory limitation applies
to war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism, and such
crimes are not subject to amnesty, clemency or pardon, and that this has
been confirmed by the judgements of national and international courts,
Recalling the resolutions on peace, security and disarmament adopted by the
IPU since 1990,
Stressing the importance of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
preventing and punishing war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity,
and recalling in this respect that States party to the Rome Statute of the
ICC have a duty to prosecute such crimes themselves or to refer persons
suspected of such crimes to the jurisdiction of the ICC, and also that
international humanitarian law, as enshrined in the Geneva Conventions for
the protection of victims of war of 12 August 1949 and their Additional
Protocols, places the obligation on States to search for and try persons
alleged to have committed, or have ordered to be committed, grave breaches,
regardless of the persons' nationality or where the violations take place,
Recognising that the jurisdiction of the ICC is limited to crimes committed
on or after 1 July 2002 and that there is a need for mechanisms to address
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide committed before that
date,
Considering the Rome Statute, which requires States Parties to cooperate
with the ICC in order to combat war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, and considering the 12 international conventions and protocols
relating to terrorism,
Concerned at the lack of progress made, on the one hand by the States
Parties to the Rome Statute of the ICC and on the other hand by all States,
in implementing the necessary mechanisms to support, respectively, the
Statute, and the provisions adopted by the United Nations and other bodies
to combat these crimes,
Recognising that political will to speak out against racism, xenophobia and
intolerance is an essential element in ending impunity,
Concerned at the fact that the implementation of agreements on the
prosecution of war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism
has been delayed, set aside, or omitted by some States, thus subjecting
these agreements to different interpretations and reducing their
effectiveness, alarmed at the possibility that this may signal a permissive
attitude towards impunity, and concerned at the fact that many States have
not yet ratified or acceded to the Rome Statute,
Convinced that parliaments have a primary responsibility, and must, by
enacting necessary legislation, play a central role in the prevention,
punishment and avoidance of impunity for war crimes, crimes against
humanity, genocide and terrorism, and that a multilateral approach among
parliaments is an appropriate way to facilitate the implementation of
mechanisms required for the enforcement of judgements and penalties for
these abhorrent crimes,
Recalling that each State has the obligation and the duty to prosecute or
extradite the perpetrators of war crimes, crimes against humanity, crimes
of genocide and terrorist crimes, irrespective of the location of the crime
or the nationality of the perpetrator or the victim,
Recalling that victims of war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and
terrorism have the right to truth, justice and reparation,
   1. Strongly condemns, without exception, all acts, methods and practices
      of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide;
   2. Strongly condemns all acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all
      its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever committed,
      including those in which States are directly or indirectly involved,
      which threaten friendly relations among peoples, endanger or take
      innocent lives, have a deleterious effect on international relations
      and may jeopardise the security and territorial integrity of States;
   3. Strongly advises all IPU Member Parliaments to assume, before their
      States and citizens, in conformity with their national legislations
      and the international obligations of States, the responsibility for
      implementing and enforcing, through the enactment of national laws,
      the international agreements that have been concluded to punish and
      prevent war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism;
   4. Recommends that through the inter-parliamentary activity of IPU
      Members, efforts should be combined and experiences shared in order to
      develop the necessary mechanisms to pursue these objectives, and to
      avoid impunity for those individuals, organisations and States that
      commit war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism;
   5. Urges Member Parliaments duly to codify, in accordance with
      international law, in particular international humanitarian law, human
      rights law and refugee law, these abhorrent crimes in their domestic
      criminal law, and to establish the corresponding penalties and
      mechanisms to avoid impunity;
   6. Invites those States which have not yet done so to ratify or accede to
      the Rome Statute and to ratify the Agreement on the Privileges and
      Immunities of the International Criminal Court; and encourages all
      Member Parliaments whose States are parties to the Rome Statute to
      pass domestic legislation in order to allow them to cooperate with the
      ICC;
   7. Recommends that all parliaments, including those of States which have
      not ratified the Rome Statute, enact laws for the prevention and
      punishment of war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and
      terrorism;
   8. Recommends that all parliaments support and cooperate with the ICC and
      other competent bodies (such as national and international commissions
      for the investigation of crimes against humanity and national and
      international courts), and thus strengthen parliamentary action to
      eradicate war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism;


   9. Recommends that States specifically address the issue of war crimes,
      crimes against humanity and genocide committed before the entry into
      force of the Rome Statute in a framework of justice and legality,
      which are the necessary conditions to attain peace and the respect of
      human rights in each country and in the international community;
  10. Urges Member Parliaments to reject bilateral agreements that would
      provide for immunity from investigation and prosecution, by the ICC or
      otherwise, for the nationals of any State;
  11. Recommends that all parliaments do everything in their power to assist
      with the criminal prosecution of persons being sought by the
      International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol), including by
      facilitating their hand-over;
   12.Calls on parliaments to consider ratifying, if they have not yet done
       so, the 12 multilateral treaties on terrorism and the relevant
       regional instruments, to incorporate their provisions into domestic
       legislation and to see to it that they are duly implemented;
   13.Recommends that all parliaments urge their respective governments to
       intensify efforts to come to a global agreement on terrorism,
       expressing the common awareness of States of the threat of
       international terrorism and providing a precise definition of the
       nature and actual features of this phenomenon, so as to combat it
       more effectively;
   14.Calls for recognition of the need to strengthen capacity-building
       assistance for countries which have the political will but lack the
       technical resources necessary to conclude and implement the 12
       conventions and protocols relating to terrorism;
   15.Recommends that all parliaments enact legislation, in line with
       international law, to create civil procedures to provide compensation
       to victims of war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and
       terrorism;
   16.Encourages parliaments to make the fullest possible use of their
       competences and roles to achieve these objectives;
   17.Recommends that parliaments take account of international declarations
       and conventions on these subjects and of the considerations of the
       United Nations, the ICC and all related international or regional
       agencies, authorities and bodies;
   18.Invites parliaments to include in their agendas, as a priority, the
       activities required to implement all mechanisms which may contribute
       to the prosecution of war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide
       and terrorism, including the strengthening of rule of law mechanisms,
       so as to avoid impunity for these crimes and to ensure the rights of
       the victims of such crimes to just reparation;
   19.Invites the United Nations and parliaments to promote voluntary
       contributions to the ICC Trust Fund for Victims.

                                ANNEXURE “C”

 THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN ESTABLISHING INNOVATIVE INTERNATIONAL FINANCING
    AND TRADING MECHANISMS TO ADDRESS THE PROBLEM OF DEBT AND ACHIEVE THE
                        MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS
            Resolution adopted unanimously by the 112th Assembly
                           (Manila, 8 April 2005)
The 112th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
Recalling the Declaration adopted on 1 September 2000 by the Presiding
Officers of National Parliaments entitled The Parliamentary Vision of
International Cooperation on the Eve of the Third Millennium,
Recalling also the Millennium Declaration of 8 September 2000, which sets
out eight time-bound and measurable goals collectively known as the
Millennium Development Goals, as criteria established jointly by the
international community for the elimination of poverty, and also the Human
Development Reports drawn up by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP),
Recalling the final declarations of specialised United Nations conferences,
in particular the International Conference on Financing for Development,
held in Monterrey, Mexico in 2002, the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, held in Johannesburg, South Africa in 2002, and the Third
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, held in
Brussels, Belgium in 2001,
Recalling the Declaration adopted in New York on 20 September 2004 by 120
countries at the end of the Summit for Action against Hunger and Poverty,
the September 2004 report by the Technical Group on Innovative Financing
Mechanisms and the final reports of the UN Millennium Project, delivered on
17 January 2005,
Recalling the resolutions of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, particularly
those adopted by the 73rd Inter-Parliamentary Conference (Lomé, 1985) on
the role of parliaments and their contribution towards the elimination of
poverty by eliminating the burden of international debt; the 74th Inter-
Parliamentary Conference (Ottawa, 1985) on the contribution of parliaments
to the search for measures and actions aimed at removing the burden of
foreign debt that weighs on the developing countries; the 88th Inter-
Parliamentary Conference (Stockholm, 1992) on the need for a radical
solution to the problem of debt in the developing world; and the 102nd
Inter-Parliamentary Conference (Berlin, 1999) on the need to revise the
current global financial and economic model, as well as the Final Document
of the Inter-Parliamentary Conference "North-South Dialogue for Global
Prosperity" organised by the IPU in Ottawa in 1993, and the resolutions
adopted by the 107th Conference (Marrakech, 2002) on the role of
parliaments in developing public policy in an era of globalisation,
multilateral institutions and international trade agreements, and also by
the Parliamentary Meeting on the occasion of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (Johannesburg, 2002), by the 108th Inter-
Parliamentary Conference (Santiago, 2003) on parliament's role in
strengthening democratic institutions and human development in a fragmented
world, and by the 109th Inter-Parliamentary Assembly (Geneva, 2003) on
global public goods: a new challenge for parliaments,
Greatly concerned by the fact that 1.2 billion people – or one in five
persons in the world – survive on less than a US dollar a day in purchasing
power parity per capita, below the international poverty rate set at a
dollar a day, and that in the 1990s, poverty worsened in 54 countries,
including 35 African countries, leaving them poorer at the end of the
decade than in 1990,
Concerned by the fact that even if the proportion of people in extreme
poverty were to be halved by 2015 in comparison with 1990, it is clear that
hundreds of millions of people in the developing world would continue to
live in complete destitution,
Recognising that the role of parliaments in championing the eight
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) is crucial, and that the adoption of
the corresponding legislation and appropriate budgetary allocations is
indispensable,
Stressing the need for assistance and support to improve the institutional
capacity of parliaments in developing countries, with a view to enabling
them to exercise effectively the legislative, oversight and budgetary
functions related to the MDGs,
Recognising the importance of ensuring environmental sustainability in
achieving the MDGs, stressing the role of the United Nations Decade of
Education for Sustainable Development and the International Decade for
Action: Water for Life, starting in 2005, and welcoming the entry into
force of the Kyoto Protocol on 16 February 2005 as a significant step
forward,
Deeply concerned that in the current state of affairs, the financing of
efforts to achieve the MDGs, and thus their implementation, is not ensured,

Noting that economic growth, debt relief and public development assistance
- the three main sources of funding for development - are in the current
circumstances unable to generate the extra 50 to 100 billion dollars
required annually to achieve the MDGs,
Noting that the official development assistance (ODA) commitment (provision
of 0.7 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP)) is still not being met by
most countries, but noting with satisfaction the undertakings by several
countries to meet these commitments within the next decade,
Noting that despite the progress made on debt cancellation, relief and
rescheduling both bilaterally, and multilaterally in the framework of the
Bretton Woods institutions, the burden of the debt remains a major
constraint and an obstacle to economic growth and human development,
Convinced that increased development assistance funding can only be
beneficial if the receiving countries promote democracy and good
governance,
Convinced that globalisation is at the same time a source of opportunities
and challenges for all countries, and that it has an impact on people's
everyday lives,
Noting that many developing countries are increasingly excluded from
international trade and capital flows, which results in poverty,
Noting the growing importance of international trade and investment and
their direct influence on the development and well-being of the nations of
the entire world, and concerned at the fact that the current international
trade and investment system is distorted in many sectors in favour of the
developed countries, and poses problems for many developing countries,
Noting that awareness of the importance of trade and investment to
furthering countries' development has grown since the Fourth Ministerial
Meeting of the World Trade Organization (WTO), held in Doha, which sought
to place the needs and interests of the developing countries at the centre
of international trade negotiations and drew up the Doha Development
Agenda,
Welcoming the Geneva framework agreement of July 2004, a breakthrough in
the negotiations conducted by the WTO, following the failure of the Cancún
meeting,
Nonetheless concerned about the many uncertainties that remain in those
negotiations, in particular with regard to issues of great importance to
developing countries,
Noting the striking lack of resources currently available to achieve most
MDGs by 2015, and underscoring the responsibility of governments and the
parliaments which provide them with oversight to respect the commitments
made at the Millennium Summit in 2000,
Strongly believing that 2005 will be the key year for governments to act to
achieve the MDGs, at such high-level meetings as the G8 summit, to be held
in July, the high-level plenary meeting to review the implementation of the
United Nations Millennium Declaration of the sixtieth session of the United
Nations General Assembly, to be held in September, and the Sixth WTO
Ministerial Conference, to be held in December,
Looking forward to the forthcoming Millennium+5 Summit, to be held in New
York from 14 to 16 September 2005, and strongly wishing that the event will
re-energise global partnerships for the achievement of the MDGs;
   1. Urges the parliaments of the countries that adopted the Millennium
      Declaration which are Members of the IPU to support the implementation
      of the MDGs in their countries by allocating funds for this purpose in
      their national budgets;
   2. Encourages the parliaments of developed countries to demand that their
      governments fulfil their commitments to allocate 0.7 per cent of their
      GDP for ODA, as set out in the Millennium Declaration and the
      Monterrey Consensus;
   3. Urges the parliaments of the developing countries to make sure that
      their governments mobilise the resources required for development,
      combat corruption, continue institutional reform, adopt the economic
      and social policies appropriate to stimulate growth, establish
      national strategies which place the MDGs at the centre of their
      policies, and promote democracy and human rights, paying special
      attention to the implementation of the new World Programme for Human
      Rights Education, and follow the principles of good governance;
   4. Encourages the parliaments of the developing countries to defend the
      interests of their people in WTO negotiations and to strengthen their
      mutual cooperation;
   5. Urges the governments of the developed and developing countries to
      provide annual reports on the application and implementation of these
      strategies to their parliaments;
   6. Suggests that such reports should give rise to a parliamentary debate
      at the national, and if possible, regional level;
   7. Suggests that provisions should be made for the same kind of approach,
      involving a strategy and a report, at the regional level;
   8. Urges donor countries, in particular members of the Organisation for
      Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), to draw up reports on
      the implementation of Goal 8 of the MDGs (develop a global partnership
      for development), specifying the action they have taken to achieve
      such objectives both quantitatively and qualitatively;
   9. Calls for efforts to enhance the effectiveness of aid at the
      international and regional levels, through better harmonisation of
      procedures and improved donor coordination;
   10.Urges donor countries to pursue collaboration with United Nations
       organisations, international financial institutions, other donor
       countries, NGOs and the private sector;
   11.Underscores the unbearable nature of the debt for a large number of
       developing countries; and calls urgently for effective debt
       cancellation and viable rescheduling procedures to be speeded up
       while measures are taken to avoid new over-indebtedness among
       developing countries;
   12.Suggests that a vital link be established between debt cancellation
       and the earmarking of resources thus freed up for investments related
       to the MDGs, in particular in the fields of health, education and
       gender equality, as set out in each country's Poverty Reduction
       Strategy;
   13.Recommends the study of other mechanisms to help countries that have
       serious debt crises, but that have too high a per capita income to
       qualify for the assistance afforded to the heavily indebted poor
       countries (HIPCs);
   14.Expresses the wish that the needs of the developing countries be
       systematically taken into consideration in international trade
       negotiations under way in the framework of the WTO, in particular in
       respect of poverty alleviation, food security and sustainable income;


   15.Emphasises the central role of parliaments as the incarnation of
       popular sovereignty in expressing the will of peoples in
       international forums;
   16.Recommends the establishment by IPU Member Parliaments of specialised
       committees to follow up on international trade negotiations and on
       the actions of the international financial institutions, and to
       provide oversight of government action;
   17.Requests governments to inform their parliaments fully of the state of
       relevant international negotiations and the stakes involved;
   18.Requests the IPU, working with the WTO, to help strengthen the
       capacities of parliaments in this field;
   19.Suggests that governments include parliamentarians in the delegations
       that they send to take part in WTO ministerial meetings;
   20.Welcomes the adoption at United Nations Headquarters of the
       Declaration on Action against Hunger and Poverty by 120 countries on
       20 September 2004, aimed in particular at supporting the
       establishment of new international financing tools for the MDGs;
   21.Recommends that a new resource should be set up, additional to
       existing mechanisms, and that it should be at the same time
       predictable and stable;
   22.Supports further work on proposals for international financing
       mechanisms as a creative and at the same time realistic way of
       providing additional resources for development;
   23.Requests that the Second World Conference of Speaker of Parliaments,
       to be held at the United Nations in 2005, follow up on this matter.

                                ANNEXURE “D”

   THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN ADVOCATING AND ENFORCING OBSERVANCE OF HUMAN
  RIGHTS IN THE STRATEGIES FOR THE PREVENTION, MANAGEMENT AND TREATMENT OF
                            THE HIV/AIDS PANDEMIC
            Resolution adopted unanimously by the 112th Assembly
                           (Manila, 8 April 2005)
The 112th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the IPU, especially the resolution
entitled Action to combat HIV/AIDS in view of its devastating human,
economic and social impact, adopted in Windhoek in 1998, and convinced that
HIV/AIDS is an all-embracing threat against development, rather than an
isolated health problem,
Further recalling the International Guidelines on HIV/AIDS and Human
Rights, issued by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) in 1998, and the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS "Global
Crisis - Global Action" adopted by the United Nations General Assembly
Special Session on HIV/AIDS in 2001,
Taking note of the UNAIDS 2004 Report on the global AIDS epidemic,
Affirming the recommendations contained in the document Guidance on ethics
and equitable access to HIV treatment and care, issued by UNAIDS and the
World Health Organization (WHO),
Referring to the Handbook for Legislators on HIV/AIDS, Law and Human
Rights, published jointly by the IPU and UNAIDS in 1999,
Reaffirming the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) contained in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, which aims to halt and begin to reverse, by
2015, the spread of HIV/AIDS,
Aware that the achievement of all MDGs, including those concerning
education and food security, will not be feasible unless progress is made
in addressing the challenge of HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases,
Deeply concerned that each year the number of people infected with HIV
continues to grow, and also deeply concerned by the exponential growth in
the number of women, young people and children affected by HIV/AIDS,
Recognising that discrimination against women, both de jure and de facto,
renders them particularly vulnerable to HIV/AIDS,
Alarmed by the unprecedented number of children around the world who are
being orphaned by HIV/AIDS, who are thus rendered far more vulnerable and
face a much greater risk of hunger, of having limited access to education,
health and social services, and of violence, abuse, exploitation and
recruitment as child soldiers, and aware that these factors increase their
likelihood of becoming infected with HIV themselves,
Further concerned that the reluctance of some governments to acknowledge
the existence and gravity of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, and to recognise the
stigma and discrimination faced by people living with HIV/AIDS,
particularly women, hampers the effectiveness of responses to this
pandemic,
Aware that stigma and discrimination continue to prevent people from having
access to HIV testing and counselling services, which are of paramount
importance in the prevention and treatment of the pandemic,
Recognising that the global HIV/AIDS pandemic constitutes a formidable
challenge to human life and dignity and to the full enjoyment of human
rights, and that the full realisation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms for the people affected is an essential element in the global
response to the pandemic,
Affirming that respect for, and the protection and fulfilment of, the human
rights of women and girls are necessary and fundamental components of the
approach to addressing HIV/AIDS,
Concerned about the negative economic and social impact of the denial of
the human rights of people living with HIV/AIDS to work, education and
other social services, and further concerned that women and children often
suffer the greatest economic and social impact as a result of the pandemic,

Underscoring that the struggle against HIV/AIDS cannot be separated from
the struggle against poverty, which affects primarily women and children,
thus undermining the workforce and hindering economic and social
development,
Concerned that ignorance and intolerance are still a reason for the
marginalisation of persons affected or presumed to be affected by HIV/AIDS,
which causes discriminatory acts in the fields of medical assistance, job
opportunities, education, housing and, in general, in every aspect related
to their social well-being,
Considering that although the use of antiretroviral medications combined
with proper therapies can delay the advance of HIV/AIDS, millions of
infected people in developing nations, particularly in Africa, cannot
afford these treatments,
Considering that under the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement) of the World Trade
Organization (WTO), WTO members may allow the production of patented
medicines in the event of health emergencies, and realising that the World
Health Assembly passed a resolution encouraging WHO member States to
utilise fully the flexibilities in the TRIPS Agreement to promote access to
antiretrovirals and other essential pharmaceutical products,
Aware that the realisation of the rights of people living with HIV/AIDS
requires non-discriminatory access for them to services, including health
care, treatment and social and legal services, within a supportive social
environment,
Convinced that recognising the degree of the infection levels of the
HIV/AIDS pandemic within each country will help the respective governments
tailor their prevention and treatment programmes to meet their particular
needs,
Further convinced that capacity-building in the field of public health is
critical to the effective prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS,
Also convinced that countries particularly affected by the HIV/AIDS
pandemic should receive special support from the international community
for their efforts to comply with their commitments,
Considering that ensuring access to affordable medication, including access
to antiretroviral therapy for those suffering from HIV/AIDS, is fundamental
to achieving progressively the full realisation of the universal right to
the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health,
Considering that conflict situations, particularly in Africa, have led to
an increased incidence of HIV/AIDS, and recalling United Nations Security
Council resolution 1308 (2000), which states that the HIV/AIDS pandemic, if
unchecked, may pose a risk to stability and security, and the report of the
United Nations High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, which
places infectious diseases among the economic and social threats to
international security,
Aware of the fact that any response to the epidemic will be effective only
if it addresses the causes of its spread, including human trafficking, in
particular trafficking in women and girls, drug abuse and illicit drug
trafficking and gender-based violence, and considering in this context that
the pivotal roles of the family, religion and long-established fundamental
ethical principles and values need to be underlined,
Emphasising that the HIV/AIDS pandemic is at the same time a medical,
social and economic emergency,
   1. Calls upon parliaments and governments to ensure that their laws,
      policies and practices respect human rights in the context of
      HIV/AIDS, in particular the rights to education, work, privacy,
      protection and access to care, treatment and social services; and also
      calls upon them to protect people living with HIV/AIDS from all forms
      of discrimination in both the public and the private sectors, promote
      gender equality, ensure privacy and confidentiality in research
      involving human subjects, and provide for speedy and effective
      judicial, administrative and civil remedies in the event that the
      rights of people living with HIV/AIDS are violated;
   2. Reminds States of the commitments they have made to promote and
      encourage respect for human rights instruments such as the Universal
      Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Economic,
      Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
      Political Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
      Discrimination against Women and its Optional Protocols, the
      Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention against Torture
      and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the
      International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
      Discrimination, and the Declaration on Fundamental Rights and
      Principles at Work of the International Labour Organization; and
      requests States that have not yet done so to take the necessary steps
      to ratify and implement these international instruments;
   3. Invites States that have not already done so to include in their
      national reports on the MDGs the objective of stopping by 2015 the
      spread of HIV/AIDS and of beginning to reverse the development of this
      pandemic; further invites parliaments to sponsor the official launch
      of these reports from their premises; and encourages the periodic
      establishment of national and regional reports taking stock of the
      degree of achievement of the MDGs, in particular in the field of the
      fight against HIV/AIDS;
   4. Urges governments in the developed countries both to continue and to
      increase the financial and technical assistance that they provide to
      developing countries and especially the least developed countries, and
      to share their expertise in addressing HIV/AIDS with those countries
      that seek to create or strengthen their own human rights institutions
      in the context of HIV/AIDS;
   5. Further urges governments to allocate sufficient resources to their
      health systems, including resources for prevention and care;
   6. Strongly urges governments to implement the measures recommended in
      the UNAIDS/WHO document Guidance on ethics and equitable access to HIV
      treatment and care to promote equity in the distribution of HIV care
      in resource-limited settings;
   7. Further urges parliaments and governments to adopt and finance the
      measures necessary to ensure, on a sustained basis and for all
      affected persons (irrespective of social status, legal situation,
      gender, age or sexual orientation), the availability and accessibility
      of good quality services and information for HIV/AIDS prevention,
      management, treatment, care and support, including the provision of
      HIV/AIDS prevention supplies such as male and female condoms, safe
      injection needles, microbicides and basic preventive care materials,
      as well as affordable antiretroviral drugs and other safe and
      effective medicines in poor countries, psychological support,
      diagnostics and related technologies, for all persons, with particular
      attention to vulnerable individuals and populations such as women and
      children;
   8. Also urges parliaments and governments to implement measures to
      increase the capacity of women and adolescent girls to protect
      themselves from the risk of HIV infection, principally through the
      provision of health care and health services, including those related
      to sexual and reproductive health;
   9. Invites parliaments and governments to adopt the measures necessary to
      continue, intensify, combine, make mutually beneficial and harmonise
      national and multinational research and development efforts aimed at
      developing new treatments for the fight against HIV/AIDS, new means of
      prevention and new diagnostic tools and tests, including vaccines and
      female-controlled prevention methods such as microbicides;
   10.Calls upon parliaments and governments to recognise the health, socio-
      economic and other effects of HIV/AIDS on individuals, families,
      societies and nations, and to take the appropriate legislative and
      executive social measures to halt its spread;
   11.Calls upon governments to make services related to treatment, care and
      support for people living with HIV/AIDS comprehensive, by including
      the prevention and treatment of other infectious diseases often
      associated with HIV/AIDS, such as pneumonia, tuberculosis and
      opportunistic infections;
   12.Urges all parliaments and governments to adopt and implement policies
      that respect the human rights of persons living with HIV/AIDS, and
      through all available media, to advocate for and raise awareness of
      their rights;
   13.Calls upon parliaments and governments to develop and implement
      national legislation and policies that address the needs and human
      rights of the growing number of children orphaned and made vulnerable
      by the HIV/AIDS pandemic;
   14.Calls upon parliaments:
           (a)   to draw up laws or amend existing legislation to define
           national standards of protection for those suffering from
           HIV/AIDS, and especially for people in vulnerable groups, such
           as women and children, with particular attention paid to the
           situation of anyone suffering from the loss of close family
           members as a result of HIV/AIDS;
           (b)   to review and adjust legislation to ensure that it
           conforms to the International Guidelines on HIV/AIDS and Human
           Rights;
           (c)   to enact legislation to punish those who knowingly take
           the risk of transmitting HIV/AIDS, or who wilfully do so;
   15.Further calls upon parliamentarians in the IPU's Member Parliaments to
       promote appropriate legislative measures to tackle discrimination
       against persons affected by HIV/AIDS and to contribute to the
       creation of a social environment of tolerance and human solidarity,
       indispensable for the prevention of this terrible disease and for
       assisting those affected by it;
   16.Also calls upon parliaments, governments and the international
       community to ensure free access to HIV testing for all;
   17.Calls upon parliaments to promote an effective and efficient use of
       resources for HIV/AIDS response, including by means of country-level
       coordination that takes into consideration the UNAIDS "Three Ones"
       guiding principles for national authorities and their partners;
   18.Urges parliaments to create parliamentary committees and/or other
       structures formally linked to parliaments with the specific task of
       tackling the issue of halting and reversing the spread of HIV/AIDS,
       to share experiences, information and best practices and to involve
       all sectors of society through partnership programmes in high-level
       decision-making processes;
   19.Calls upon organisations, agencies, bodies, funds and programmes
       within the United Nations system to incorporate public health into
       their development activities and programmes, and to support actively
       the capacity-building of the public health systems of Member States
       in respect of the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS;
   20.Urges parliaments and governments to take into consideration the
       linkage between sexual and reproductive health and rights on the one
       hand, and the fight against HIV/AIDS on the other;
   21.Further urges parliaments to develop comprehensive policies to provide
       for an improved food supply in countries affected by the HIV/AIDS
       pandemic;
   22.Calls upon parliaments and governments to ensure the development and
       accelerated implementation of national strategies for women’s
       empowerment, inter alia by ensuring they have access to property
       rights, by promoting and protecting women’s full enjoyment of all
       human rights and by reducing their vulnerability to HIV/AIDS through
       the elimination of all forms of discrimination, as well as all forms
       of violence against women and girls, including harmful traditional
       and customary practices, abuse, rape and other forms of sexual
       violence;
   23.Strongly urges governments to coordinate efforts with and support the
       work of the United Nations, non-governmental organisations and other
       bodies or institutions involved in HIV/AIDS prevention in order to
       ensure that the human rights of individuals living with HIV/AIDS are
       upheld and protected;
   24.Calls on all parliaments and governments to strengthen national
       mechanisms such as commissions, tribunals, legislation and
       coordinated strategies to protect, enforce and monitor, in their
       respective countries, the human rights of individuals infected with
       and affected by HIV/AIDS, and to eliminate all forms of stigma and
       discrimination, especially in respect of vulnerable groups such as
       women and children – both boys and girls – as they bear the brunt of
       the epidemic and are most likely to care for sick people and to lose
       jobs, family members, income and schooling opportunities as a result
       of the illness, and to pay equal attention to other vulnerable
       groups, such as prisoners;
   25.Urges parliaments and governments to design HIV/AIDS policies and
       programmes that effectively recognise the needs of women in
       particular, and that are sensitive to differences in terms of culture
       and religion that may exist in societies;
   26.Further urges parliaments and governments to consider the public
       health safeguards provided for by the 30 August 2003 decision of the
       General Council of the WTO allowing members to produce and/or export
       pharmaceutical products needed to combat infectious diseases such as
       HIV/AIDS that threaten societies, and to incorporate permitted
       flexibilities into national laws enacted in compliance with the WTO
       TRIPS Agreement;
   27.Calls upon parliaments and governments to ban compulsory HIV/AIDS
       screening for people applying for travel visas, university enrolment,
       jobs, or asylum, in favour of voluntary testing;
   28.Further calls for special attention to be given to preventing HIV/AIDS
       by disseminating adequate and target group-oriented information,
       using all available media and multipliers, raising awareness and
       educating both men and women, with particular attention paid to
       adolescent boys and girls; and requests the inclusion of sex
       education in school curricula, for both boys and girls, as a means of
       prevention;
   29.Urges the national and local agencies concerned to give high priority
       to assisting pregnant and breastfeeding women suffering from HIV/AIDS
       in order to protect their babies from infection;
   30.Requests parliaments and governments to establish coordinated,
       participatory, transparent and accountable national policies and
       programmes for HIV/AIDS response, and to translate these national
       policies into action at the district and local levels, wherever
       possible involving, in development and implementation, non-
       governmental and community-based organisations, religious
       organisations, the private sector, and more importantly, people
       living with HIV/AIDS, and particularly the most vulnerable among
       them, including women and children;
   31.Calls upon men and women parliamentarians to ensure that national
       budgets are gender-sensitive, thereby efficiently addressing the
       needs of both men and women;
   32.Calls for the enhancement of support and resources for UNAIDS, and for
       increased financial contributions for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
       Tuberculosis and Malaria;
   33.Urges parliaments and governments to promote international
       cooperation, growth and development as steps towards the containment
       of conflict situations and the reduction of their possible impact on
       HIV/AIDS;
   34.Urges States, in conformity with United Nations Security Council
       resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security, to ensure
       adequate HIV/AIDS awareness training for members of the military and
       the police, and for peacekeeping personnel;
   35.Reiterates its call to governments to recognise the International
       Partnership against AIDS in Africa and to promote it, along with the
       Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, as the framework
       for action to fight AIDS in Africa;
   36.Affirms the importance of narrowing the economic and cultural gap
       between the developed and developing countries, while ensuring that
       the strategies and programmes employed in the fight against HIV/AIDS
       take into consideration the natural, human and cultural
       characteristics of the regions where they are applied, so as to
       reflect both the characteristics of the demographic structure of each
       region and the social and economic conditions of its inhabitants;
   37.Emphasises that countries should integrate the development of public
       health undertakings into their national economic and social
       development strategies, which should include the establishment and
       improvement of effective public health mechanisms, in particular a
       network for the supervision, prevention, and treatment of the
       HIV/AIDS epidemic, and for the exchange of information.

3.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


      Report of the Parliamentary Oversight Authority on the Facilities for
      Members of the National Assembly and Permanent Delegates to the
      National Council of Provinces (generally referred to as L.19):

Scan in attached document


