---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 09 March 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-03-09
---

WEDNESDAY, 9 MARCH 2005
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 15:00.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                    WOMEN AND THE ENVIRONMENT CONFERENCE


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M F MATLANYANE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council -

     (1)    notes that South Africa has successfully hosted the first ever
           "Women and the Environment Conference" at Misty Hills,
           Muldersdrift, near Krugersdorp, from 6 - 8 March;

     (2)    also notes that the conference showcased the best practices in
           environment management as pioneered by women in this country;


     (3)    further notes the additional function of the conference to
           assess the role of women in waste management, fishing, and
           conservation over the last ten years of Freedom in this country;
           and


     (4)    congratulates the department and the Ministry  of  Environmental
           Affairs and Tourism on an excellently organised conference  that
           sets up an opportunity to  continuously  assess  our  gains  and
           challenges as we strengthen the role of women in all sectors  on
           our road to developing our country.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Is there any objection
to the motion?

Mr M A MZIZI: This is not an objection. I just want to enquire about a
principle. I made a similar suggestion in the programming committee: Whilst
we have suspended the motion without notice, could there be any flexibility
about accepting motions without any political connotation? I was kicked
out, and the programming committee said the principle remained the same
until further notice. I don’t know. I am not against the motion as such,
but I am just enquiring about the principle.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Thank you, hon member,
so the motion is agreed to in other words.

Motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

          APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO THE JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, on behalf of the
Chief Whip of the Council, I move the draft resolution printed in his name
on the Order Paper, as follows:

     That, in terms of section 178(1)(i) of the Constitution, the  following
     persons be designated to serve  on  the  Judicial  Service  Commission:
     Mahlangu, M J; Mokoena, M L; Setona, T S; Van Heerden, F.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): There is no speaker’s
list. I shall now put the question. The question is that the motion be
agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation
heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to voting
on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour of, or against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyaxhasa. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Free State?

Mr T S SETONA: We agree.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: We support it.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: IKwaZulu-Natal iyavuma. [KwaZulu-Natal agrees.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ya amogela. [Agrees.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr K SINCLAIR: Northern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Western Cape?

Ms N NTWANAMBI: IWestern Cape iyahambisana. [Western Cape agrees.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Nine provinces voted
in favour. I therefore declare the motion agreed to in terms of section
178(1)(i) of the Constitution.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 178(1)(i) of the Constitution.

            APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO THE MAGISTRATES COMMISSION
                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, on behalf of the
Chief Whip of the Council, I move the draft resolution printed in his name
on the Order Paper, as follows:

    That the Council appoints  the  following  members  to  the  Magistrates
    Commission: Hollander, P; Windvoël, V V Z; Mabe, E S; Worth, D; Mzizi, M
    A (Alternate).

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): There is no speaker’s
list. I shall now put the question. The question is that the motion be
agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation
heads present? Yes. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow
provinces an opportunity to make declarations of vote if they so wish. We
shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour of, or against, or abstain from
voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Free State?
Mr T S SETONA: Free State votes in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: We support it.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: IKwaZulu-Natal iyaxhasa. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr K SINCLAIR: Northern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Western Cape?

Ms N NTWANAMBI: Elethu. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Nine provinces voted
in favour. I therefore declare the motion agreed to.

Motion agreed to.


             WOMEN OF THE WORLD CELEBRATING A DECADE OF PROGRESS


                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Sorry, members, there
has been a change in the programme, because Minister Pahad is not here yet.
[Interjections.] Oh, the Minister has arrived. Thank you, Minister. We
welcome Minister Pahad to the National Council of Provinces. I now call on
the hon Minister Pahad to open the debate.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Thank you very much, Chairperson. My
apologies, Madam Chair, as your amended programme said notices of motion
would last approximately 20 minutes. So the idea was that we would start
this debate at 15:20, but thank you for starting earlier.

Hon members of the National Council of Provinces, I am honoured indeed to
be part of this important debate on “Women of the world celebrating a
decade of success”. The struggle for democracy in our country would not
have been successful without the enormous contributions and sacrifices made
by the women of our country. To them, all of us in this august assembly owe
an enormous debt, for without them we would not be here today.

The struggle for gender equality has a long and rich history. The meeting
of the Socialist International in 1910 saw the establishment of Women’s
Day. The idea was to honour the movement for women’s rights and to build
support for achieving universal suffrage for women. Later, in 1913 to 1914,
International Women’s Day became a mechanism for protesting against war.

Since those early years of the international women’s movement,
International Women’s Day has assumed a new global significance for women.
Today it is a mass celebration by women of the whole world, celebrating,
the progress achieved by the women of the world. Most importantly, the day
is a celebration of the achievements of ordinary women who have made a
tremendous contribution within their local communities, making a difference
in the lives of those around them.

International Women’s Day is a day for women to encourage each other at
various levels, to say as women that they will continue to work together to
change their world. It is an affirmation that the world can indeed be
changed.

Women at the Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing, China, in
1995 declared, and I quote:

     We, the women of the world, dedicate ourselves unreservedly to
     addressing the constraints and obstacles, and thus enhancing further
     the advancement and empowerment of women all over the world, and agree
     that this requires urgent action in the spirit of determination, hope,
     co-operation and solidarity now and to carry us forward into the next
     century.


South Africa, for the very first time, officially participated in the
Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing, China. The women who were
gathered in Beijing were determined to push forward their vision to create
a world that recognises the rights of women to equality, peace and
development.

Our government welcomed, endorsed and adopted the Beijing Platform for
Action that emerged from the conference. Looking back at the priority areas
that were set out a decade ago, one cannot help but recognise the
achievements of women in implementing objectives that were stipulated in
Beijing. From 1995 to 2002, 48 African countries prepared national plans of
action for poverty reduction that included gender concerns. Furthermore,
some African countries have strategies for supporting women’s
entrepreneurship through microcredit schemes and capacity-building in
enterprise management.

During the past decade there have been improvements in basic education in
many countries. Many African countries have made progress in reducing
illiteracy levels, particularly among women and girls. In the past decade,
progress in the promotion and protection of the human rights of women has
concentrated on strengthening legal and policy frameworks. Women’s voices
in conflict prevention and peace building are sometimes heard only faintly.
This should be a call for continued focus on women in conflict and
postconflict situations.

In the last decade, some African countries have prioritised women’s health
as an area of concern. This has resulted in increased attention being given
to the reproductive health and rights of women, encouraging breastfeeding
and other infant feeding options, making facilities available for the
management of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/Aids, and
raising awareness among men regarding their responsibilities in
reproductive health.

African governments have established various mechanisms at different
levels, including national machinery, to mainstream gender in the
formulation of policies, plans and programmes, and in policy advocacy, and
to monitor and evaluate the implementation of international, regional and
national commitments.

The past decade has seen different international conferences reaffirming
the international commitments to gender equality and women’s empowerment.
According to the report from the African Regional Conference on Women, the
decade following the adoption of the Beijing Platform for Action has
witnessed many changes on the African continent, including the development
of regional declarations and mechanisms on gender and development.


The advances achieved on democracy and peace fronts at the national level
have contributed to positive change at the regional level. The creation of
the African Union, which is committed to the principle of gender equality
and equity, provides further opportunities for the increased participation
of women in national, subregional and regional decision-making.


The African Union Commission was formed on the basis of gender parity.
Article 6 of the Constitutive Act of the African Union States, about the
election of members of the commission, that, firstly, the election of
members of the commission shall be governed by the rules of procedure of
the Assembly of the executive council and these statutes.

  Secondly, that the region from which the chairperson and the deputy
  chairperson are appointed shall be entitled to one commissioner each. All
  other regions shall be entitled to two commissioners. Thirdly, and here
  is the critical element, that at least one commissioner from each region
  shall be a woman. Let me say that they were able to find the women
  commissioners before they could find the men.


      Further, the heads of states and government of member states of the
      African Union, meeting in the third ordinary session of our Assembly
      in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, from 6 to 8 July 2004, signed a solemn
      declaration on gender equality in Africa. Article 5 of the declaration
      called on them to “expand and promote the gender parity principle” –
      the gender parity principle - that we have adopted regarding the
      commission of the African Union to all other organs of the African
      Union, including its Nepad programme, to the regional economic
      communities, and to the national and local levels in collaboration
      with political parties and the national parliaments in our countries.
      That is 50%:50%.


The first Speaker of the AU Pan-African Parliament is a woman, and at least
one in every five national members of the Pan-African Parliament is a
woman. The protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on
the Rights of Women in Africa has been adopted. Nepad is expected to
enhance women’s human rights through the social development indicators
included in its African Peer Review Mechanism. It is commendable to see
that governments in Africa are equally committed to changing and empowering
the women of the continent.

In 1995 our Parliament ratified, without any reservations, the United
Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, Cedaw. In total, 51 of the 53 African member states have
ratified the convention known as the “women’s international bill of rights”
and 17 have signed the optional protocol. Some countries have aligned their
national legislation to the provisions of Cedaw.

Earlier this month Cabinet approved the optional protocol for ratification,
and Parliament is in the process of finalising the ratification and will
then inform the United Nations of its decision. So, I hope we will have a
unanimous vote when it comes before the NCOP later today.

Women around the world are increasingly participating at all levels in
decision-making bodies. South African women are especially highly motivated
in advocating and mobilising other women to take a hands-on approach to
issues of women’s empowerment, fighting violence against women and the
protection of women’s rights.

While much progress has been made, many women, especially disabled women in
rural areas, still face enormous, daunting challenges. Women continue to
suffer under extremely abusive and violent conditions. It is for this
reason we say, as we celebrate a decade of women’s progress, that we must
not fail to remember the work ahead. We are by no means there yet. The
challenge remains huge. Statistics that are emerging to mark the 10th
anniversary of Beijing show us how much remains to be done worldwide. We
must say, Yes, indeed we have made progress in the past decade in laying
down the legislative and policy frameworks as the basis for the work ahead.
The next decade should be about working towards implementing our
commitments.

We in South Africa live in an era of urgent, stepped-up delivery. And the
cause of women - the equity and social justice they justly demand and
justly deserve - is very much part of the package that we must deliver.
President Mbeki has cracked the whip in public and driven the nation to new
heights of delivery with a new, detailed programme of action that appears
on, and is monitored by, the Worldwide Web. We are just about the only
country in the world that does this.

We in South Africa do have a remarkable history of women’s efforts to
inspire us and to drive us on to success. One thinks here of the many
pioneers of women’s rights down the years, most notably those women who
braved the Union Buildings in the 1950s, then an apartheid citadel, to
protest against the very idea that black women should carry passes. It is a
matter of great pride and privilege to me that my mother was one of them.

We as nation managed a remarkable transition to democracy in 1994. As the
21st century unfolds, we must quicken the pace of ensuring the true and
full emancipation of women. We can justifiably take pride in our
Constitution, and specifically the Bill of Rights, Chapter 2, that
proclaims the equality of all and prohibits discrimination on a number of
enumerated grounds, including race, gender, sex, pregnancy and marital
status. Chapter 9, section 187, of our Constitution also provides for the
establishment of a Commission for Gender Equality. In 1996 this commission
was created.

Allow me to end by recalling the words of former President Mandela who, in
his inaugural speech in April 1994, noted that democracy in our country
would not be achieved, and I quote: . . . unless we see in visible and
practical terms that the condition of the women in our country has
radically changed for the better and that they have been empowered to
intervene in all spheres of life as equals with any member of our society.

Let us therefore, hon members, join hands, women and men, and rededicate
ourselves to achieving gender equality in our society. We should expect
nothing less from ourselves and nothing less from our government, for
gender equality is critical to our national wellbeing. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Deputy Chairperson and hon members, with reference to women
of the world celebrating a decade of progress and South Africa bettering
the lives of women in our developmental democracy, I want to address you
today on how our countries have prepared the ground to provide women the
space within which to participate in our developmental democracies.

I address you with the knowledge that women have always been the glue in
their families, communities and society. They have always been at the
forefront, struggling to survive. They have always been first to care for
others. Indeed, our women have led from the front in the struggle to
liberate our people. They continue to do so today during this time when we
lead the process of transforming our society. As I speak, women are
gathering in New York to assess the progress that has been made since 1995
when they made the commitment in Beijing.

What are we in fact really celebrating? Certainly, we are celebrating the
progress that we have made towards equality between women and men. We have
come a long way, and we are celebrating our solidarity with women around
the world in all countries. And, as we do so, we must particularly remember
those living in conflict and in poverty, those whose rights are violated
daily.

As we celebrate, we should also reflect on where we stand in the country,
how far we have progressed and what we still need to do to achieve those
rights and opportunities that are integral parts of our rights as citizens.

Women are increasingly well educated. More and more girls are outperforming
boys in primary and secondary education. [Laughter.] Yet, these
achievements are not reflected in professional life. The glass ceiling and
the sticky floor continue to be realities for women all over the world.

Women continue to shoulder the bulk of the responsibility of caring for
children and elderly relatives. The reconciliation of work and family life,
which we talk about so much, is still mainly regarded as a woman’s problem
in some countries.

I know from my own experience, and particularly from my experience here in
Parliament, that gender balance has resulted from clear political decisions
in that the balanced presence of women and men makes a difference.
Different decisions are made and, I believe, they are better decisions.
They are better because they reflect a wider range of concerns, in that
they take account of the priorities of the whole of society, not just half
of it and, because of that, it is more likely that the decisions work in
place.

The barriers we face as women are complex and structural, so reforms have
to be incremental - and they can seem painstakingly slow. Some of the
challenges we face today include the question of ensuring that managers, in
all sectors, are evaluated on how well they are able to develop all their
staff, men and women. We should not raise our eyebrows if a man asks for a
flexible working arrangement in order to assume his share of the family
responsibilities. And, if a woman does the same, we should not assume that
it is a sign that she is not committed to her career.

I believe that the success of the reforms of our government should be
judged on how well they are using their human resources and especially on
how they overcome their failure to use the full potential of women. Gender
equality goes hand in hand with democracy at all levels.

Women’s rights are human rights. Freedom from discrimination, as embodied
in the Freedom Charter, is the cornerstone of our democracy. But democracy
requires more than an absence of discrimination. It needs governance, and
good governance means sharing the power to make decisions in politics, in
economic and social life, in public administration and in the home.

The values that the ANC has espoused from its founding date till the
present can be listed as: justice, equality, respect for human and women’s
rights, love, sharing, caring and unity for all the people. Great strides
have been made over the past 10 years, particularly in the lives of women,
by the government led by the ANC. We have achieved many admirable
milestones in the struggle to equalise opportunities for our daughters,
granddaughters, aunts, sons, mothers and grandmothers, and so on.

The first democratic nonracial, nonsexist government in our motherland has,
since its inception in 1994, set out to transform the quality of life and
status of women with vision and vigour. This vision emanates from the views
that all South Africans share. It is a vision that stems from the struggle
for the emancipation of all South Africans, no matter what their race,
class, culture or gender.  This vision is enshrined in the Freedom Charter.
There must be no doubt about this.

The adoption of the new Constitution of South Africa, which has been
declared one of the most progressive legal frameworks worldwide, cannot be
separated from the vision that the Freedom Charter spells out for the
nation. And, because of the link between these two key policy documents,
the Freedom Charter and the Constitution, the adoption of the Constitution
was a major victory for all the women of South Africa. It has been stated
that the Constitution is their charter rights. It embraces the hopes and
aspirations of women and men, many of whom sacrificed their lives fighting
for justice and equality in our country.

We have to recognise the role of women in the prolonged struggle against
oppression. This struggle spanned the urban and rural communities, the old
and young, women and men who fought against the pass laws, repression and
forced removals, exploitation and abuse, poverty, extreme deprivation,
inferior education and laws that discriminated against women. It was from
this struggle that the vision that was scripted in the Freedom Charter
emerged to represent the needs, aspirations and visions of a new united
nation, in which empowered women and men led transformation and development
together.

The right to equality is the cornerstone of our Constitution, and all other
rights … [Time expired.][Applause.]

Ms S S CHEN: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members,
International Women’s Day yesterday afforded an excellent opportunity to
celebrate the achievements of women over the past 10 years, to acknowledge
their dedication and commitment to uplifting their status in society, and,
at the same time, to highlight the challenges that women continue to face
today.

Despite 10 years of democracy and progress, women in South Africa remain
economically, politically and socially disadvantaged. Without access to
adequate educational and economic opportunities, the fundamental human
rights of women are placed at risk. Women therefore need to be empowered
through the creation of an economic environment that is conducive to women
participating in business.

Research conducted by the Businesswomen’s Association on the companies on
the JSE and 17 state-owned enterprises found that only 7% of directorships
were held by women and that only 14,7% of executive managers were women.
Almost 60% of South African boards have no female board representation at
all.

The Department of Trade and Industry has launched initiatives such as
Technology for Women in Business and the SA Women Entrepreneurs’ Network in
order to encourage the participation of women in the economy. Additional
programmes, however, need to be introduced in order to unleash the
potential of women as entrepreneurs and key role-players in the corporate
sector.

These programmes must aim to improve women’s access to loan finance; amend
regulations and legislation which can have a constraining effect on the
economic progress of women; increase education opportunities in order to
facilitate the acquisition of skills; and ensure that there are adequate
job opportunities available to women.

Ultimately, though, these efforts will come to naught if attitudes in
broader society remain unchanged. Notwithstanding the progress of women
over the past 10 years, there are still obstacles that women face in
achieving greater economic upliftment. Government needs to ensure that its
commitments to achieving gender equality are successfully implemented, and
that the scope of economic empowerment is widened in order to provide
opportunities to empower women. Without increased involvement in the
economy, women in South Africa will be unable to truly progress. Thank you.
[Applause.]
Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, women of all races in any country are the
backbone of families, communities, societies and governments, and behind
every successful man is a woman. I feel it is time now that we should all
say, “Behind every successful woman is a man.” [Applause.] Men and women
work as partners, supporting and guiding each other. Warm families with
strong moral codes are needed for the proper upbringing of children and
role-modelling.

Women of courage have made struggles of liberation successful, and I will
come back to our South African soil. We have a long list of our heroines
who will live forever in our memories. Some are alive and others are in the
warm hands of our Maker. I have in mind women – ladies - like Mrs Ella
Nxasana, Mrs Hilda Manyathi, Mrs Albertina Sisulu, Prof Fatima Meer,
Princess Magogo Buthelezi, Ms Bertha Mkhize, Ms Dorothy Nyembe, Ms Helen
Joseph, Ms Helen Suzman, and lately Ms Wangari Maathai, the Kenyan
environmentalist who became the first black woman to win the Nobel Peace
Prize.

Four international women’s conferences on women’s issues have been held. In
all these conferences the lead issues were the eradication of poverty and
the empowerment of women. In South Africa our Constitution has empowered us
as women. We need to get our act together and commit ourselves to assisting
in particular the less fortunate ones, particularly our sisters.

Legislation does not do the work; it is the people who go out there to make
things happen. Women in South Africa have worked side by side with men to
lessen each other’s burdens. As from 1982, the unaccepted, ill-resourced
KwaZulu government managed to get rid of the oppressive Zulu code of law
which left women double oppressed. And then the 1996 South African
Constitution widened that to include all marginalised women in South
Africa.

There are challenges to love and care, especially with the Aids pandemic
that is facing us today, and the rape and murder of women, which I just
don’t know why they are on the rise. This scourge is undermining our
success. Although the available statistics are apparently not correct, we
have to refer to them nevertheless. They will guide us, and we will have to
make a difference.

If we look at the present statistics, we notice that from 1997 to 2002,
22 989 women aged 30 to 34 years died from Aids; for women aged 25 to 29
years the figure is 22 813; for women aged 35 to 39 years the figure is 19
099; and for women aged 44 to 49 years the figure is 15 221. We found that
the percentage distribution of female deaths by age are: from age 30 to 34
years it is 10,1%, and from 35 to 39 years it is 8,2%.

When we look at the sex ratios of deaths by age, the leading province this
time is KwaZulu-Natal with 116 982, followed by Gauteng with 95 186 and,
thirdly, the Eastern Cape with 73 072. I will stop there with the
statistics. We need to work hard and be committed as women. We cannot give
this job of caring and nursing our sick to any other person, because if we
do not care for the sick . . . [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Rev E ADOLPH: Thank you, Madam Chair. Today I speak as part of a woman.
[Laughter.] I am a man but I am also part of a woman. It is indeed an
honour and a pleasure to participate in the celebrations of women in terms
of the progress that has been made over the past decade. We especially
celebrate with ordinary poor women in our country and elsewhere on the
globe their great achievements.

Regarding International Women’s Day, which we celebrated yesterday, the ID
wants to celebrate with all women the considerable progress they have made,
especially in terms of their sizeable contribution towards the upliftment
of the poor. Whilst we acknowledge and recognise their contribution, we are
also mindful that much still remains to be done in the struggle to uplift
the status of women.

We salute the South African government of today. For the past decade they
have put women in key positions, elevated the status of women, and seen
them as our counterparts and as part of the building of the country. The ID
recognises the achievements of Kenyan ecologist Wangari Maathai, who
recently became the first African woman to receive the Nobel Peace Prize
for her work in environmental affairs. She has unequivocally proved to be
an achiever.

In South Africa we also have very significant women. We have our own icons
- ordinary women who gave their lives to the struggle against oppression.
We all know who they are. Some women, of course, are still living in poor,
harsh conditions, and we would also like to think of them whilst we
celebrate. Women of the world are crying, especially if one thinks of the
mothers in Iraq. They are crying today. I think also of those in the
Republic of Congo and in the Darfur region. We have sympathy for the women
of Palestine, but we also sympathise with the Jewish mothers because they
are artificially separated and polarised by political endeavours.

But we have to be honest on the other side as well in that whilst we are
celebrating, women are still suffering and living in harsh economic
situations and circumstances. This is because sometimes they are very
unsafe, and sometimes they suffer owing to a lack of income and just
maintain the family on a meagre salary. Millions of women still suffer from
the pain of sexual abuse, cultural suppression, domestic violence and so
forth.

Today we are challenged to educate women. Women must be educated to
liberate themselves. You can’t oppress an educated woman. There is no way
on earth that we can allow subordination if women are educated. About two
thirds of women are illiterate across the world, and almost two thirds of
the women who are literate . . . [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr K SINCLAIR: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, International Women’s
Day is a day to commemorate women’s struggle for change and to celebrate
the progress made towards improving the quality of life of women. It’s a
day of reaffirming our commitment to working towards the liberation of
women.

While many aspects regarding the situation of women have been improved,
much remains to be achieved. Even as we consider the great advances made
towards gender equality and equity over the past nine years, we need to be
sensitive to the harsh realities that still face the majority of women in
South Africa. It is the women who bear the brunt of poverty. Their lives
are still characterised by low levels of literacy and by inequitable access
to education, adequate food, health care, housing, water and fuel sources.
I therefore want to add my voice to the plight of the rural women of this
country.

A former Prime Minister of Israel, Golda Meir, once said, and I quote:

      Let me tell you something that we Israelis have against Moses. He took
      us 40 years through the desert in order to bring us to one spot in the
      Middle East that has no oil.


Maybe the time has arrived that we in South Africa also start asking these
questions of women’s organisations but, more than that, of the leaders of
women’s organisations. The critical question that needs to be answered is:
Where are they taking us? We must get to the point at which we get answers
to that specific question. Like Golda Meir, we can’t allow a situation in
which we get to the point at which we ask the question: Where are the women
of this country going? The critical challenge for all of us is that we must
address the backlogs of the past. Women need to be in a position in which
they make a difference, even though the struggle against colonisation and
apartheid is over.

I want to end with a quote from a learned Nigerian professor. He once said
to an august gathering of women, and I quote:

    Armed with the power of knowledge that is derived from sound and
    qualitative education, African girls and women may prove to be the
    missing link between Africa and social cohesion, political stability,
    economic development, unity and civilisation.


Maybe that is what we need in South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Chair, hon Minister and hon members, it gives me great
pleasure to participate in this debate celebrating the progress that has
been made in this decade. We have made giant strides on all levels.

We see women as successful Ministers of state, directors-general and
judges. There are women in boardrooms. Many run their own businesses, small
and large. In the business world, women used to refer to the glass ceiling
that was a barrier, but now there are cracks in that glass ceiling and they
are able to make their way to the top based on competence. Yet, there is
long way to go before we break some of the gender stereotyping.

Ten years have passed during which we have been governed by a nonsexist
Constitution that has taken a stand against patriarchy, sexism and
homophobia. Yet women continue to be raped, abused, marginalised and
exploited. Far too many children and women are raped. Women should have the
right to control their own bodies. They should have the right to insist on
the use of condoms without being beaten up. There are too many men who
still refuse and, therefore, knowingly infect their partners and kill them
- a slow and painful death.

There needs to be an awareness that freedom does not mean the right to do
whatever you want to. Freedom means respecting the rights of others too. We
need our politicians and leaders to come out strongly on this. All who are
vulnerable need to be protected. We realise that not all men are abusers,
but we ask you to put pressure on those who do to practice safe sex and to
be role models for responsible behaviour.

At the recent conference on Women and the Environment held in Johannesburg
this week, it was stated that the centre of development in the country lay
in the emancipation of women and that women, particularly in the rural
areas, are involved in providing food, shelter, water and sanitation. We
feel that these people need to be involved to a greater extent, not just in
being volunteers or doing menial jobs, but to be part of the management,
part of the organisation, because they have the wider picture. But for this
we need education; we need capacity-building.

This brings me to my favourite topic of education and libraries. For once,
I agree with Mr Sinclair. We need to promote a culture of reading, writing
and education. More emphasis needs to be given to adult basic education.
That culture of learning needs to be established. We must become a nation
of readers. We need libraries, and not just to read little stories, but as
resource centres where people can improve their minds about all aspects of
their lives. This is a form of recreation, a common problem especially in
rural society where there is nothing to do. Children need books; all adults
need to read.

I appeal to our Ministers, Minister Manuel particularly, to set aside funds
for libraries to augment the education that would turn us into a winning
nation so that women can lead and carry on with the good work. Thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Madam Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members,
let me respond to Mr Sinclair’s question, which was “Where are we taking
you?” We are taking you to a destination where you will find a broad
women’s movement based on nonracism and nonsexism, where women will be free
to choose, and where women will be united around certain issues that affect
them all.

Secondly, let me say now that Mrs Chen is here that she must be honest with
herself and other women. It is not true that women are not participating in
this country and that women in this country are not empowered. This is one
country that has done its best to empower women. She has been empowered, in
particular, because she runs businesses from Cape Town to China, in Hong
Kong and everywhere else. [Interjections.] So she must be honest about
this. But let me quickly move on.

I chose to focus on the girl-child today, as a parent, and of course
because today’s girl is tomorrow’s woman. In the past week, women of the
world gathered in New York, celebrating a decade of progress and seriously
discussing women’s issues. This was a follow-up to the Beijing landmark
gathering, which took place 10 years ago.

One of the underlying principles of the Beijing Platform for Action is
equality as a human right and a matter of social justice, and it is also a
prerequisite for development and peace. A partnership based on equality
between men and women is an important tool for people-centred development.
It is therefore important that we focus on the girl-child as one of the
Beijing Platform for Action’s critical focus areas.

As South African women, and as the ANC Women’s League in particular, we
have always been proud of our slogan “Malibongwe igama lamakhosikazi!” [In
the name of women!] [Interjections.] We say so as champions of human and
women’s rights, not only in our country but on the continent as a whole. In
every society and every community, we women are pillars who have worked for
a better South Africa and a better world. Therefore we have every reason to
celebrate their achievements in this decade. Women have an enormous impact
on the wellbeing of their families and societies, yet their potential is
not being realised because of discriminatory social norms, incentives and
legal institutions. While their status has improved in recent decades,
gender inequalities remain pervasive.

Gender inequality starts early and keeps women at a disadvantage throughout
their lives. In some countries infant girls are less likely to survive than
infant boys because of parental discrimination and neglect, even though,
biologically, infant girls should survive in greater numbers. Girls are
more likely to drop out of school and to receive less education than boys
because of discrimination, educational expenses and household duties.

As a Xhosa-speaking person, I know there is the saying in Xhosa: “Ikamva
lentombazana lisemzini wayo.” This means your future is not in your home,
but somewhere where you are not even known, where people have a right to
abuse you. This says you give your in–laws the power to abuse you, which is
not right.

The differences between boys’ schooling and girls’ schooling are greatest
in regions with the lowest primary school completion rates and the lowest
average incomes. In low-income countries, the percentage of girls’
enrolment in primary and secondary education – as opposed to the percentage
of boys - was 84%, compared to 101% in upper middle-income countries.

Gender disparity at school is still serious in many sub-Saharan African and
South Asian countries. In South Africa, reducing education costs, improving
equality, tackling parental concerns about female modesty or safety, and
increasing the returns to families that invest in family schooling are
factors that can overcome social and economic barriers to girls’ education.

The advent of democracy and the historical eradication of centuries of
apartheid rule in our country have seen the introduction of a number of
progressive pieces of legislation aimed at transforming our society from an
oppressive and discriminatory one to one that is based on equality.

Amongst some of the laws that our government has passed to abolish
discrimination and restore the dignity of the girl-child are the Child Care
Amendment Act and the Maintenance Act. There is also the establishment of
the Girl Education Movement, and the Men in Partnership Against Aids
campaign that empowers boys to be ambassadors on issues of gender and
violence against women and children and to challenge any violent behaviour
meted out against girls by their peers. There are many but, owing to time
constraints, I cannot touch on all of them.

Lastly, I want to say that with these legislative developments in our
country, there still remain challenges in Africa as girl-children are still
victims of armed conflict, there is violence against women and children,
and there is child trafficking. The SA
Women in Dialogue, led by our first lady, Comrade Zanele Mbeki, facilitated
a peace dialogue between South African, Congolese and Burundi women on
issues that affect women and children in armed conflict. This process
assisted these women better to understand the management of peace and
stability in their countries.

Let us conclude by emphasising the point, when we speak of women, the girl-
child and armed conflict, that we are proud to tell the world that we are
working with women in countries where there are conflicts, and that Africa,
like South Africa, will belong to all who live in it, and its wealth will
be shared by all who live in it as well. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Madam Chair, the one wonderful thing about
the NCOP is that you don’t have to “shaya”. [Laughter.] You are so nice in
this house, so it’s difficult to reply. I want to really say thank to all
of the speakers who spoke here, and for what they said.

However, it seems to me that perhaps we need to look at ourselves as
elected representatives of our people in the national Parliament. At the
moment 32,75% of the members of the National Assembly are women, and 35,18%
of the members of the NCOP are women. So, you are doing much better.

Now, if we are going to fulfil the requirements the heads of state of the
African Union determined last year in terms of gender parity, we have to
ask ourselves the question: How then do we get to a situation in which
there will be 50% representation of women in all our elected institutions?

Actually, if you do a breakdown of the figures, and I’m just stating a fact
- not for party-political purposes - you will find that the figures are
high because of the representation of women in the ANC. I’ve said so before
in the National Assembly and I want to say it here: I think we need to
discuss this matter. I don’t know what conclusion we will arrive at. I
think we need to discuss whether or not we need legislated quotas.

Now I agree that if you are the single representative of Azapo, you can’t
divide yourself into three. But there seems to me no significant reason
why, if a party has a minimum of three representatives, one should not be a
woman. I think we need to discuss this matter seriously, because it is
going to be difficult for us to keep on increasing the numbers of women,
which we must do, in our elected institutions, if, as it is at the moment,
the issue is left purely to the decision of individual parties. I think we
must discuss this matter. Do we or do we not need legislation which would
impose a one-third quota on all political parties wishing to be represented
in Parliament, the provincial legislatures and our local government
structures.

Where we do best, as a legislature and as an executive, is where the
President has the powers of appointment. At the moment 42,8% of all
Ministers are women, and 47,6% of all Deputy Ministers are women. And this
is because the appointments are done by the President. Four out of nine
premiers are women. And, I think, that’s the approach we need to take: if
we do not have a systematic, very determined, very cohesive approach to the
appointment of women to senior positions, their appointment will not happen
on its own.

Therefore, we need to continue to discuss this amongst ourselves. I believe
this discussion can take place cutting across party-political lines, so
that we don’t get embroiled in party-political fights, which we should do,
and which we do.
What is it that we need to do as a nation? What is it that we need to do as
the elected representatives of the people of South Africa to ensure that we
continue to expand the number of women in our elected institutions and
indeed in occupying all of the necessary positions that we have, whether as
Whips, chairs of portfolio committees or presiding officers? Of course, the
NCOP has a gone a bit backwards from four to three. But, never mind, three
out of four is still very good in terms of the main presiding officers we
have.

Lastly, let me say that in 10 years we’ve moved from being one of the most
sexist societies in the world to one of the leading countries in the fight
for a nonsexist society. I think that’s a remarkable achievement by
anybody’s standards.

Lastly, Madam Chair, my PA says that you were the best and finest teacher
he ever had, and he said I must make this public declaration in his name.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Thank you, hon
Minister Pahad. We thank you for your participation and for the informed
debate. Thank you very much.




      WORLD HEALTH ORGANISATION FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON TOBACCO CONTROL


      (Consideration of Report of Select Committee on Social Services)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Deputy Chair, hon members, despite widespread knowledge of
the harm caused by smoking . . . [Interjections.] [Laughter.] Let me just
say that I am not the only smoker in this House. Whilst I deliver my speech
I will mention the others by name. [Laughter.] Despite widespread knowledge
of the harm caused by smoking and concerted tobacco control efforts in the
last decade, only modest success has been achieved in lowering the impact
of tobacco mortality and morbidity.

Tobacco use is considered to be one of the chief preventable causes of
death in the world. In South Africa it is an ever-increasing health and
economic problem. In 1990, 25 000 tobacco-related deaths were reported. In
1994, estimates of the economic cost of deaths in terms of loss of
productivity owing to premature death and hospitalisation exceeded an
amount of R2,5 billion, while the direct cost of hospitalisation and
outpatient treatment for smoking-related diseases in the public sector
alone was approximately R1,5 billion that year.

Between 1970 and 1995 the World Health Organisation adopted 14 resolutions
on the need for both national and international tobacco control policies.
Member states were encouraged to implement comprehensive tobacco control
strategies that contained the following. Deputy Chair, whilst you are in
the Chair, and I know you are a smoker yourself, I want you to listen very
carefully. [Interjections.] These were measures to ensure that nonsmokers
received the effective protection to which they were entitled from
involuntary exposure to tobacco smoke; measures to abstain from the use of
tobacco so as to protect women and young people from becoming addicted; and
the establishment of programmes of education and public information on
tobacco and health issues, including smoking programmes.

The Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and its protocols before us
today seek to protect present and future generations from the devastating
health, social, environmental and economic consequences of tobacco
consumption. [Interjections.] [Laughter.] In terms of the general
obligations and to ensure achieving this objective of the convention and to
implement its provisions, parties shall be guided by the following
principles. Deputy Chair, whilst I am paging over to the next page, I want
to say that the hon member Priscilla is also a smoker. [Laughter.]

In terms of these principles every person should be informed of the health
consequences, addictive nature and moral threat posed by tobacco
consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke. Effective legislative, executive
and administrative measures should be contemplated.

Strong political commitment is necessary to develop and support, at the
national, regional and international levels, comprehensive multisectoral
measures and co-ordinated responses, taking into consideration the
following: the need to take measures to protect all persons from exposure
to tobacco smoke; the need to take measures to prevent the initiation, to
promote and support cessation, and to decrease the consumption of tobacco .
. . [Interjections.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for a
member, when debating such an important matter, to lie to the public from
the podium? [Laughter.] Could the hon member please withdraw?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, much as I understood this
to be a joke, I think for the record you must withdraw it, because the
public will capture it and she does not smoke.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I withdraw. That was a joke. [Laughter.]

There is also the need to take measures to promote the participation of
indigenous individuals and communities in the development, implementation
and evaluation of tobacco control programmes that are socially and
culturally appropriate to their needs and perspectives; and the need to
take measures to address gender-specific risks when developing tobacco
control strategies.

Furthermore, the convention spells out key provisions with regard to the
measures related to reducing the demand for tobacco; price and tax
measures; packaging and labelling; and the regulation and disclosure of
contents of tobacco products. Moreover, it commits parties to raise public
awareness through education, communication and training programmes.

The convention also, and importantly so, obliges parties, in accordance
with its constitution, to undertake a comprehensive ban on all tobacco
advertising, promotion and sponsorship. [Laughter.] It is indeed so that
even up until today, if you look at rallies on television, you will still
see that there are some tobacco advertisements at those races. As a
government we are in the process of working with other countries to make
sure that they don’t advertise tobacco products.

Significant for us as South Africans is the fact that our country chaired
the second session of the intergovernmental working group of the FCTC and
hosted the first groundbreaking intercessional Afro meeting that consisted
of African countries. This was held in March 2001. The treaty was then
signed on Youth Day in 2003, and we undertook to strive in good faith to
ratify the convention and show political commitment . . . [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’
votes. Are all delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that wants
to make a declaration of vote? No. We shall now proceed to voting on the
question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province. Delegation
heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour of, or
against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr T RALANE: Iyaseketela. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: We support, Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalangu iyasekela. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr K SINCLAIR: Northern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                     OVERSIGHT VISIT TO SENTECH, GAUTENG



      (Consideration of Report of Select Committee on Labour and Public
                                Enterprises)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I am tabling the report and ask the House to
adopt the report. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. [Interjections.] It is procedural.
She has tabled the report. The report was in the ATC and was adopted by the
committee which represents all provinces.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province
wanting to make a declaration of vote? No.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Eastern Cape siyaxhasa. [Eastern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr T RATLANE: Iyaseketela. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ri khou tendelana nawo. [We support it.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Northern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [Agrees.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr K SINCLAIR: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

PROVINCIAL STUDY TOUR




   (Consideration of Report of Select Committee on Land and Environmental
                                  Affairs)


Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson and hon members, this statement is on the annual
report of the provincial study tour by the Select Committee on Land and
Environmental Affairs to the provinces of Limpopo, Gauteng, the Northern
Cape and the Free State from 10 to 13 August 2004.

The hon President of the Republic of South Africa, in his 2005 state of the
nation address, captured the evolving role of members of Parliament within
a co-operative governance framework. The following statement was made in
President Mbeki’s state of the nation address on 11 February 2005:

  We also highly appreciate the oversight role as well as the direct
  contribution in the . . . actual implementation of our public
  representatives in all the three spheres of government. We are confident
  that hon members will persist in this service to the people, so as to
  improve our work, all-round.


This captures the important oversight component of the work of  hon  members
of Parliament during committee meetings, public hearings, oversight  visits,
debates  in  the  Houses,  budget  and  legislative  processes,  in   taking
Parliament to the people and constituency work.

In the South African Parliament, committees are increasingly becoming
visible in the process of finding innovative solutions to the challenges
facing South Africa. Parliamentary committees oversee the activities of
government departments, statutory bodies, state-owned enterprises and
various other forms of social and economic activities.

In the light of the statement made on the crucial role of hon members of
Parliament in oversight, the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
Affairs has, over the years, tracked the legislative and implementation
process of various government programmes in its cluster. However, 2004 and
2005 began the shift in focus with an increased emphasis on oversight to
gauge the progress, achievements and challenges confronted in delivery
targets.

It is within this framework that a statement is made on the report that
covered the study tour by the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
Affairs to Limpopo, Gauteng, the Northern Cape and the Free State from 10
to 13 August 2004. Sample studies of projects were undertaken as part of
the oversight visit to gauge the developments, progress and challenges
encountered in the implementation of aquaculture production in South
Africa, as well as the provision of water and sanitation services.

Some of the issues that emerged that focused specifically on aquaculture
production – obviously, policy on aquaculture is long overdue - in South
Africa encompassed, inter alia, the need for an aquaculture institute that
would offer various services such as research, marketing strategies,
training and skills development, collaborative partnerships, etc. The
private-public partnership could be strengthened.

The various stakeholders maintained that aquaculture production in South
Africa has great potential for job creation and poverty alleviation. The
provision of water and sanitation services differed from province to
province.

However, some common factors that were highlighted, which will give an
indication of how to address these problems, were the slow facilitation of
project disbursements; a need for the protection of water services;
increasing or skilling municipalities to handle the services to the
respective communities; the development of effective water management
institutions; developing and establishing water services, monitoring and
information systems; reviewing their approach to sanitation services; and
provision to achieve sustainability, effectiveness, efficiency and
affordability of services.

The details of the above summary can be accessed from the longer report
compiled by the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs. I
therefore table this statement on the report before this House for
adoption. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: As there is no speakers’ list, I
shall now put the question. The question is that the report be adopted. As
the decision is dealt in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall
first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to
cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province wanting to
make a declaration of vote? There is no province. We shall now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr T RALANE: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Siyaxusana. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: IKwaZulu-Natal iyaxhasa. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo iyaseketela. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: IMpumalanga iyasekela. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr K SINCLAIR: Northern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Steun. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


                            STUDY TOUR TO LIMPOPO


 (Consideration of Report of Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
                                  Affairs)

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thank you, Chairperson. The Select Committee on
Security and Constitutional Affairs undertook a study tour to Limpopo from
11 to 15 October 2004. The purpose of our visit was to look into the
activities of three departments, namely Justice and Constitutional
Development, Correctional Services, and Safety and Security. We also wanted
to see if our justice system was effective. That is why our visit looked
into the whole justice cluster.

We visited police stations and even holding cells. We visited magistrates
to see if cases were being heard expeditiously, taking care that the
justice administrators were never compromised. Overcrowding in our prisons
is a key challenge for various departments that are responsible for
ensuring the effective administration of our criminal justice system.

Let me deal with the Justice and Constitutional Development department.
When visiting magistrates’ offices, we were impressed with the attitude of
some of our magistrates and prosecutors. In many offices the following
concerns were raised by magistrates. Some offices were dilapidated, the
culprit in this being the Department of Public Works. For example, for a
requisition to be responded to, it would take no less than three months, if
you were lucky.

Security was cause for concern for many of our magistrates. A shortage of
interpreters was also a serious problem. In some cases you would find six
courtrooms in a magistrate’s office with only three interpreters available.
That then meant that the other three courtrooms could not function.

Another problem that was raised by magistrates was the exodus of
experienced prosecutors. They leave for greener pastures, for example to go
the bench or the private sector. Those who have been employed to replace
them are so inexperienced that they cannot even stand the heat from
lawyers.

On the other hand, the committee was disturbed to discover that there were
some magistrates who were not willing or prepared to play ball. They were
reluctant to make use of section 62F of the Criminal Procedure Act. This
permits them to use their discretion if an accused is given bail of R1 000
or less. For instance, a young boy who was given bail of R400 for stealing
an avocado has already spent two years in an awaiting-trial prison. Some of
the magistrates were reluctant to make use of section 276, which would have
enabled them to do what we call “diversions”.

Let me speak about the Safety and Security department. Our men and women in
blue need to be honoured for their efforts. More arrests are made than ever
before. People are now prepared to report their cases. As members can see
from our report that has been tabled before them, there are some police
stations that need a total revamp or to be built afresh. There is no
privacy when women go to report rape cases at some of our police stations
owing to a shortage of office space. One woman said she was expected to
explain what transpired during the rape in front of everybody in a small
office. We think this is unacceptable.

One of the complaints that was raised by some of the station commissioners
was a shortage of vehicles in order to respond swiftly to calls. There is
also a shortage of personnel at many of our police stations. There are
serious shortcomings in this department as well. The committee discovered
that many of our police officers were unable to take statements properly
that would lead to successful prosecution. This is a serious concern
because many cases are lost owing to insufficient evidence or poor
investigation. It was also revealed that there was no proper co-ordination
between investigators and prosecutors. Again, this makes it easy for clear-
cut cases to be thrown out.

It was also revealed that there are many police officers who are declared
unfit to possess a firearm. This needs to be addressed as quickly as
possible. One other problem that was identified was what we call the toll-
free number, or 10111. Some people preferred to drive to police stations
rather than call this number. I think we can do better than that.

Many of our police officers need counselling because of the stressful
conditions under which they work. This will assist in avoiding the many
cases of suicide committed by many of our police officers. Some even go to
the extent of wiping out their whole family, later killing themselves. Let
us do something about this.

Let me speak about Correctional Services. This department is at the
receiving end. Whatever happens in both the Departments of Justice and
Constitutional Development and Safety and Security ends up at the door of
this department. We visited some of the prisons in the province.
Overcrowding not only negatively affects the Department of Correctional
Services’ ability to rehabilitate offenders, but also creates a problem for
the SA Police Service whose cells routinely exceed their holding capacity.
You can see this in the report we have submitted to the Council.

Many of our prisons in the province are overcrowded. This committee was
made to understand that as long as there was no proper co-ordination
between the Department of Correctional Services and the SAPS, overcrowding
would be with us forever. What makes the situation so bad is that the
rehabilitation programme put in place by this department cannot be
effective because of overcrowding.

Another problem that was identified by this committee was the integration
of prisoners, into their communities on being released. The stigma that is
attached to these prisoners already makes it difficult for them to adjust
to some conditions. There is the example of a boy, a soccer player, who was
arrested and spent four years in prison. When he was released, the coach
put him in the very first team, but his very same team players refused to
play because they said they couldn’t be associated with this criminal. That
had to be addressed. I think, here, that we need more correctional centres
in our areas or vicinities.

Our recommendation as a committee is that all the said departments now come
together and deal effectively with some of the problems identified by the
committee. If not, we will be left with no option but to force them to sit
down and talk. As a committee we will follow-up to see to it that our
recommendations are implemented.

We want to thank all those officials in this cluster who are prepared and
who are dedicated to bettering the lives of all our people. Let me, once
more, thank the committee members, whom I call the “Mokoena detachment”,
for their unconditional commitment to this cluster. It is true that no
matter how deep the bottle, the cream will remain on top. I now submit to
this Council this report for adoption. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! As there is no speakers’ list,
I shall now put the question. The question is that the report be adopted.
As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present. Are all
delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration of vote? No. We shall now proceed to the voting
on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr T S RALANE: Ya seketela. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Ke ya rona. [Supports.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal iyaxhasa. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re a e thekga. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr K SINCLAIR: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


               INTERVENTION IN THE ELUNDINI LOCAL MUNICIPALITY


    (Consideration of Report of Select Committee on Local Government and
                               Administration)

Mr S SHICEKA: Deputy Chair of Committees, the Select Committee on Local
Government and Administration is presenting a report on the Elundini
Municipality in the Eastern Cape under the Ukhahlamba District, bordered by
Lesotho, the Free State and the Northern Cape. We are here to solicit
support from this august House for the intervention by the Eastern Cape
government.

This municipality serves a population of about 371 170 people, according to
the last census. Elundini comprises the established municipalities of
Maclear TLC, Mount Fletcher TLC and Ugie. Elundini Local Municipality has a
collective executive system combined with a ward participatory system, and
is composed of 16 wards and 16 proportional representation councillors. If
you add this up you get 32 councillors. The breakdown is as follows: 28 ANC
members and four UDM members.

Elundini falls within the jurisdiction of the Ukhahlamba District. It is
one of the 13 rural development nodes earmarked and identified by the
President to be part of the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development
Programme.

This intervention, as we present it, by the Eastern Cape provincial
government should cease by the end of April 2005. However, we must look at
the areas of intervention we want dealt with. Firstly, the quality of
service should be visible, including the provision of free basic services.
A healthy environment should be created, in which the bucket system as a
form of sanitation, is eradicated. Waste needs to be managed regularly.
There should be the building of strong financial systems that promote
accountability, value for money, revenue-raising mechanisms and prudent
expenditure approaches.

The municipality must build and strengthen an administration that is
responsive to the needs of the people, and an administration that is
informed by the principles of Batho Pele under the clarion call “We serve
and we care.” The council should build and strengthen the organs of
people’s power through ward committees, informed by the clause in the
Freedom Charter that says “The people shall govern.”

These structures should ensure that the people take charge of their own
destiny. They should be sustained as they deepen our democracy. The needs
of our people should be community-driven through the IDPs, which must be
linked to budgets in a participatory budgetary system.

The provincial government should submit monthly reports to the committee in
order to allow the committee to monitor progress and intervene where
necessary. The committee will meet with the new MEC for Local Government
and discuss this report, including the recommendations and timeframes. The
committee will, in its programme, make follow-up visits to all
municipalities where interventions have occurred.

It is in the interests of this House that we touch base with the people for
their observations of the positive impact of these interventions. I humbly
request this august House to adopt the Elundini intervention with the
recommendations of the committee, as it has satisfied itself with the
subjective and objective conditions obtaining in that area. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: As there is no speakers’ list, I
shall now put the question. The question is that the report be adopted. As
the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present?
Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration of vote? No. We shall now proceed to voting on
the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr T RALANE: Ke ya rona. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Sihamba nayo, baba. [Support it, Sir.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Votes in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: IMpumalanga iyasekela. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr K SINCLAIR: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


    OPTIONAL PROTOCOL TO THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE ELIMINATION
                OF ALL FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN


    (Consideration of Report of Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement
                   of Quality of Life and Status of Women)

Ms M P THEMBA: Hon Chairperson, hon members, since our first democratic
election in 1994 much has changed in this country. South Africans in
general, but particularly women, have been centrally involved in the sphere
of human rights, more specifically in the important sphere of the
elimination of discrimination against women.

The significant role we played has been recognised and applauded by
especially the committee of the United Nations Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, Cedaw. This
committee is responsible for supervising state parties’ obligation under
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women. It receives reports from states that have ratified and adopted the
convention. One hundred and sixty-two member countries of the United
Nations are party to the convention, making it the most widely ratified
human rights treaty in the world dealing with measures required for the
elimination of discrimination against women.

South Africa ratified Cedaw on 15 December 1995. We also reported to Cedaw
our efforts to eliminate all forms of discrimination against South African
women in 1998. This adoption is therefore not the first interaction that
we, as South African women, have had with the Cedaw committee. It must be
stated that this is a relationship of mutual respect that is driven by a
deep-seated commitment to improving conditions in terms of the difficulties
and suffering that were caused in the past.

Our history of struggle against oppression is well documented. That alone
does not suffice in making our country blemish-free as far as
discrimination against women is concerned. Our struggle was based on firm
principles of equality, dignity, nonracism and human rights. The struggle
was guided by the vision of the Freedom Charter.

During this current period of reconstructing and transforming this country,
we remain firmly committed to the principles as scripted in the Freedom
Charter. It remains our road map to free all humans, women in particular,
from discrimination and oppression.

In this regard, the Cedaw committee’s positive responses to the 1998 South
African report must be noted. It refers to the exemplary manner in which
the Constitution protects the rights of women. In particular, it mentions
the work done by the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of
Quality of Life and Status of Women in reviewing the gender implications of
legislation.

However, consistent with the ratification of Cedaw in 1995 and acting on
our committed vision for equality for all and the elimination of
discrimination against women, the ANC government has continued with
groundbreaking legislation that improves women’s lives.

Guided by the knowledge of our violent and oppressive past and following
the vision of the Freedom Charter, we have improved women’s lives in a
variety of ways. We enacted the Domestic Violence Act; we strengthened the
Social Grant System; we . . .

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, I am afraid your time has
expired.

Ms M P THEMBA: I ask the House to adopt the report. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: As there is no speakers’ list, I
shall now put the question. The question is that the report be adopted. As
this decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes.

In accordance with . . .

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson . . .

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Yes, hon member?

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, my 10 minutes are not finished. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Yes, this sounds quite . . .
[Inaudible.] . . . very seriously. I am not sure. Can you double check?
Maybe this thing is broken. You can look here. I am also double checking. I
am not only checking one clock, hon members. [Interjections.] Yes, it is
working. I appreciate the anxiety of members. [Laughter.] Maybe I was
supposed to say it was a groundbreaking record in this House when hon
Shiceka took only five minutes to present the report of his committee. I
think that was groundbreaking. [Interjections.]

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour of, or against, or abstain from
voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Eastern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr T RALANE: Free State ha yi seketela. [Free State supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPETRSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Ke ya rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: IKwaZulu-Natal iyavuma. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ha yi seketela. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Her time has expired. [Laughter.]
Northern Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Northern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr K SINCLAIR: Wes-Kaap Steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 16:48.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
     Report of the Auditor-General on the Performance Audit of Overall
     Management Measures at Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency [RP 11-2005].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     The following statements have been submitted to the National Council of
     Provinces by the MEC for Local Government, Housing and Traditional
     Affairs in KwaZulu-Natal in terms of section 106(3) of the Local
     Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000):


     (a)    Investigation at the Umzinyathi District Municipality

     (b)    Investigation at the Ezinqoleni Municipality

     These statements are referred to the Select Committee on Local
     Government and Administration.

     Copies of these statements are available from the office of the Clerk
     of Papers.


