---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 25 May 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-05-25
---

WEDNESDAY, 25 MAY 2005
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 15:02.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting of
the NCOP I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

  That the Council -

  (1) notes with shock that two years after opening a murder case against
        her mother’s employer, after their dog brutally attacked and killed
        her, Kedibone Makwela from Atteridgeville has complained that no
        progress has been made with the case;


  (2) further notes that, according to the Tshwane police spokesperson, the
        case was only referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions on
        Friday last week for a decision;


  (3) acknowledges that the SAPS is very busy and that there are many cases
        they have to deal with every day, but that it is totally
        unacceptable that Miss Makwela has had to wait for two years for any
        progress to be made; and


  (4) urges the relevant authorities to take the necessary steps to speed up
        the progress of this case.

Mr B J TOLO: Chair, I give notice that I will move at the next sitting of
this House on behalf of the ANC:

  That the Council-

    1) notes the manner in which the Presidency has been restructured over
       the last few years so as to become an engine of integrated governance
       that researches, analyses and strategises in an even more efficient
       and an effective manner to ensure the stability and development of
       South Africa and our African continent;


    2) commends our President, the Deputy President, the Minister in the
       Presidency, the Director-General of and the staff in the Presidency
       for the sterling work they are doing to strengthen and sustain this
       integrated form of governance that fits our ever deepening democracy;

    3) assures this leadership of our collective support and continuing
       effort similarly to forge ways of effecting change and of deepening
       our democracy in this Council, and through our intergovernmental
       links with the provincial legislatures and local government;

    4) urges all reasonable and patriotic South Africans to commit
       themselves to the collective effort of developing our nation and our
       continent, now and in the future; and

     5) recognises and celebrates the excellent manner in which our
        leadership is leading our country, both at home and abroad.

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag sal voorstel:

  Dat die Huis daarvan kennis neem dat-

  (1) gemeenskappe regoor die land in opstand kom teen wanbestuur en gebrek
       aan dienslewering in die ANC-beheerde munisipalerade;


  (2) woedende inwoners paaie versper deur buitebande aan die brand te steek
       en die polisie met klippe te gooi;
  (3) inwoners al 11 jaar wag vir huise wat aan hulle belowe is, en dat
       huise toegeken is aan persone wat nooit op waglyste was nie;


  (4) die polisie die betogers met traangas en rubberkoeëls onder beheer
       moes bring; en


  (5) versoek derhalwe die Huis om ANC-wanbestuur van munisipale rade te
       debateer as ‘n saak van dringendheid.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J W LE ROUX: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next
sitting of the House I shall move:

  That the Council notes that–


  (1) communities all over the country are revolting against
       maladministration and a lack of service delivery in ANC-controlled
       municipal councils;


  (2) angry residents barricaded roads by setting alight tyres and stoning
       the police;


  (3) residents have already been waiting for 11 years for houses promised
       to them and that houses are allocated to persons who have never been
       on any waiting list;
  (4) the police had to bring the demonstrators under with tear control gas
       and rubber bullets; and


  (5) therefore requests the House to debate ANC-maladministration as a
       matter of urgency.]

                                 AFRICA DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T RALANE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council –

   (1)      notes that–


        (a)      25 May 2005 is Africa Day;


         (b)      it is a day that symbolises a renewed sense of our
             identity; and


        (c)      it is a day on which we look in the direction of Africa,
             to salute its achievements and potential to work for its
             future;


     2) endorses the role played by our President, Mr Thabo Mbeki, in
        promoting the African Renaissance; and


     3) looks forward to the day when the African continent takes its
        rightful place in international events on a par with other
        continents and other global players.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   ACCIDENT AT BUILDING SITE CLAIMS LIVES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council–


  (1) expresses shock at the tragic accident in Randburg on Tuesday, 24
        May, in which four construction workers lost their lives;

  (2) notes the efforts of rescue services to save the lives of these
        workers and their colleagues;


  (3) further notes the vulnerability of lower-paid workers of our country,
        who daily toil in poor and dangerous conditions due to low wages;
        and

  (4) implores the Department of Labour to -

         (a)      conduct a thorough investigation into this incident;


         (b)      ensure that both the injured and the bereaved families are
             speedily and appropriately compensated; and


         (c)     ensure that the health and safety standards  that  workers
              fought so hard to achieve are not compromised.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 4 – Home Affairs:

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Chairperson, hon members, our Director-
General Mr Maqetuka, deputy directors-general, senior managers of our
department, dear friends, let us take this opportunity once more to honour
the memory of the late Comrade Joyce Kgoali, a former Chairperson of this
House. She was a dedicated leader of our people, a comrade and a sister to
us all. I think we should remember her. The last time I presented my budget
to this House, she was still the Chairperson of the NCOP. And so,
appropriately, we start today by devoting our thoughts and prayers to her.

On Friday, 13 May, we had an opportunity, after the launch of our mobiles,
for the first time to address a sitting of the Eastern Cape Provincial
Legislature. Using this rare opportunity, I had lamented the fact that
because our work is determined as a national competence, there has not been
a very dynamic link between our department and other provincial structures,
including public representatives.

I raised this issue because the work that the department does is premised
on the delivery of services directly to our people, and as a result
requires input from these structures.

Before we left the legislature, I appealed to them that it would be very
helpful if their own oversight work could be extended to cover the
Department of Home Affairs in that province. I thought we should share this
experience we had in the Eastern Cape with you, hon members, because I
truly believe that the beginning of such a dynamic link with the provinces
can only start with this House. So, accordingly we will need to extend this
plea to you as well. For this reason it is significant for us that we have
this opportunity to present our Budget Vote to this upper House of
Parliament, and we do so here today.

We promised during our previous Budget Vote speech to this House that we
would use this budget not only to present our plan for this year, but also
to report back to you on progress we have made in implementing the
undertakings made to you in 2004. In this regard, allow me to draw the
analogy that if our work was to be likened to tilling the land and growing
of food, then the ground at the Department of Home Affairs is fertile and
ready. We believe that in the past 12 months we have seen good rains, and
we are therefore ready to deliver to the public the benefits of our efforts
in this regard, through a recognisable improvement in service delivery.

As you will recall, hon members, we had committed ourselves before all of
you here to dedicating most of our time and resources towards ensuring that
the department does not continue to be a source of frustration to the
millions of South Africans and foreigners that interact with us. Today we
are able to report to you that we are succeeding in this regard. Most of
the things we said we would do, we have done.

Firstly, we had said we would ensure convenient access to our services,
particularly to those of our people who have to travel long distances in
the rural areas to get to a Home Affairs office or service point. We have
put in place a number of initiatives aimed at bringing our services closer
to those who find it difficult to get to our offices.

In the first place, we moved to provide relief for the millions of mothers
with newly-born babies around the country who have to travel  to our
offices and stand in long queues. At times they stand for hours without
getting the necessary relief. For this reason, we provided registration
facilities at 69 hospitals around the country for new mothers to register
their children directly after birth. This has also made it possible for the
speedy processing of child support grants for those children who qualify.

This programme is a further consolidation of the birth registration
campaign we launched during the year 2002 to ensure that all South African
children are registered in a population register. In addition to this, we
have also sought to provide relief mostly for rural communities by building
67 state of the art mobile units, fully computerised and equipped with
satellite connectivity, to provide real-time processing of applications,
and the speedy issuing of all enabling certificates in rural communities.

Ten of these mobile units were unveiled at the ceremony in King William’s
Town in the Eastern Cape on 13 May. We see the unveiling of these mobile
units as an important start to ensure that the state fulfils its obligation
to provide every citizen with a claim to such citizenship, one they can be
proud of, and one that entitles them to receive other services of
government.

Hon members might have seen that a certain number of our offices are
already open beyond working hours during the week, and until lunchtime on
weekends. This is part of the flexi-hours system that we now intend to
implement in all our provinces as part of our programme to provide
convenient and easy access. [Applause.]

Secondly, we said we shall provide relief for women who fraudulently
married people they have never met in a bid by unscrupulous people to
obtain South African citizenship. You will recall that at the beginning of
the month of August last year we launched a campaign on the registration of
marriages and the verification of their status. We had called on all South
African women to come forth and verify their marital status on the national
population register. This was to ensure that those who find themselves
married without their consent are able to apply for the annulment of such
unions. The campaign has been a great success. To date we have managed to
assist 1 977 people to annul their fraudulent marriages, whereas a total of
18 109 people have come forward to register their customary marriages.

Last week, at the presentation of the Budget Vote to the National Assembly,
I made a further call, particularly on elderly people to be assisted to
register their marriages, or at least check their status, because we have
realised that upon their death their certificates consistently reflect that
they were never married. This in turn causes a lot of distress for their
families.

We have decided to take this campaign further to cover all aspects of
verification of status and other data in the national population register.
On 7 April, during the imbizo focus week of government in Makhado, we
launched a national campaign of “Lokisa ditokomane”, or “Lungisa amaphepha”
[Get your documents in order], calling on South Africans who have
corrections to make to their documents regarding surnames, names, dates of
birth, marital status and so on to do so.

This is because we have received a number of complaints from the public, in
which a number of South Africans claim they have been declared dead, and
yet they are still alive. They have suffered humiliation due to other
incorrect reflections of their particulars. For a period of three months
the department will have dedicated counters to which all people who need
this assistance can come and receive relief free of charge.
We are, however, aware that there are certain individuals who might want to
take advantage of this campaign, and abuse the opportunity for self-serving
purposes. We will be on the lookout for such cases in order to ensure that
only genuine errors are corrected.

Thirdly, we said we would endeavour to restore the dignity of our people,
and provide all South Africans with a common identity and citizenship. Our
commitment to ensure that all South Africans are accorded their dignity and
place as citizens of this country through the acquisition of the relevant
documents is unwavering.

In this way, we will be living up to the undertaking we made through the
Freedom Charter that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in
our diversity. We are indeed happy that we are playing some part in the
realisation of this ideal, to such an extent that we have moved to
intervene in cases where people are still experiencing problems with their
registrations due to systems put in place by the previous government. Some
of these systems have now been repealed or replaced.

We have been encouraged and humbled by the sense of hope and gratitude we
have seen in the eyes of the elderly who have never had an ID in their
lives, but who can receive their old age grant today for the first time.
Our hearts have been warmed by the sight of children who now enjoy a better
quality of life because they are recognised and duly registered as South
Africans.
It is our feeling that all South Africans need to be able to acquire their
enabling documents in a manner that is efficient and without unnecessary
time delays. We have decided that during this financial year we shall cut
down on the waiting period it currently takes to issue an identity document
from six weeks to four weeks. [Applause.]

In order to determine the real extent of the need for civic services among
our people, we said we would commission research in this regard. Last year
we commissioned the Human Sciences Research Council to conduct this civic
services survey with a view to assisting us to understand some of the
necessary interventions we might need to make in improving our services to
citizens, particularly in the rural areas. We will receive the final report
of this survey at the end of June, and it will assist us to plan more
efficiently for the execution of our civic services mandate.

Certain policy pronouncements will follow the release of the report of the
survey, including whether we should continue to have late registration in
this country, as well as steps we need to take to deal with those South
Africans who are still continuing to use their old reference books – dompas
if you like - and blue pass books.

We also undertook to improve the capacity of our organisation to create
improved levels of service delivery. The dire limitations with regard to
leadership in the department have been resolved. Since the last time we met
here, we have moved to overhaul a management structure that was packed with
people in an acting capacity - from deputy directors-general to assistant
directors. We have now appointed 54 senior managers at head office,
including a full component of five deputy directors-general to head five
new branches. [Applause.] In this regard, we are also going to look at
enhancing our capacity at all our local offices by reviewing our civic
services establishment.

We need to ensure that we have leadership and operational level capacity
that are adequate in order for us to do this work. This work will be in
addition to the 898 new posts that will be funded in this financial year to
create capacity at lower levels. The review of the establishment of civic
services will also include the matter of grading our posts at district and
local offices to ensure that we have the proper calibre of and quality
officials at the front line level.

Our plan for enhancing the leadership capacity in our provinces will also
include the review of our business processes and standard operating
procedures, allowing more decentralisation of decision-making processes. We
should also report that our programme to computerise offices has registered
significant achievements. And 70% of the sites that needed computerisation
have already been covered, with the exception of those offices where
accommodation was not adequate or where there were security concerns.

We offered to tackle the problem of corruption head on. As Minister in the
Department of Home Affairs, I attach as much seriousness to the issue of
improving service delivery as I do to our fight against graft and
corruption. Corruption in the Department of Home Affairs needs to be
tackled head on. During the past 12 months we have moved to enhance our
capacity to address this problem by creating a chief directorate within the
department. We have had several successes through our partnerships with
other law enforcement agencies in this regard. We are not fully satisfied
with our progress, but we are sure that we have both the commitment and the
capacity to deal with this problem directly. The strength of the department
lies in the fact that we are talking about it, because we do want to find a
solution to the problem.

As promised, we have moved to transform and reorganise our immigration
services. The new national immigration branch of the department was
launched in April. As part of this launch, we committed ourselves to
continue implementing a programme that will ensure that our immigration
service is professionalised and positioned to address both our domestic and
international obligations in this area of work.

When hon members travel and come back into the country, they will be happy
to note that we now even have designated counters which are marked “African
passport holders”, like they have elsewhere in Europe, where they display
“EU countries only”. You will now have, at our own airports, counters which
are designated to be of service only people from African countries.
[Applause.] For us, it is a big and significant step to take, because it
restores the dignity of the African people on the continent.

We are starting the important work of improving the state of our ports of
entry. The work of improving the services that government provides at the
ports of entry has started in earnest through the establishment of the
Border Control Operational Co-ordinating Committee, BCOCC, under the
convenorship of our department. Among its tasks, BCOCC is to look at
infrastructure development and changing the appalling conditions and state
of our border posts. The Department of Home Affairs will finalise the
appointment of port managers for these ports of entry.

As part of ensuring more humane treatment of people at the ports of entry,
particularly those from the African continent, as I have already indicated,
we have these counters that are dedicated to African passport holders. The
immigration regulations have now been finalised, as promised last year. I
am happy to report that South Africa will no longer use interim regulations
in its management of immigration in the country.

After the passing of the Immigration Amendment Act last year, we have
engaged in an extensive consultation process for the finalisation of the
regulations that will be used in the implementation of the Act. The new
immigration regulations have now been finalised and will come into effect
on 1 July this year. We are grateful for the support that this House and
Parliament as a whole have given us during the time of amendment of the
Act.

In line with our international obligations, we have also moved to
reorganise our refugee affairs section with a view to creating more
capacity in the medium term. These interventions will include the need to
eliminate the current backlog of status determination and to process those
cases that are outstanding. The backlog project is currently under way, and
I am sure it will bring a lot of relief to the many asylum seekers who
await protection.

We are finding solutions to managing our deportation activities with more
respect regarding a human rights culture. We decided last year that given
the many perceptions held about the Lindela Repatriation Centre, both at
home and internationally, it was time for the centre to be opened to public
scrutiny and for everybody, including the media and independent
organisations, to have access to the centre. Since then, we have addressed
a number of problems that have been reported to us about the centre and its
work has been demystified.

During the past financial year we moved swiftly to install IT capacity at
the centre to ensure real-time verification of fingerprints at the centre
so that the identities of South African citizens and any other legal
persons who are mistakenly taken to the centre are verified and released as
soon as possible.

As we celebrate Africa Day today, we need to report that we take our
international obligations seriously, particularly with regard to the
continent. During this financial year, we will continue to assist the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with its establishment of a national
population register, as well as an identification system for the country,
as part of their preparations to hold their democratic elections. In this
regard, we met the Minister of Interior in the DRC for further discussions
in order to put in place detailed plans for the execution of this
obligation. We are encouraged by the overall commitment of both parties to
make this work successful.

In our quest to encourage easy but legally regulated human movement between
our neighbours and ourselves, we have started several bilateral engagements
with most SADC countries concerning visa agreements. We have, in this
regard, finalised such an agreement with Mozambique. We will, during this
financial year, consolidate the current engagements that we have with the
rest of the neighbouring states.

Lastly, we have made realistic allocations to key projects, having
considered our capacity to implement. We have allocated a sum of R71
million for the upgrading and construction of office accommodation, as we
intend to roll out our offices to those areas that continue to struggle in
their attempts to access our offices. We have also made an additional
request for R91 million to be allocated to public works from our current
savings in order to finance 63 new rentals over the three-year period. This
will allow us to relocate some of our worst offices to better
accommodation.

As in all other financial years, a big percentage of our current R2,9
billion budget will go to transfers that must be made to organisations that
constitute our auxiliary services. Due to its commitments, with regard to
the upcoming local government elections, the IEC will receive a transfer of
R884 million from this budget, and the Film and Publication Board will
receive R6,7 million. We need to create the necessary capacity within the
Film and Publication Board to fight the scourge of child pornography. To
this end, we are preparing to host the national conference against child
pornography during this coming week.

We shall also continue to implement outstanding work regarding the Home
Affairs National Identification System.
The introduction of the smart card, which is the outstanding component of
Hanis, was approved by Cabinet in 2001, as you all know, pending the
finalisation of the procurement model. We are now in the final stages for
Cabinet's approval of such a procurement model. In this regard, we will
report to you on the progress, hon members.

A lot of work has gone into achieving the targets we have set for ourselves
in the past 12 months and for this I would like to extend my gratitude to
the management and staff of my department, under the leadership of the
director-general, for the indulgence of the select committee and its
chairperson, Comrade Joyce Masilo, and for the co-operation we received
from all our stakeholders.

As we said last year, we believe that the success of our work should be
judged, not on the number of promises we make but on its ability to touch
the lives of ordinary South Africans out there. This is a yardstick we have
chosen for our work, and we call on you to measure our success, or lack
thereof, on this basis. It will not be easy, but we are confident that it
is possible. Let us all move forward to transform our country and improve
the lives of millions of South Africans. Thank you. [Applause.]

Moh J MASILO: Modulasetulo yo o tlotlegang, Tona, badirammogo, Mokaedi-
Kakaretso le balaodibagolo, mmangwana o tshwara thipa ka fa bogaleng. Mme
Mapisa-Nqakula, lefapha la gago le dira ka natla go tokafatsa matshelo a
batho botlhe ba Aforika Borwa; segolo thata tshireletso ya bomme le
basetsana, segolo bao ba tlhokileng tšhono ya go bona dithuto kgotsa go
buisa le go kwala. Batlhalefi ba ba tswang mafatsheng a a kwa ntle ga
Aforika Borwa ba ikhumisa ka rona ka manyalo a a sa nepagalang sentle
kgotsa a tsietso. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Mrs J MASILO: Hon Chairperson, Minister, colleagues, the director-general
and senior managers, a true leader always puts the interest of the group
first. Ms Mapisa-Nqakula, your department is working very hard to improve
the lives of all South African people, especially with regard to the safety
of women and girls who did not have the opportunity to learn to read and
write. Foreign fraudsters who live in South Africa enrich themselves by
means of unlawful marriage.]

Home Affairs is one of those departments on which the whole country relies
to perform an efficient and effective service delivery function. Its proper
functioning ensures that we are safe, since it shares the responsibility of
border control and management with the Department of Defence, the SAPS and
Sars. They also issue documents from the cradle to the grave. If you have
given birth, your child needs to be registered. If you get married, you
have to register that too. If you die it also has to be recorded. Home
Affairs, needless to say, is responsible for the issuing of all these vital
documents, including your travel documentation.

Other departments are also closely linked to this department by virtue of
the identity documents issued by the Department of Home Affairs, allowing
all citizens to access any of the many government services, such as social
security grants and housing subsidies. Even foreigners who wish to enter
our country for study, business, medical procedures, as visitors or to
become permanent or temporary residents, must have interaction with this
department.

Those who seek political refuge from their government can apply for asylum
or other kinds of protection from our country, and this department
facilitates this process. Therefore, it is imperative that this department
has an appropriate budget to ensure that it extends its efficient service
to everyone, even those in the remotest areas of our country.

This department, by its own admission, acknowledged that it did not
function to its fullest potential in virtually all the areas mentioned
above. This meant that our citizens got the raw end of the deal with long
queues for ID applications, fraudulent marriages, inadequate infrastructure
to house the services provided and limited mobile units to serve the remote
areas of our country. The list is quite long if one should quantify all the
inadequacies emanating from this department.

An intensive analysis of their inadequacies was embarked upon, and an
intensive campaign to turn around the situation was launched under the
Minister’s leadership. When we were first presented with this strategy, our
initial thought was that it was very ambitious. However, we have been very
impressed with the identification of all these areas of need and the
systematic way in which it was endeavoured to alleviate the problems in the
many critical areas.
The 2004-05 up to 2006-07 strategic plans identify 10 critical intervention
areas, and each of these areas has been given target dates for achievement.
Our concerns relate to all areas of control, from a financial management
perspective to the appointment of key managers and the provision of
adequate IT services to systemise the whole function of Home Affairs. The
new strategic plan 2005-10 revises the sum of the targets and outlines some
of the successes that the department has already achieved.

As mentioned before, service delivery was critically at a loss, to the
extent that some of the employees of Home Affairs were involved in
syndicates issuing fraudulent documents. Embarking on the Check your Status
campaign was just one of the attempts to stop corruption. The whole country
was drawn into this campaign, and many fraudulent marriages were uncovered.

In addition, the Immigration Act was amended so that those foreign
nationals wishing to obtain permanent residence and wanting to use marriage
to a South African to obtain that status must now wait for five years of
marriage before their permanent status will be approved. During such
marriage they will be visited by officials from the department who will
verify the validity of the marriage. [Interjections.] Amendments to the
Marriage Act are also envisaged to reinforce the five-year waiting period.
The select committee welcomes this initiative by the department.

Improved service delivery is needed regarding immigration; that means
effective border control, effective law enforcement and the ability of the
department effectively to enforce legislation that is interlinked with the
department’s ability effectively to manage refugee services.

We were also concerned that the levels of staff at the deputy director
general level had an extraordinarily high vacancy rate. We welcome the
appointment of five branches at the deputy director general level. We want
to see the trend of filling vacant posts continuing in critical service
delivery areas. We also welcome these appointments as a major step forward
in the transformation of the department and in an effort to improve its
image. It also signifies significant progress in the delivery of quality
services to the people of this country.

On our own oversight visit to North West and Gauteng district offices, we
identified some of the challenges that the department still has to
overcome.

It was not a mistake to send out pilot mobile units to the Eastern Cape
province. Due to poor infrastructure and roads 67 mobile units have been
rolled out. It represents the Department of Home Affairs’ commitment to
improving the lives of our people. Well done. We know that this is a long-
awaited service, however even this number is a mere drop in the ocean.

We are very happy that the budget for Home Affairs has increased;
especially the 23,35% increase allocated for delivery of service; and the
budget for auxiliary and associated service programmes increased by 57,71%
compared to the 2004-05 budget. The budget showed an overall increase of
23,3%. We hope that the department will have all their financial accounting
structures in place so that whatever they spend on the improvement of
services will be accompanied with the appropriate reconciliation statements
for verification purposes so as to comply with the Public Finance
Management Act and the relevant Treasury regulations.

In the previous financial year, this department underspent by only 16% and
the select committee expressed its concern at the delay of late payments to
service providers, even though the percentage is relatively low. We know
how costly restructuring is, but it still needs to take place within the
department. Therefore, every cent must be spent in each financial year,
with no roll-overs.

We also welcome the increase in the internship programme from 250 to 500
people for this financial year. Young people do not necessarily think about
Home Affairs as a career choice. These internships will help them to get a
better idea of what Home Affairs is all about and how they can contribute
to nation-building.

Let us be guided by the principles of the Freedom Charter, which is the
vision of our masses from time to time. We need to reflect on this historic
Congress of the People held 50 years ago. We must not fail our people. The
Freedom Charter is the foundation on which we base our programmes of action
to transform our country economically and socially: “The country belongs to
all who live in it” and “The people shall govern”.

In conclusion, thanks goes to the Minister, Deputy Minister, former
Director-General, Mr Barry Gilder, new Director-General of the department,
Mr Jeff Maqetuka, and to senior officials for the support they gave to the
select committee members all the time, not forgetting dedicated hon members
of the select committee who worked without failure. Well done, members,
keep up serving the nation at work. The select committee welcomes this
Budget Vote and supports it. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.] [Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr O M THETJENG: Thank you, Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues and other
guests. I want to start off by thanking the Minister for making it possible
for offices of the department to open on Saturdays to assist our fathers
and mothers out there in the communities.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank the Chief Whip of the Council
for his efforts to ensure that speakers are given the opportunity to relay
their opinions. Some presiding officers raised the same concerns and need
to be commended for their efforts and I hope that I will be fairly
protected.

This country has traversed dangerous escarpments in search of tranquillity.
Highly fortified resistance existed but it soon broke down as it was based
on a falsehood. The masters fell from grace like a slaughtered bull ready
to be cooked and devoured and today are no more.

Incidents like the one quoted in the Minister’s speech delivered on 18 May
2005 in the National Assembly of a certain Ms Cecilia Flink is but one of
the many cases that occur unnoticed in this country.

Problems within the department can to some extent be blamed on the previous
regime that failed to register all South Africans as citizens. But, we
cannot continue to blame the past when the resources are at the disposal of
this ANC-controlled government. We need to get down to the business of
correcting and doing the right things.

The budget for this financial year is slightly higher since some of the
money will be transferred to the Independent Electoral Commission for the
forthcoming local government elections. This means that there is likely to
be a decrease in the budget allocation in the following financial years.
This department is, as put in the Strategic Plan 2004-05 to 2006-07,
“central to government’s service delivery agenda, to national security and
to prevention and combating of crime”. But a number of issues are contrary
to this valuable statement. If the statement above is compromised, then it
goes without question that the poor, the elderly and orphaned children will
not be able to access valuable services from government, as is already
happening in some instances.

It is very common to find that personal details are incorrect when one
applies for a new identity document. What are the causes of these types of
glaring errors? How many of such errors are contained in our population
register? On 07 April 2005, the Minister launched the “Lokisa Ditokomane”
campaign, which was meant to assist those who have faulty IDs.

It was a very good campaign that was launched. Yes, those who are literate
will easily manage to have them corrected, but the big question is how the
rural poor and illiterate are to be assisted in this regard? Has the
department conducted information campaigns to reach the deep rural folks
who are normally isolated from the mainstream government service?

Bear in mind that some do not know when were they born but can only relate
to a well-known incident to assist with determining their date of birth.
It’s a fact and we’re asking: “How then are we going to assist them?”

Incidents of inaccurate information about our own citizens happen almost on
a continuous basis and one wonders when this will ever come to an end. A
schoolteacher from Dennilton, as reported in the website of the department,
Ms Eva Moremi, struggled to be paid for three months because she had been
declared dead. The question is: Who submitted a form declaring her dead?
She was then required to make an affidavit confirming that she was still
alive. She is one of the few lucky individuals to have had her status
restored.

The department has been rocked by a number of incidents that compromise the
security of our country. Recently in the Eastern Cape, some individuals,
including a medical doctor, are alleged to have been found with fraudulent
IDs. One wonders how many officials are involved in such scams and many
more.

Maybe the Department of Labour needs to review the related labour laws to
make it easier to expel those who have been found committing fraud, and
fired without having to go through the onerous process required by this
monstrous legislation.

One official who was caught red-handed, in the act, by means of security
cameras is still suspended with full pay. Such people are not required in
the system of government because they compromise the security of this
country.

This needs to be looked at by the Minister because we cannot allow people
to compromise this country’s security. Foreign nationals easily access our
IDs to obtain South African citizenship without going through the correct
procedures, and one wonders how many such people we already have in our
system.

I hope irregular marriages are being weeded out of the system because many
of our sisters have been victims of fraud, though there are those who
deliberately got involved because they wanted to give some of the corrupt
foreigners citizenry of this country. One cannot have sympathy for such
elements. As the Minister has just said, I hope that has been attended to.

Some offices in some parts of this country fail to practice the principles
of Batho Pele. During lunchtime and teatimes offices are literally locked
and clients are told to wait until lunch or teatime is over. Maybe
officials need to be helped to understand that the principle of Batho Pele
does not necessarily deny them the opportunity to take their lunch or
teatimes.

Officers need to alternate in taking their lunch so that at any given time
clients are assisted instead of waiting for long periods of time. But,
Minister, I want to congratulate the manager Ms Mohlatlego Manthata,
together with her staff, in a satellite office found in Senwabarwana,
somewhere in Bochum, as it was called before for efficiency in assisting
the clients that visit that office. I am of the opinion that she deserves
from her supervisor or manager to be favourably assessed on her
performances to earn performance-related bonuses, because we need people
like her to perform these functions in this government. She is on top of
the principles of Batho Pele and this must be commended. I visit that
office regularly during my constituency period and am impressed with their
output. [Laughter.]

The same can be said about an officer in the Social Development office, Ms
Nakedi Molele, who deserves the same accolades because she understands how
to render a service to clients who visit her office. This office is
critically understaffed and yet those entrusted with its management and
administration are doing the best they could. The same cannot be said about
some of the other offices, because they do not do what they are supposed to
be doing.

We have heard that this department is understaffed. What is the situation
as we speak now? Is there an improvement because we want our mothers,
sisters, brothers, mothers, fathers and friends to receive a service on
time by this particular department?

The other entity that is actually funded by this department is the
government printing works. The government printing works has had an adverse
report from the office of the Auditor-General for four years in a row. The
Auditor-General has also now presented a “disclaimer report”. This means
that he cannot express an opinion on the financial statements presented to
him. Something is really fishy about this entity.

The question that I want to put to the Minister is whether there is any
intention to put this entity in private hands since it is not in a position
to account for the finances allocated to it? I will appreciate a response
from the Minister if possible. The present report from the Auditor-General
foretells a bleak future for this entity.

The security of the department’s finances is compromised, as reported, in
the Auditor-General’s report. Many officials had access to the security
password and this means that individuals could easily transfer funds
fraudulently to individuals or institutions that never performed any
service to the department. Anything is possible with this department since
they are a few officials, who  are corrupt to the bone and need to be dealt
with as swiftly as possible. One would appreciate hearing from the Minister
if this has been attended to.

We heard bone-crushing stories about the Lindela Detention Centre. The
Minister has indicated at some point that this centre has been opened to
the public to ensure that other role-players have access to this human-
humiliating centre. The Auditor-General’s report indicates that controls
are very poor at this centre. Record maintenance of suspected and or
illegal foreigners is very poor or nonexistent. The centre lacks capacity.
Immigration officials do not have access to the department’s population
register. That is why many South Africans have been deported.

Yes, many South Africans that are too black - pitch black, like me - have
been wrongfully arrested and deported because they do not deserve to be
South Africans. This could lead to legal litigation for the Minister in her
capacity as head of the Ministry and department. When will this type of
humiliation end? It is my belief and hope that this situation will be
attended to as a matter of urgency.

We commend the introduction of fully equipped vehicles to service outlying
areas of our country. It is my belief that these vehicles will be
efficiently utilised. There are offices in various Makgosi that can also be
used optimally. Makgosi’s offices can also be used here. For example, the
hon Kgoshi Mokoena has an office that could be used in rendering a service
our clients. In some parts of this country they are being utilised.

The budget allocation to this department should be utilised to address many
of the issues highlighted and many more that I cannot  manage to deal with
today. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, Minister, colleagues, I just want to say to
hon member Thetjeng that considering the way he speaks it is not surprising
that he is arrested because people think he is a foreigner; the way he
speaks badly about South Africa. It reminds me of the way in which the DA
criticises our country overseas. One would think that they were not from
South Africa, and didn’t live in South Africa. So yes, I wouldn’t blame
officials that arrested hon Thetjeng, because to them he speaks a foreign
language, just as he spoke in this House.

When democracy finally dawned in South Africa in 1994, the hopes and
expectations of newly enfranchised citizens were sky high. Looking back
today along the long and arduous road we have travelled, as the people of
South Africa, we can testify to moments in our pilgrimage when our faith
has been severely tested, and it is daily tested by the DA.

Change, almost by definition, meant a radical improvement in the real-life
conditions of ordinary people, of which Mr Krumbock is no part. The fervent
wish of ordinary citizens that a better life for all were around the corner
seemed tantalisingly realistic. The change to the political system also
brought hope from another quarter.

As many can attest, today government delivery has been more difficult,
unequal and often slower than expected. Achieving the promised land is by
no means plain sailing. But, happily and indeed, there are great Ministers,
Deputy Ministers and officials that are daily launching and maintaining
innovative, effective measures to better the lives of South Africans, who
are not just complaining and breaking everything down and lamenting, but
who really do certain things to better the life of South Africa.

I think that the hon Thetjeng only visited one or two of Home Affairs
offices. In my constituency, Wynberg in Cape Town - I can correctly say –
in Mitchells Plain and at Nyanga, Home Affairs has really changed and
turned around.

We are sorry, Mr Krumbock, to say that yes, there is really a Minister and
a Deputy Minister that are now working at Home Affairs. I think when
something works, the DA can’t understand why it is working because there is
nothing of the DA that works. That is why 70% of South Africans have said:
Let’s get away from these complaining ...

“... soos hulle sê in Afrikaans: ‘natbroekmense’”. [... as they say in
Afrikaans: ‘natbroekmense’ [moaners].

But let us rather vote for a government; let us put a government in there
that can really work, that can really look after our people and understand
the needs, hon Loe, of our people. [Interjections.]

Home Affairs is one of those government departments that plays a pivotal
role in our systems of government in South Africa. I want to thank the
Minister and her officials in this department that a lot of South African
lives can rely on the department. Thank you for the sterling work. The NNP
supports the Budget Vote.

I also want to ask the hon Thetjeng to go home tonight and really study the
speech of the Minister. If you can’t read, hon member, we will get Kgoshi
Mokoena to give you reading classes. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, hon Minister, the director general, other
officials and hon members, this year we are celebrating the 50th
anniversary of the Freedom Charter, a living document that enshrines the
aspirations of the people of this country. Deviation from that document
will be tantamount to selling the spirit of those who paid with their lives
for it to be realised. It is for that reason that to this day the Freedom
Charter serves as the compass that directs the ANC government in our
struggle to better the lives of our people.

As we debate the Budget Vote of the Department of Home Affairs we can
vividly hear the voices of the founding fathers and mothers of the Freedom
Charter in Kliptown echoing across the decades, saying: “There shall be
houses, security and comfort. There shall be work and security”. As we
debate the Budget Vote we must also bear in mind that the apartheid regime
not only relied on brute force to suppress and subjugate our people, but it
also relied heavily on an administrative machinery. Home Affairs was at the
centre of this machinery to dehumanise the majority of the people of this
country.

The task of our democratic government is, therefore, fundamentally to
transform the Home Affairs department from being a symbol of humiliation
and suffering to a department that is the nerve centre of government, to be
in a position to deliver a better life to all the people of our country. To
be able to access many government services as a citizen, one must first
interact with the Department of Home Affairs. The ID document and many
other types of documents are keys to unlocking services provided by both
government and the private sector.

Therefore, the department has to be a well-oiled machinery if it must live
up to its expectations. If this department is not resourced such that it
functions optimally, a better life will remain a mirage for our people. We
believe that the department’s turnaround strategy adopted in 2003 is just
what the doctor ordered for the department to deliver in a manner
consistent with the overall plan of government to deliver quality services
to our people.

In our interaction with the department, the director-general said: We need
to strengthen our ability to execute and to measure our levels of success
on the impact of our plans instead of our ability to merely develop such
plans.

We cannot agree more with this statement. The acid test for any plan is in
its implementation. As a committee we are looking with keen interest at the
way your turnaround strategy is unfolding and as committee members consider
ourselves as allies of and even as a resource to the department in the
implementation of that strategy.

In our interaction with the communities and your regional offices we do
come across some of challenges which we have no doubt you will address as a
department. Of course the Minister, in a speech here today, has already
elaborated much on how they are actually solving some of these problems.
However, we have to highlight them in this debate for the sake of emphasis.

Early this year we visited your offices in Mabopane and Garankuwa. Both
these offices are inaccessible to physically challenged people as they are
both situated on the upper floors of the buildings in which they are
housed, the Ga-Rankuwa one especially as it has not lift. In both offices
there is a serious shortage of both staff and resources like computers. In
some instances two or more staff members share a single computer.

It is our view that such an environment is not conducive to the optimal
functioning of officials, but we must indicate that when we interrogated
the budget of the department we saw that there is money that has been put
aside for IT and we hope that this problem will be eliminated.

There is also a feeling that there is too much centralisation of certain
minor functions at headquarters in Pretoria. For instance, if an ablution
system is blocked in a far-flung area this needs to be reported to
headquarters and it is headquarters that has to give a go-ahead whether
that ablution block can be repaired or not. We believe that regions need
some degree of self-sufficiency so that they can be in a position to deal
with some of the issues themselves, without having to refer to
headquarters. Yes, we agree that major operations have to be attended to by
headquarters.

As the Minister has already indicated, corruption seems to be a festering
sore in the department. We believe that the majority of public servants in
the Department of Home Affairs are honest citizens who want to see to it
that government succeeds. However, there is in our view a tiny minority who
are hellbent on continuing with corrupt activities to undermine the good
work that others are engaged in. These people must be hunted down and if
they are caught they must face the wrath of the law.

Some members of the public are also guilty of these unbecoming activities.
In our interaction with some officials we heard stories to the effect that
some pastors are selling baptismal certificates to people who are not
deserving. Some principals are also appending school stamps to documents
for people who are not South Africans so that they can be in a position to
acquire South African documentation. We condemn, in no uncertain terms,
these individuals who are entrusted with high positions in society and
misuse these positions to sabotage our young democracy.

We are looking forward to the day when all South Africans have the smart ID
card. The Minister has already indicated this. We were assured by the
department that these cards are not easily forged. We urge the department
to fast-track this process so that we can reduce the forging of our IDs in
a meaningful way. During the elections last year government, through this
department, decided to issue IDs free of charge in view of the fact that
many people can’t afford even the minimal charges.

We commend government to be so sensitive as to enable our people to
exercise their inalienable right – the right to vote. We know that the same
sensitivity is and will be displayed during the coming local government
elections. In the same vein, Chair, we must state that there is still the
challenge of ID collection. There are stacks and stacks of IDs in regional
offices that remain uncollected. We call upon our people who have applied
for IDs to go out there and collect those IDs.

South Africa is relatively better developed economically compared to other
African countries. It therefore has a strong pool factor compared to other
countries in the region. As a result many people tend to want to come to
South Africa, legally or illegally. It is for that reason that in 2002
Parliament passed the Immigration Bill, which enables the department to
regulate immigration and emigration. That law introduced immigration
inspectors to deal with the problem.

We viewed with interest - although we were not invited - the other day when
the department was unveiling this directorate in their new uniforms at the
Cape Town Convention Centre, their beautiful uniforms, which distinguish
them from other law-enforcement agencies. We appreciate this very much. But
we believe that the department will, in this financial year, be able to
appoint more immigration officers so that they can be in a position to be
equal to their tasks, as we were told that there is a shortage of such
officers out there in the offices.

A concern that we have is that according to audit reports this department
has been getting qualified audits since the year 2000-01 financial year to
the 2003-04 financial year. Over and above that there has been an
underspending for the past three years. This is not consistent with the
PFMA and we hope that the turnaround strategy will also address this
problem. We are aware that the department has a new all-round leadership
and we hope that, as new brooms, they will sweep clean.

In conclusion, we must state that, as the ANC and the committee, we
unequivocally support the Ministry and the department. We have no doubt
that the department and Ministry will discharge their functions with
distinction. I thank you. [Applause.]

Nkk J N VILAKAZI: Sihlalo ohloniphekileyo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe
woMnyango, malungu onke ahloniphekile oMkhandlu kazwelonke oshaya
imithetho, kuhle ukukhuluma ngento oyaziyo. Ikomidi engikulo elifaka nalo
Mnyango wezaseKhaya like lathi ukuhambahamba libuka amahhovisi alo Mnyango
ukuzibonela indlela oqhutshwa ngayo umsebenzi.

Empeleni sonke siyazi ukuthi kunezikhalo eziningi ngalo Mnyango phakathi
kwazo okukhona lezi: imigqa emide ekhalisa umphakathi nezisebenzi ezincane
ukwenza lo msebenzi. Useshilo uzakwethu usihlalo wethu uMnu Tolo. Ezinye
ukulindwa kwamapasi nezinye izincwadi ezibalulekile njengoba sebeshilo
ozakwethu abaningi, asebekhulume ngaphambi kwami, kanye nalezi zincwadi
ezikhishwa yilo Mnyango nokunye nokunye. Yizikhalo lezo eziningi
eziqhamukayo. Siyethemba mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe ukuthi isabelo sakho sanele
ukuhlinzekela ukulungiswa kwazo zonke lezi zinkinga esengizibalile kanye
nezinye.

Ekuhambeni kwethu sathola ukuthi imigqa emide yenziwa ukungeneli
kwabasebenzayo, ukwesweleka kwamakhompyutha okwenza umsebenzi ube lula
kanti umsebenzi omningi kangaka wenziwa ngezandla. Lokhu kukodwa nje
kukhomba isidingo esikhulu sokuqashwa kwabantu abazokwenza lo msebenzi,
kuphinde futhi kuthengwe amakhompyutha amaningi ukusheshisa umsebenzi
odondayo, kuphinde kufundiswe izisebenzi ukwenza lo msebenzi ube
yimpumelelo. Imali edingeka lapha inkulu kwazise phela amahhovisi
ezaseKhaya ayakhelwe amadolobha kuphela. Uhulumeni wobandlululo
wawungagqizi qakala ngabantu ababehlala emakhaya nasezabelweni yingakho
kunzima kangaka ukulungisa isimo kulo Mnyango.

Ukulinda amapasi nezinye izincwadi ezibalulekile emphakathini kuba
undendende. Ipasi kuphela unyaka owodwa noma emibili ulindile, usuke
unenhlanhla uma kube yizinyanga. Uma lifika, usuke unenhlanhla uma kungekho
okubhedayo kulo. Mhlawumbe igama noma isibongo sisuke sibheda noma unyaka
kumbe omunye nje unyaka ongawazi uqhamuke usubhalwe phansi. Ukulungisa lesi
simo utshelwa ukuthi yiPitoli kuphela elizolungisa bese uphinda futhi
ulindele incwadi efakaza ukubhaleka kabi kwamagama. Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe,
kunesidingo sokuthi eMinyangweni yakho eseduze nabantu kube khona usizo
lokulungisa noma ukufakaza iphutha elisuke lenzekile. Umphakathi
uyahlukumezeka kakhulu yilesi simo, useke washo usihlalo wami lapha, uMnu
Tolo noma yena ebekhulum ngolimi lokuwela mina ngikhuluma ngelami
engalincela ebeleni.

Angithokoze mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe ukuthi ukhona umehluko engiwubonile
emahhovisi aseduze nami. Izitulo, amabhentshi abemasha ceke, abantu behlezi
phansi. Kuhle! Kodwa bona olayini akukakashintshi lutho. Siyethemba ukuthi
isabelomali soMnyango wakho sizoqhubeka ukwenza ngcono lesi simo.
Siyothokoza kakhulu.

Abantu abaphilayo okuthiwa sebafa nabo bayahlukumezeka ukulinda ukulungiswa
kwephutha. Sike sambona umhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe ezisukumele elungisa
amaphutha alo Mnyango. Sengathi kungaba khona indlela esheshayo ukulungisa
izimo ezinjena.

Abashadile bebe bengazi, kuningi ukuhlukumezeka abahlangabezana nakho,
kulindwe iPitoli ukulungisa kodwa ibe ikhona imiNyango ingenawo amandla
olkulungisa la maphutha yize ubufakazi bukhona. Ushilo uzakwethu wathi.

Imisebenzi ilawulwa esizindeni esisodwa. Kudingeka amandla abiwe nakwezinye
izindawo ukuze kwehle isisindo somsebenzi othwelwe eMnyangweni wakho.

Okokugcina, kuyobe sekuyalunga uma abasebenza kulo Mnyango sebekwazi
ukukhuluma kahle nomphakathi abawusebenzelayo. Okwamanje akukalungi,
mhlawumbe kwenziwa ukushoda kwezisebenzi.

Egameni le-IFP siyawamukela lo mbiko wesabelomali esethulwa umhlonishwa
uNgqongqoshe. Ngibonge kakhulu kuMnyango wakho Ngqongqoshe, osebenza
kanzima usilungiselela ngapha nangapha. Ngiyabonga kakhulu. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)
[Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members of the
National Assembly, it is good to talk about something you understand. The
committee on which I serve has visited the Department of Home Affairs
offices’ to see how things are done.

We are all aware that there are many complaints about this department. The
following are some of them: The long queues that are a concern to the
public and the shortage of staff to do the work. The chairperson, Mr Tolo,
has indicated this already.  Other problems include a long waiting period
for identity documents and other important documents, as indicated by my
colleagues who have spoken before me. These are some of the complaints. Hon
Minister, I hope the budget is adequate to address these problems I have
mentioned.

During our visits we established that these long queues are caused by staff
and computer shortages. As most of the work is done manually, computers
would make the work easy. This alone shows the need to employ workers to do
the work, to buy computers to speed up the work and to train staff so that
this work becomes a success. More money is needed because Home Affairs
offices were built in towns only. The apartheid government never bothered
about the rural people and that is the reason it is difficult to rectify
the situation in this department.

It takes a long time to get important documents. It takes one to two years
to get an identity document and if you are lucky it takes a few months.
When it comes, you would be lucky if nothing is wrong in it. Sometimes your
name, your surname and your date of birth are wrong. When you want to
correct this you are told that this can only be done in Pretoria and you
have to wait for the form confirming the incorrectly written names. Hon
Minister, there must be a mechanism at offices nearer to people to correct
these mistakes. This situation affects the public, as the chairman Mr Tolo
said in English, but I am saying this in my indigenous language.

I am not happy, hon Minister, that there is a difference in the offices
nearer to the place where I live. The chairs and benches are new and people
are sitting down. That is great! However, the queues remain the same. We
hope the budget for your department would make the situation better. We
would indeed be pleased.

People who are still alive, but have been classified as dead are affected
while they wait for the rectification of this mistake. We have seen the hon
Minister trying to address these problems. We would appreciate the
introduction of a mechanism to address situations like these.

There are people who are married without their knowledge. They encounter
many problems while they wait for Pretoria to correct this mistake, whilst
there are offices without the power to correct those mistakes in the face
of evidence. My colleague has said so.

There is too much centralisation of services. We need decentralisation,
just to ease some of the pressure that is being experienced in your
department.

Lastly, things would be better if employees of this department dealt with
the public they serve in a better manner. So far things are not good; maybe
this is due to the staff shortage.

The IFP supports this budget tabled by the hon Minister. Thank you very
much, Minister, that your hard-working department is making things
possible. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, officials from
the department, Home Affairs is a critical junction between a citizen and
her or his ability to access social and economic services. The Department
of Home Affairs, firstly, records the arrival of a new citizen through
birth or immigration; secondly, provides them with proof of identity;
thirdly, recognises marriages; and fourthly, eventually records the end of
every person’s citizenship through death or emigration. In this fashion the
department’s work directly affects the life of every citizen.

The budget is, therefore, incredibly important to the social and economic
life of the country. Where the department fails, the consequences for
citizens are incredibly disruptive. Therefore, the continuing existence of
mismanagement and corruption involving the officials of the department
cannot be tolerated. This undermines the intentions of this Parliament
whenever we consider and approve the budget for this department.

Mphathiswa, masikubulele kakhulu ngokuba uthe wahambela iphondo laseMpuma
Koloni, kuba lelona phondo ndicinga ukuba lihlupheke kakhulu, nangokuba
uthe wasinika ezi ofisi zingoomahamba-nandlwana. Loo nto itsho yazise
kakuhle into yokuba nawuphi na umntu, noselalini, naye uza kuxhamla kweli
phulo uthe waliphehlelela. Siyabulela kakhulu.

Mphathiswa, kwakhona masikubulele kuba kwisebe lakho abantu abasakwazi
ukuhlala kakhulu xa belinde iziqinisekiso zokufa nezokuzalwa kuba
bazifumana kwangaloo mini. Liphulo elihle ke elo. Siyabulela. Lilonke I-UDM
iyaluxhasa olu hlahlo lwabiwo-mali. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Minister, we would like to thank you for paying our province, the
Eastern Cape, a visit and for providing us with mobile offices, because I
believe it is the most impoverished province. That should ensure that
everybody, including those living in the rural areas, benefits from this
initiative. We appreciate that.

Hon Minister, we would also like to commend you and your staff at the
Department of Home Affairs for a job well done because people no longer
have to wait for long periods for documents such as death and birth
certificates as they now get them on the same day.  This is a good
campaign. We are grateful indeed. The UDM supports this Budget Vote. I
thank you. [Applause.]]

Rev E ADOLPH: Hon Chairperson, the ID wants to recognise and acknowledge
the national Minister and her department’s endeavours to streamline our
service delivery to the people who needed it most. The intervention through
acquiring new additional offices, upgrading existing office space and, of
course, increasing the staff complement should be complimented. That is a
lot of improvement. We also welcome the new immigration services at the
airport.

I want to emphasise this: To restore the dignity of our mothers, fathers,
brothers and sisters, especially in the rural areas, will remain our
collective responsibility as proud South African citizens. I am happy to
notice that people can now be registered from birth to death and that they
have access to better facilities. Also, the fact that we now have mobile
units in most rural areas needs to be commended.

There are some challenges, which we need to raise, that the department
faces on a regular basis. I am not convinced that the deployment of 54
senior managers will immediately solve your problem regarding the financial
systems, which are currently not working. It is evident that the department
did not have the capacity to spend money allocated to it in the budgets of
the past three consecutive years.

Yes, there is an improvement but it is a long shot to think that we will
wave the magic wand and then: Wow, the underspending of three years will
disappear! You need to be serious about underspending, because that is an
indictment concerning the taxpayer’s money. The Auditor-General’s report
raised concerns about the financial management of the revenue. The ID is
concerned about the measures that you will put in place to remedy the
situation so that that should never happen again.

We also welcome the fact that the department took tremendous strides in its
efforts to fight against child pornography. That is a major bone of
contention for all concerned South Africans. We also agree with the Freedom
Charter when it says: “South Africa belongs to all who live in it”. But
when it comes to its implementation, we have some problems and
reservations.

In terms of our approach to xenophobia, Africa belongs to Africans. Why are
we scared to welcome our neighbouring Africans to Africa? We have systems
in place to streamline and legalise the citizens of Africa in a very
professional manner. Africa is part of the continent and we have to face
that. We need to work together as a team. Therefore I commend the
department for its efforts in going across the boundaries to include the
African continent. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Sihlalo, mangibingelele uNgqongqoshe kanye
nabasebenzi bomnyango wakhe, ngibingelele namalungu ahloniphekile wonke.
[Chairperson, hon Minister, staff members from her department and hon
members, I greet you all.]

The select committee and the ANC are always eager to ensure that the
programmes of our government indeed reach all the people. So I want to
spend the first few minutes of my debate outlining some of the concerns we
found when we embarked upon our oversight visit at the beginning of this
year.

We undertook an oversight visit in North West in February 2005. The Home
Affairs offices, which were visited, were Ga-Rankuwa and Mabopane, which is
situated in the cross-border area, and is providing services in both
Gauteng and North West provinces.

There are challenges faced by the Department of Home Affairs, which have
already been mentioned by the previous speakers. The number of immigration
officials are inadequate. It appeared to us that they also lacked the
necessary resources, such as adequate vehicles, to transport illegal
immigrants.

The Mabopane office serves as a cross-boundary area, which creates its own
unique set of problems. The office has to provide services to people
travelling approximately 248 kilometres, since offices closer to them do
not have terminals to provide death certificates immediately.

There is a shortage of computers and the buildings are in desperate need of
renovation. There is a staff shortage and therefore a failure to do the
necessary job adequately, for instance verifying ID applications or
alternative documentation, such as baptismal certificates or school
letters, which results in fraudulent practices.

However, these challenges were raised with the head office of the
Department of Home Affairs in Tshwane on the very same day, and the
department promised to address such challenges in line with the President’s
state of the nation address last May, which says: We have set out to ensure
that during the second decade of freedom we improve the machinery of
government so that where ever we are each one of us aspires to act as the
servant of the people.

We would like to see that this has indeed been done. While we are aware
that the department is addressing all the problems within the department in
its turnaround strategy holistically, we do not want these sites that we
visited to be neglected when improvements are made.
Ngqonqgoshe, ngiyabonga kakhulu ukuzwa ukuthi umnyango wakho uphokophelele
ekulungisweni kwazo zonke lezi zinkinga enibhekene nazo. Ngalokho kuzo zuza
wonke umphakathi walapha eNingizimu Afrika.

Ozakwethu sebekhulumile maqondana ne-Government Printing Works.(Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Minister, I am grateful to hear that your department is aiming at
correcting all these problems that you are faced with. By doing that the
whole South African community will benefit.

My colleagues have already spoken about the Government Printing Works.]

We as the ANC needs to express our concern with how this entity has been
managed within the Department of Home Affairs in the past. It almost seems
as though it is an afterthought to the department, and as a result it has
been neglected rather badly.

We know that this entity assists public representatives with our Government
Gazettes, among others, at all levels of government. We also know that in
2004-05 to 2006-07, according to the strategic plan, as critical
intervention area 10, the Government Printing Works was supposed to have
urgent critical posts filled by 1 September 2004.

That is the other challenge faced by the department, also mentioned by
previous speakers. The Auditor-General’s report for 2003-04 outlines a
38,7% vacancy rate.  These vacancies include lower-skilled posts at 37%,
skilled posts at 44,5%, highly-skilled posts at 32,5%, highly-skilled
supervision posts at 45,5% and senior   management posts at 33,3%. We as
the ANC know that without a full staff complement it becomes impossible for
the Government Printing Works to fulfil any of its functions effectively
and efficiently.  We hope that before the next Auditor-General’s report we
would have filled these important posts.

Another challenge within the Government Printing Works is the management
and control of its finances. It would appear that there are no proper
checks and balances in place, with debts being collected and creditors
being paid.

During the 2003-04 auditor’s review, the Auditor-General’s office noted the
debtor’s balance amounted to approximately R137 million and the management
did not charge interest on debts owed to the Government Printing Works,
because they could not reliably determine the aging of debtors.

Such a statement from the Auditor-General is an embarrassment to the
department and needs to be sorted out immediately, especially since the
Government Printing Works has been given a real increase of 1,4% in its
budget allocation this current year. Hon member Thetjeng, if I may respond
to you, on the Government Printing Works, it is going to be sorted out
soon.

Coming to the Independent Electoral Commission, the IEC becomes the most
important entity with the government every time we are faced with
elections. The entity has proved itself ready for the task of ensuring a
free and fair election. Indeed we are unique on the African continent for
having elections frequently and incident free.  We as ANC-led government
are very proud of this phenomenon.

Since we are approaching local government elections shortly, it becomes
important that we budget appropriately. We are therefore pleased to note
that the IEC has been allocated 63,6% real increase from last year. We are
confident that this increase will be sufficient to run a free and fair
local government election. I do hope, and I am confident enough to believe,
that the budget allocated to the department will be aligned with achieving
the broad government objectives. It is pointless for us to continue
lamenting like the member of the DA, Thetjeng, complaining and not coming
up with concrete proposals for assisting the department.

You are a public representative. It is important to assist where necessary
and stop lamenting. I am sure you know the channels for lodging complaints.
I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I want to start by thanking all
hon members for the constructive debate we have just been engaged in. I
think it was good – very constructive and very informative for me and I
believe for the officials - because we were not aware of some of the issues
raised by hon members. I am particularly interested in the issue that was
raised regarding officials who are able to transfer money and make payments
to companies without proper authorisation or without those companies having
rendered services to the department. I would really be interested in
getting more information about it so that we can do what is necessary and
investigate it. Some of the information which you have at your disposal we,
as the department, do not have at times, and therefore the best route to
take would be for you to provide us with the relevant information so that
we can investigate it.

Once again, thank you very much, hon members, for the issues you have
raised in your debate. I will not respond to all the issues that have been
raised, but I will respond to issues which really require of me to give
some explanations such as the first issue of concern, which was raised by
almost all the speakers, namely the issue of long queues. This is a problem
we will have to live with for a long time in this country. It really is a
matter which is beyond our control. It has to do with our history and the
way our offices were structured.

The majority of our people, particularly those in the rural areas, did not
have this service in areas which were accessible to them. You would have
the offices of the Department of Home Affairs located in far-flung areas in
your cities and towns, and then people from the rural areas were expected
to get into buses and taxis to reach these offices in order for them to
access these services. Therefore, what we are trying to do right now is to
have mobile units as service points. Admittedly these are still
provisional. This is what we are trying to put in place really to deal with
the backlog that we have as the Department of Home Affairs. It is a
backlog.

However, we cannot say that this is adequate. It is far from being
adequate. It is impossible to say that and then to make a promise or give
an undertaking here that every village will have a service point. But what
we can say is that every village will have a mobile unit that will reach
that village, even if it is once or twice every fortnight. Let me say that.
We can give the undertaking that there will be a mobile unit that will
reach the villages.

Meanwhile, what will happen? People will still need those services. They
will need to access an office of the Department of Home Affairs, and they
may not want to wait for a mobile unit, which would probably reach their
area in 10 days’ time. They will need a service to be rendered to them.
Therefore, they will still have to go to the nearest service point, and
thus we will still have this problem of long queues at the Department of
Home Affairs. They may not be as long as they have been, but we are still
going to live with this problem.

This is a reality that we need to explain to our people. We are trying to
do our best, we are trying to bring the services closer to our people, and
we are trying to reach as many corners of our country as possible. However,
we are still going to live with this legacy of apartheid; with this backlog
of the Department of Home Affairs. It is a reality.

Secondly, there is the issue of flexihours. I think it is a good thing that
we have these flexihours, but we also have people working beyond four
o’clock. You must do the oversight, hon members. I will not know, where I
am, that my officials are closing the offices between one and two o’clock.
So, I am glad that you raised this, because this has come to an end.

There is a directive that the offices of the Department of Home Affairs
should not be closed between one and two o’clock. People must stagger their
lunchtimes so that you do not have to close the offices of the Department
of Home Affairs. This will allow people who are at work to access these
services during their lunch times. That is the directive that is out there.
But I rely on the officials to implement this. We can issue the directive
with the director-general. But who should monitor the implementation? You,
the public representatives, in order to give us feedback so that we know
whether the directives which we issued to our officials are in fact being
complied with.

The last concern about the issue of flexihours is this challenge of
weekends, because we are now open on Saturdays from the morning until one
o’clock. We will not know if our offices do open on Saturdays, unless you
do your oversight work by informing us whether the office on your corner or
in your constituency does open.

If it does open, good; if it does not open, what do you do? You take the
officials to task, because you have the information and you know what the
directive is. It is part of your oversight work as public representatives,
not as members of the select committee. You do not have to be a member of
the select committee of the Department of Home Affairs; as public
representatives it is our responsibility – all of us – to ensure that,
because of the problems, we exercise this oversight role of ensuring that
people do the right thing.

As far as the Government Printing Works is concerned, we all know it has
had major problems for many years, but what has been the major problem of
the GPW is that provinces – our own provinces - which have been benefiting
from the GPW by having their own stationery and any other service rendered
by the GPW, have not been paying.

For instance, we have had outstanding debt of R134 million. Right now, at
least, we have been able to recover R86 million. I am not convinced that we
will be able to recover everything that is owed to the GPW, but we have at
least been able to get R86 million. However, we are owed R134 million. By
whom? In the main by government departments, in particular, of the
provinces. That’s the first thing I want to say.

The second problem we have of course has been the management of the
Government Printing Works. And, hon members are aware that the GPW is right
now going through a process of corporatisation, which we have been talking
about for many years. However, deciding on which route to take has been a
challenge that we have been faced with. For a long time it has been
difficult to agree on which route to take in terms of the GPW. Right now,
we have just appointed a CEO and that CEO has been given exactly 12 months
to take us through the process of the corporatisation of the GPW.

At the same time there is also another process that is running parallel to
that process simultaneously, and that is a forensic audit of the GPW,
because we have been receiving qualified statements from the Auditor-
General. We have never had a forensic audit of the GPW and right now we
have an ongoing forensic audit so that we can understand what exactly the
nature of the problem at the GPW is.

The last issue I would like to respond to is the issue of the
centralisation even of minor functions. You are right, hon members, but it
is not as though there is nothing that is being done about this. We are
trying to do something about this. You’re probably aware that we’re the
only department, I don’t know about the others - I stand corrected – where
all our provincial managers have been at director level. And now we have
taken the decision to ensure that people who are running our provincial
offices, our provincial heads, are at the level of chief director.

In this way you entrust a lot of responsibility to them. Yes, you entrust a
lot of responsibility and you are actually able to devolve some of the
functions to them. That is besides the trivial matters that have been
raised. Such trivial issues refer to, when among others, ablution
facilities are blocked they have to go to head office, when they need
toilet paper they have to go to head office, and when they need glue they
have to go to head office. I am talking about very serious matters relating
to actual services that must be rendered to people.

However, you do have these kinds of very trivial, minor functions. Small
things like when they have to buy something they have to contact to the
CFO, the head office, and make a requisition, and then we must sanction it
from there. When they need a plumber they must contact head office and we
must follow up with them on who the plumber in that vicinity is, and they
will inform us who the plumber is. Then they have to go through all these
processes, and, probably a month or two later, we will have that particular
tap fixed.

These are all the small things we are trying to deal with at the
department. However, our strength lies in the fact that we have recognised
and identified the problem, and we recognise that it is creating major
problems. For example, you may go to our offices and find that people are
unable to move on because there is no paper. The photocopier is broken, and
it cannot be repaired because they are waiting for head office to do that.
In the process it delays the work, and they cannot render the services they
need to render.

So we are trying to deal with all these matters so that we can make it
possible for people to fulfil their responsibilities in the province.

The very last issue is that which have been raised by the hon members about
Ga-Rankuwa and Mabopane; you visited these two offices and you identified
very serious problems of, for instance, inaccessibility for people living
with disabilities. I want to be honest and admit that this is one of the
shortcomings of the mobile units that we have just built. We have
identified a serious shortcoming in building the mobile units we actually
built mobile units that are inaccessible for people living with a
disability.

Then again, these were the first of their kind. The kind of mobile units
that we have delivered are the first of their kind. This was a learning
curve for us. We want to promise South Africa, our people, that with the
next batch of mobile units that we will deliver, we will ensure that we
take into consideration the fact that people with disabilities must be able
to enter the mobile unit, so that when you render the service you do not
have to do it outside in public. As it is, it is a mobile unit that
requires them to go upstairs, and this is going to create a bit of a
problem. When we were unveiling these mobile units we actually had to make
a statement to the country acknowledging that we have identified this
shortcoming and that it will be rectified.

Then, regarding Lindela, the hon member raised the issue of people with
dark skins being the ones who are found at Lindela, and they are at times
South Africans. It is true. I know this, even from my own family. I have
children who are very dark, and some who are very light-skinned. I always
have to remind my eldest son to carry his ID whenever he goes out. Yes,
because he always hits a problem with the police at the gate when he comes
home and at times there is a new policeman and then the policeman wants to
know who he is. And, when he tells them: “I stay here, I live here”, the
policeman does not believe him. They do not associate the boy with us, you
know, because he is very dark.

This has to do with the past. It has to do with our past and our own
socialisation, our own orientation, our own indoctrination, and all that go
with it. Our mindset is, when our immigration officers and policemen talk
about illegal immigrants, that an illegal immigrant can only be a person
with a dark skin. It cannot be me, it cannot be a light-skinned person, and
it cannot be a white person.

As a result, when you visit Lindela, indeed, you hardly find people with
light skins as they raid target areas that are flooded with people from the
African continent. It is a terrible embarrassment to us. It shows the
indoctrination which has been there all along, and these are some of the
ills of the past that we have to deal with. And, it is going to take time
for us to deal with this blockage  people still have in their minds.

I am not justifying their conduct. I cannot justify their conduct. I am
saying that we have to preach this every day - that an illegal immigrant is
not a dark-skinned person walking down the road; you have to preach this
all the time. Therefore, we have put systems in place in Lindela so that
when people come in for admission, when they are booked in, you will be
able to verify immediately whether these people are in fact illegals or
not.

So, we do have an IT system and we have a system now that operates 24
hours, so that you do not have to have people sleeping in cells at Hillbrow
police station. As soon as people are arrested they are sent through
immediately, and they are booked in immediately. Also, in the past you
would have a train that would travel to these countries once every
fortnight or once a month. We now have weekly trains that deport them to
their various countries. So we do not have people staying for long periods;
after all, their only crime is that of being economic migrants. There is no
crime that they have committed other than that. We should also be careful
not to be seen as being xenophobic in the manner in which we deal with this
particular issue.

I also, need to emphasise the issue of women at Lindela. There is a clear
directive that we issued about women. I do not want women to stay for two
days, if I could have things my way. You will find that some of the women
who are booked in at Lindela are pregnant, or some of these women have
children. We therefore want to avoid a situation where you have women with
babies or with children being booked in at Lindela.

Nonetheless, they are also illegal immigrants. So we have to find a place
to keep them before they are deported to their countries. We still book
them in, but they receive first priority, the first train or bus, or
whatever form of transport is available, so that we take them out and do
not keep them at the centre for any longer than three nights.

We have improved our systems at Lindela. In fact, you will find that since
we have opened up Lindela to the media and to some of these organisations
that have been writing all sorts of gory stories about what is happening
behind closed doors at Lindela, there is hardly anything to find, because
we have now demystified Lindela. We have opened the doors and we are
saying, come and interview the people, come and talk to the people. Talk to
the people about what they eat and how they are treated at Lindela. Now
that we have opened the doors there is hardly anything to read about in the
papers, because there is nothing juicy to write about what is happening at
Lindela. Thank you very much, once more, Chairperson, for this good debate.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 16:55.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Translation of Bills submitted

     (1)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


            i) Wetsontwerp op die Herbepaling van Grense van
               Oorgrensmunisipaliteite [W
            12 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Re-
         determination of the Boundaries of Cross-Boundary Municipalities
         Bill [B 12 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      General Report of the Auditor-General on Provincial Audit Outcomes
    for 2003-2004 [RP 42-2005].

2.    The Minister of Transport

      (a)   Accession to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
         Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation and to the Protocol
         for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed
         Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf, tabled in terms of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

      (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Accession to the Convention for
         the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime
         Navigation and to the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
         against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental
         Shelf.

      (c)   Bilateral Air Service Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Great Socialist People’s Libyan
         Arab Jamahiriya for Scheduled Air Services Between their
         Territories and Beyond, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of senior
         magistrate Mr M J S Nhleko.

      (b)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of magistrate
         Mr R Ameer.

      (c)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of magistrate
         Mr M K Chauke.

      (d)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of magistrate
         Mr M S Makamu.


