---
title: 'National Assembly - 23 August 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-08-23
---

TUESDAY, 23 AUGUST 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:06.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.




                       WELCOMING OF SWAZILAND SPEAKER


The SPEAKER: Hon members, before we start I would like to welcome the hon
the Speaker of Swaziland, Speaker Sgayoyo Magongo, and his delegation.
[Applause.]

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancy caused by the resignation from the
National Assembly of Mr R K Henderson has been filled by the nomination of
Ms S J Loe with effect from 17 August 2005.
                                    OATH
Ms S J Loe, accompanied by Mr D K Maluleke and Ms S V Kalyan made and
subscribed the oath, and took her seat. [Applause.]


                        LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS


                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, before we proceed with today’s business I
wish to make the following announcements.

The President has informed me that he has appointed the Deputy President as
Leader of Government Business in the National Assembly with effect from 28
June 2005 thereby replacing the hon Mr Charles Nqakula who was appointed on
15 June 2005. [Applause.]

 APPOINTMENT OF PARLIAMENTARY COUNSELLOR TO THE PRESIDENT AND PARLIAMENTARY
                     COUNSELLOR TO THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: In terms of Rule 319 I have, with effect from 18 August,
designated Mr J H Jeffrey, formerly counsellor to the Deputy President, as
Parliamentary Counsellor to the President and Ms S D Motubatse-Hounkpatin
as Parliamentary Counsellor to the Deputy President. I wish to congratulate
the hon members. [Applause.]
I do not know if the hon members in the House know these two hon members
and I would like them to rise. I request the hon members to rise.


                                 NEW MEMBER


                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Mr H B Cupido has been nominated on 1 August 2005 to fill the
vacancy caused by the resignation of Mr K D S Durr. Mr Cupido has made the
solemn affirmation in my office.

Hon Cupido, hon members would like to see you. Welcome.




                              NOTICE OF MOTION


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I hereby give  notice  that
I intend moving the following motion:

   That the House -

        (1) notes that President Robert Mugabe has refused to accept a loan
        of $5 billion from the South African government; and


   (2)      therefore -


          a) expresses its gratitude and delight;


          b) (b) urges the government to abide by President Mugabe’s
             decision and not to insist that he should take our money;
             and


          c) debates the matter urgently.


[Applause.]





                       CONDOLENCES TO THE TINTO FAMILY


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Ndiphakamisa ngaphandle kokunika isaziso:

   Ukuba le Ndlu –

   (1)      iqaphele ngosizi novelwano ukushiywa kwethu nguBawo uFihla
         Christmas Tinto, abaninzi bethu ebebemazi njengo “Com T”;


   (2)      ikhumbule ukuba uBawo uTinto walulwa ngokuzinikezela
         nangokuzincama ucalucalulo nengcinezelo kweli lizwe


   (3)      ikhumbule nokuba uBawo uTinto namanye amagqala omZabalazo
         basebenza kakhulu ukumisela umbutho weUnited Democratic Front
         ngowe-1983, emva komsebenzi omkhulu ababewenzela umbutho wesizwe i-
         ANC noMkhonto weSizwe, kwanokuba bathabatha inxaxheba
         emzabalazweni wokukhulula eli lizwe lakowethu;


   (4)      ikhumbule ukuba ngowe-1994, uBawo uTinto wayelilungu lale
         Palamente, ephaya kwiNdlu yeeNgwevu, waza ngowe-1997 wabalilungu
         eNdlu yoWiso-mthetho yePhondo yase eNtshona Koloni;


   (5)      ikholelwe ekubeni ubomi beqhawe nompondozihlanjiwe wenkokeli
         enjengale, bubonisa ngokumhlophe ukuzinikezela kwamalungu ombutho
         wesizwe i-ANC ekudaleni intlalontle kwilizwe liphela; yaye


   (6)      idlulise uvelwano olunzulu kusapho lwakhe nakwinkosikazi yakhe,
         ilungu elibekekileyo umama uBulelwa Tinto, abantwana, izalamane,
         nalo lonke usapho lwakwaNyawuza, ingabalibali oogxa bakhe
         awayesebenza nabo kwimibutho yabasebenzi nakumbutho wesizwe i-ANC,
         ithi: “Phumla ngoxolo, Nyawuza, Ngqungqushe, Matshob’endlovu.”
         Hamba kakuhle, Mkhonto!
(Translation of Xhosa draft resolution follows.)

[I move without notice:


   That the House –


   (1)      notes with sadness the passing on of Mr Fihla Christmas Tinto,
         known by many as “Com T”;


   (2)      recalls that Mr Tinto fought tirelessly and wholeheartedly
         against apartheid and oppression in this country;


   (3)      remembers that Mr Tinto and other veterans worked very hard to
         establish the United Democratic Front in 1983, after working hard
         for the ANC and the Spear of the Nation, and the fact that they
         played a role in the fighting for our country;


   (4)      also remembers that Mr Tinto was a member of the NCOP  in  1994,
         and subsequently  1997  became  a  member  of   the  Western  Cape
         Provincial Legislature in 1997;


   (5)      believes that the life of a hero and a well-versed leader
         clearly shows the commitment of the members of the ANC in creating
         a better life for all in the whole country; and


   (6)      conveys its heartfelt condolences to his family, his wife, hon
         member Mrs Bulelwa Tinto, his children, relatives and Nyawuza
         family at large and, not forgetting his colleagues in workers’
         unions and the ANC, we say: “Rest in peace, Nyawuza, Ngqungqushe,
         Matshob’endlovu”. Farewell, Spear of the Nation!]


The SPEAKER: I believe that by arrangement by the Whips those hon members
who would like to have an opportunity to say something for a minute. Hon
Gibson!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Madam Speaker, on behalf of the DA I
wish to extend very sincere condolences to the family, the loved ones, the
friends and the political party of the late Mr Christmas Tinto.

His is a famous name. It is a catchy name; one that is easy to remember,
but also a famous name in politics in South Africa because of what he did
in helping to move our country from apartheid oppression to democracy and
the contribution which he made will not easily be forgotten. We honour his
memory. [Applause.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Somlomo neNdlu ehloniphekile, egameni leqembu leNkatha
yeNkululeko sidlulisela ukukhala kwethu okokuqala emndenini wakwamfowethu
uChristmas Tinto, eqenjini likaKhongolose, emndenini wonke, kunkosikazi
uBulelwa nakuzo zonke izihlobo nabangane.

Kuyazeka ukuthi umfowethu uTinto abanye bebethi ubenguthisha kothisha,
enokubekezela, enomoya ophansi amukela bonke abantu futhi enesineke.
Abamazi kahle bebethi ukuhola kwakhe bekungukuhola okuhlakaniphile
nokwamukelekayo kubo bonke abangamalungu angaphansi kwakhe namkhethileyo.

Thina beNkatha yeNkululeko sikhalisana nani nina bakaKhongolose
ngokudlulelwa yiqhawe nomholi wenu. Sengathi iNkosi ingamsiza angene
ezulwini. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker and hon members, on behalf of the Inkatha
Freedom Party we would like to extend our condolences, firstly to the
immediate family of our brother Christmas Tinto, to the African National
Congress, the whole family, his wife Bulelwa and all friends and relatives.

It is well known that others used to call our brother Tinto a teacher
amongst the teachers. He had a passion for people, was humble, receptive of
all people and considerate. Those who knew him well used to say that his
leadership was a wise leadership, accepted by all who were under his
leadership and who had elected him.

We, the Inkatha Freedom Party, sympathise with you, the African National
Congress, for losing your hero and a leader. May God help him reach his
haven. Thank you.]

Mr A HARDING: Madam Speaker, it is with great sadness and regret that the
Independent Democrats received the news of the passing away of Mr Christmas
Tinto, a well-known ANC leader and anti-apartheid activist.

His invaluable contribution will remain with us always. His role in
recruiting young people to join the struggle is well known and he was like
a father to many of the young lions. He was humble and well liked by all
the cadres because of his pleasant disposition. He will be remembered as a
man of great wisdom and a natural leader. The Independent Democrats wish to
extend their condolences to his wife, Bulelwa, his children, his
grandchildren his great-grandchildren and the ANC. I thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Mevrou die Speaker, dit is met leedwese dat kennis geneem
word van die heengaan van Christmas Tinto op 14 Augustus. [Madam Speaker,
the death of Christmas Tinto on 14 August is noted with regret.]

He was born on Christmas Day in 1925 near Transkei and joined the ANC in
1951. Better known on the Cape Flats as Comrade T, Tinto played a key role
in the defiance campaigns in the Western Cape during the early 1950s.

In recognition of his fearless anti-apartheid leadership and for his
contribution to the democratic government the Order of Luthuli was
conferred on him by President Mbeki earlier this year. Today we bid
farewell to a hero whose commitment, discipline and passion were an
inspiration to all his comrades. I wish to express our deepest condolences
to his family and his loved ones. I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, the ACDP conveys its condolences to the
family, friends and colleagues of Mr Christmas Tinto. We pay tribute to him
for his struggle against apartheid and for nonracialism.

The late Christmas Tinto was a brave and almost fearless man. He is
remembered for maintaining a positive attitude in the face of much
adversity. Not even lengthy periods of incarceration could deter him from
his cause. Mr Tinto was widely praised when he was awarded the Order of
Luthuli for the role he played in the transition to democracy.

The ACDP acknowledges the significant contribution made by Mr Tinto and
wishes his family strength and comfort during this time of bereavement. Our
prayers are with the family in their time of bereavement. I thank you.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker and hon members, the UDM joins the House in
paying tribute to the late Mr Fihla Christmas Tinto. We extend our
heartfelt condolences to his family and friends during this time of
bereavement. He will be remembered particularly for his active role in the
establishment of the UDF.

By all accounts, he was not only a leader who walked at the front but also
a unifier. Even in his personal life his family has attested to the fact
that he possessed a unique humaneness that always sought to bring people
together no matter how far removed they may have been physically or
otherwise.

It is always sad to bid farewell to members of the liberation struggle who
went on to become leading role-players in the Houses of Parliament. As with
those who have gone before him, we can at least find consolation in the
fact that Mr Tinto lived a full life and left a lasting legacy in pursuit
of democracy and freedom.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Azapo learned with shock and sadness of the untimely
death of Comrade Christmas Tinto. Azapo knew him when many Azapo members
were in gaol on Robben Island with him and he was indeed an inspiration in
the fight against apartheid. We wish to join the ANC and all comrades
within the alliance in celebrating the life of a true patriot, comrade in
arms and indeed a dedicated fighter who spent most of his adult life in the
struggle for freedom. Azapo expresses its condolences to the Tinto family
and relatives. May his soul rest in peace. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, it is sad when one struggled for one’s
country and achieved freedom and then one is not here to enjoy it. The MF
associates itself with the House and expresses its heartfelt condolence to
Mr Fihla Christmas Tinto’s family and says: Hamba kahle, we are going to
miss you. May you rest in peace. Thank you very much.

Dr C P MULDER: Geagte Mevrou die Speaker, die VF Plus wil hom graag
vereenselwig met die mosie, gestel deur die agb Hoofsweep, waarin hy hulde
betuig het teenoor Mr Tinto wat afgesterf het. Ons vereenselwig ons
daarmee, ook met ander uitsprake gemaak deur ander lede van die Raad, en
wil ook graag ons simpatie en meelewing oordra aan sy familie en sy ander
naasbestaandes. Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, the FF Plus would like to associate itself
with the motion moved by the hon Chief Whip, in which he pays tribute to
the late Mr Tinto. We associate ourselves with this statement and endorse
the remarks made by other members of the House. We would also like to
convey our sympathy and condolences to his family and next of kin. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Speaker, the PAC wants to join the House and the other
speakers in expressing our deepest condolences to the Tinto family and our
solidarity with the motion on the occasion of his passing away.

As we mourn his passing away and celebrate his life we remember that
Comrade Tinto belonged to a generation whose contribution, whose
fearlessness and whose optimism during the dark years of apartheid
propelled and gave hope that democracy was going to prevail at the end of
the day.

Comrade Tinto, unlike some of his comrades, lived to see the dawn of
liberation and was able to make a contribution in the transformation of our
country and we want to believe that as we continue with the process of
democratising and transforming our country his legacy will continue to
inspire and guide us all. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I think it is obvious that there are no objections to the
motion and I would take this opportunity to add the heartfelt condolences
of both the Deputy Speaker and myself and we will accordingly convey the
condolences of the House to the Tinto family.

Debate concluded.
Motion agreed to.


    CONGRATULATIONS TO SPRINGBOK RUGBY TEAM ON BEATING AUSTRALIA AND BEST
                WISHES FOR UPCOMING MATCH AGAINST ALL BLACKS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D K MALULEKE: Madam Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House -


    1) congratulates the Springbok rugby team on their victory against
       Australia in Perth in the Tri-nations Competition on Saturday;

    2) notes that this victory is the first away win against a major rugby
       nation in seven years;

    3) commends the team for the great maturity and commitment it has shown
       on the field; and

    4) wishes the team and coaching staff well and every success for the
       crucial clash against the All Blacks in Dunedin this coming Saturday.

Agreed to.


                      DEATH OF VICE PRESIDENT OF SUDAN


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -


     1) notes the great tragedy that befell the people of Sudan when, on 30
        July 2005, a Ugandan presidential helicopter carrying Dr John
        Garang de Mabior, Vice President of Sudan, crashed, killing him and
        others;

     2) recalls that Dr Garang de Mabior led the Sudan People’s Liberation
        Movement and Army for more than 20 years and that in January this
        year the SPLM and the Government of Sudan signed a comprehensive
        peace agreement;

     3) further recalls that on 9 July 2005, Dr Garang de Mabior was sworn
        in as the first Vice President of a peaceful Sudan and that Dr
        Garang was committed to the unification of Sudan and peace among
        its people;

     4) expresses its commitment to helping the people of Sudan in their
        continuing effort to realise peace, development and prosperity in
        their country; and

     5) conveys its heartfelt condolences to the Garang family, the SPLM,
        the Sudanese government and the Sudanese people at this tragic and
        untimely loss.

   Agreed to.







              CELEBRATION OF 130-YEAR ANNIVERSARY OF AFRIKAANS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Die HOOFSWEEP VAN DIE MEERDERHEIDSPARTY (ANC): Mevrou die Speaker, die ANC
wil graag sy gelukwense oordra aan die Afrikaanse taalgemeenskap in ons
land met die 130-jarige viering van Afrikaans as taal. Die ontwikkeling van
Afrikaans die afgelope 130 jaar tot ’n volwaardige wetenskaplike taal
behoort as inspirasie te dien vir die ontwikkeling in Suid-Afrika van ander
inheemse tale. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Inderdaad is Afrikaans een van slegs vier tale wat in die 20ste eeu tot ’n
wetenskaps-, literêre en handelstaal kon ontwikkel. Die ANC is ook dankbaar
dat Afrikaans die afgelope dekade die stigma van onderdrukkerstaal kon
afwerp en in die volksmond kon ontwikkel tot algemene spreektaal van ’n
snel groeiende Afrikaanse taalgemeenskap. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die ANC verbind
hom opnuut tot pogings om Afrikaans, net soos ander inheemse tale, te
beskerm en te bevorder. Hartlik dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC would
like to convey their congratulations to the Afrikaans language community in
our country on the 130-year celebration of Afrikaans as a language. The
development of Afrikaans over the past 130 years into a full-fledged
scientific language should serve as an inspiration for the development of
other indigenous languages in South Africa. [Interjections.]

In fact, Afrikaans is one of only four languages that could develop into a
scientific, literary and commercial language in the 20th century. The ANC
is also grateful that Afrikaans could, in the past decade, shed the stigma
of being the language of the oppressor and in popular usage could develop
into the colloquial language of a rapidly expanding Afrikaans language
community. [Interjections.] The ANC recommits itself to efforts to protect
and promote Afrikaans, as is the case with other indigenous languages.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]]




                     THE SO-CALLED ZUMA CAMP IN THE ANC


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Speaker, the so-called Zuma camp in the ANC,
which includes Cosatu, the Young Communists and the feckless ANC Youth
League, persist in demonstrating, at best, a profound ignorance of the law
and our Constitution, and, at worst, a cynical disrespect for the rule of
law and our legal institutions.

Their rabid, ill-considered statements in support of the man they regard as
their leader, ex-Deputy President Jacob Zuma, attacking the Scorpions, the
National Prosecuting Authority and the judiciary, are doing damage to the
ANC’s image as an organisation committed to the rule of law.

The Zuma camp seems to believe that there is one law for poor, ordinary
folk and another for the politically powerful. In other words, they see
themselves as above the law. If they reflect the view of their hero – and
he has not contradicted them publicly – then God help South Africa if he
should ever become the President. [Interjections.] It would mean the end of
constitutionalism and the end of good governance and the rule of law, and
would ensure that our country became part of the African basket-case
scenario. The ANC should not pussyfoot around these constitutional
terrorists.

Contrary to what the Zuma camp claim, in terms of the National Prosecuting
Authority Act the Scorpions had every right to enter Mr Zuma’s house and
offices and those of his associates and advisers as they were in possession
of a valid search warrant.

There are specific provisions to protect privileged information, but any
attorney-client privilege is not an unlimited right, and attorneys’ offices
are not sacrosanct. It’s really only Mr Zuma’s statements to his attorneys
and perhaps even a confession that might be privileged. Zuma’s attorneys
were entitled to withhold documents they alleged contained privileged
information, but they failed to do so. The National Prosecuting Authority
has the final discretion to investigate and prosecute cases. Thank you.
[Applause.]


                       ISRAELI PULLOUT FROM GAZA STRIP


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Madam Speaker, this House should compliment the
Israelis and the Palestinian leaders for the courageous steps they have
taken in what is now referred to as “the Gaza pullout”, but which is, in
fact, the implementation of the subprovision of the Oslo Accord, namely the
Cairo Agreement of 4 May 1994. The civil societies should, equally, be
applauded for their co-operation in this.

This has been a long, hard and torturous road since the formation of the
state of Israel in 1948 throughout the demands of the Palestinians for an
independent homeland based on the two-state solution to accommodate both
the Arabs and the Jews. It has been a long way from the intifada in 1982,
the surging of the Palestinian uprising that could not be subdued by
military means alone, but which made political initiatives and negotiations
imperative for peace and stability.

It has been a long way from the recognition of the state of Israel by the
Palestinian National Council in November 1988 to Yitzhak Shamir’s 1989 twin-
track peace plan, the subsequent Madrid Formula and the Gaza and Jericho
Agreement, outlining the perimeters of Palestinian interim self-rule.

Oslo II, signed in Washington, the USA, on 28 September 1995, was in fact a
consolidation of past agreements and the foundation of what is popularly
known as the roadmap. It is now self-evident that the axiomatic principle
of land for peace is central to a destiny intertwined, that is peaceful
coexistence between the Israelis and the Palestinians.

Therefore, the European Union, the United States, Russia and the Republic
of South Africa ought to be commended for their positive role in this
process. I thank you. [Applause.]

                      A CALL TO UPHOLD THE RULE OF LAW

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A MLANGENI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the manner in which the Scorpions
raided certain residencies in relation to the investigation on the ANC
Deputy President refers. The sensational nature of the investigation
processes criminalises the ANC Deputy President, even before he gets a
chance to appear before a court of law.

We further condemn the statement made by Cosatu, calling on the President
to disregard the Constitution and interfere with due legal processes. The
call by Cosatu that the President should reinstate Comrade Jacob Zuma
fundamentally undermines the President’s prerogative to appoint his
Cabinet.

We call on all South Africans to uphold the rule of law as enshrined in our
Constitution. [Applause.]


                      COSATU’S LACK OF COHERENT POLICY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M STEPHENS (UDM): Madam Speaker, the UDM noted with interest the launch
yesterday of the so-called new UDF by Cosatu and assorted others. Cosatu
leaders publicly avowed their support for the ruling party and their
commitment to the ruling alliance, yet they are seeking a vehicle to oppose
major aspects of the ruling party’s policies. Are they in government or are
they in the opposition? Straddling the fence is such an undignified
position.

Cosatu obviously has a major identity crisis on hand. It represents an
important section of our society, but are they a political party or a trade
union? Do they represent any consistent political philosophy? Increasingly
the organisation has a schizophrenic approach. They lack a coherent policy
stance. Do they support the former Deputy President’s right to a trial, or
do they oppose it? Are they campaigning for the ANC in the local government
elections or are they fighting Gear? Are they part of the ruling alliance
or in opposition? They appear to want to do both.

Up to now the new UDF has not added a single new idea to the national
debate on poverty and unemployment. Admittedly, the overall noise volume is
going up but the policy content is not increasing. The UDM and other social
democrats in the opposition are already pursuing the very goals now adopted
by the new UDF. If Cosatu and their partners are really serious about
attaining those goals, they should have the honesty and the courage to give
up the comfortable spoils of government and join us in the opposition. I
thank you. [Applause.]




                          DA SUPPORT FOR DEVELOPER


                            (Member’s Statement)

Me F BATYI (ID): Mevrou die Speaker, op 18 Julie 2005 is daar ’n
gemeenskapsvergadering te Westlake, Constantia, gehou. Tydens hierdie
vergadering wou ’n ontwikkelaar, John Vivieros, die gemeenskap oorreed om
hul huise vir ’n belaglike prys van R40 000 aan hom te verkoop. Ek is in
besit van beëdigde verklarings van die gemeenskap wat weier om hul huise
aan die ontwikkelaar te verkoop. Dié stukkie waardevolle grond in
Constantia en die huise wat ons mense besit, moet beskerm word teen
ongevoelige uitbuiters onder die dekmantel van besorgdheid.

Hierdie insident bevraagteken die integriteit van  die  DA  wat  hon  daarop
roem dat hulle besorg is oor armoedeverligting  en  die  behuisingsnood  van
ons mense. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die DA-raadslid Leon van Rensburg  was  by  die
vergadering en het die ontwikkelaar gehelp om mense te oorreed om hul  huise
te verkoop. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Dit is interessant dat die ontwikkelaar terdeë bewus is dat die  uitbreiding
grens aan die nuwe Amerikaanse ambassade. Die waarde van  die  grond  alleen
beloop miljoene rande. Wat is dit anders as “daylight robbery”?  Waarom  het
hy wat ’n prokureur en raadslid is nie die mense ingelig oor  die  voor-  en
nadele en hul verantwoordelikhede om nie hul huise te verkoop nie?

Hulle wil die regerende ANC-party laat vuil lyk,  maar  nou  moet  dieselfde
mense weer gaan plak op ongedienste grond in Ottery. Mense maak oop jul  oë!
Die DA het nie verander nie. ’n Jakkals  verander  van  hare  maar  nie  van
snare nie! Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans  member’s  statement
follows.)

[Ms F BTYI (ID): Madam Speaker, on 18 July  2005  a  community  meeting  was
held  at  Westlake,  Constantia.  During  this  meeting  a  developer,  John
Vivieros, sought to convince the community to sell their houses to  him  for
the ridiculous price of R40 000. I am  in  possession  of  sworn  affidavits
from members of the community who have refused to sell their houses  to  the
developer. This valuable piece of land in Constantia  and  the  houses  that
our people own should be protected from insensitive exploiters  who  pretend
to be concerned.

This incident places a questionmark over the integrity of the DA, who boast
that they are concerned about relieving poverty and the lack of housing
among our people. [Interjections.] DA councillor Leon van Rensburg was at
the meeting and helped the developer to convince people to sell their
houses. [Interjections.]

It is interesting that the developer was well aware that the extension
borders on the new American embassy. The land alone is worth millions of
rands. What else is this but daylight robbery? Why did he, as an attorney
and councillor, not inform the people about the pros and cons and their
responsibility not to sell their houses?

They want to make the ruling ANC party look bad, but now these same people
have to go and squat on unserviced land in Ottery. People, open your eyes!
The DA has not changed. A leopard does not change its spots! Thank you.
[Applause.]]




                          MUGABE’S RULE SHOULD END





                            (Member’s Statement)


Dr P W A MULDER (VF PLUS): Mevrou die Speaker, hier word vandag sulke mooi
Afrikaans gepraat en nadat ek na die Hoofsweep geluister het, is dit vir my
duidelik dat Afrikaans baie belangrik is. Eers het die DA daarna gevry en
nou die ANC. Ons het waardering vir die mooi Afrikaans wat die Hoofsweep
vandag gepraat het.

Die VF Plus stem saam met president Mbeki, wat in verlede week se ANC Today
skryf dat die 14 SADC-lande gemeenskaplike probleme het, waarvan een
Zimbabwe is. Hierdie lande sal moet saamwerk om oplossings vir hierdie
probleme te vind. As Zimbabwe dan in duie stort, raak dit al hierdie lande
en nie net Suid-Afrika nie. Waarom word dit dan van Suid-Afrika alleen
verwag om Zimbabwe te red met ’n finansiële lening van etlike miljarde
rande?

President Mugabe is nou 25 jaar lank president van Zimbabwe en hy is ouer
as 80. As enige lening van Suid-Afrika die posisie van president Mugabe in
Zimbabwe gaan versterk of sy regering se posisie gaan versterk, sal die VF
Plus dit ten sterkste teenstaan. Dit is ongelukkig tyd vir pres Mugabe om
te gaan. Suid-Afrika kan Zimbabwe help opbou nadat mnr Mugabe gegaan het.

Die VF Plus is wel ten gunste daarvan dat maatreëls getref word om die
gewone mense van Zimbabwe wat tans baie swaar kry en onderdruk word, nou te
help. Hierdie hulp moet verkieslik geskied deur die kerke en
welsynsorganisasies ten einde te voorkom dat president Mugabe dit kan
misbruik.

Waar die Internasionale Monetêre Fonds, die Verenigde Nasies en die
Europese Unie tans druk op president Mugabe se regering plaas, moet Suid-
Afrika nie die swak skakel word deur die Mugabe-regering nou suurstof te
gee en sodoende die lyding van die mense in Zimbabwe langer uit te rek nie.
Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[De P W A MULDER (FF PLUS): Hon Madam Speaker, such beautiful Afrikaans is
being spoken here today and having listened to the Chief Whip it is clear
to me that Afrikaans is very important. First the DA was enamoured of it
and now the ANC. We appreciate the beautiful Afrikaans spoken by the Chief
Whip today.

The FF Plus agrees with President Mbeki, who wrote in last week’s ANC Today
that the 14 SADC countries have common problems, one of which is Zimbabwe.
These countries will have to co-operate to find solutions to these
problems. If Zimbabwe collapses totally, this will affect all these
countries and not only South Africa. Why then is South Africa alone
expected to rescue Zimbabwe with a financial loan of several billions of
rands?

President Mugabe has now been the president of Zimbabwe for 25 years and he
is over 80 years old. If any loan from South Africa is going to strengthen
the position of President Mugabe in Zimbabwe or strengthen the position of
his government, the FF Plus will strongly oppose it. It is unfortunately
time for President Mugabe to go. South Africa can help  build up Zimbabwe
after Mr Mugabe has left.

The FF Plus is, however, in favour of measures being taken now to help the
ordinary people of Zimbabwe, who at present are suffering greatly and are
being oppressed. This assistance must preferably be given through the
churches and welfare organisations in order to prevent President Mugabe
from abusing it.

Whereas the International Monetary Fund, the United Nations and the
European Union are at present putting pressure on President Mugabe’s
government, South Africa must not become the weak link by now resuscitating
the Mugabe government and in this way further prolonging the suffering of
the people in Zimbabwe. I thank you.]


                              HOUSING DELIVERY


                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms M M RAMAKABA-LESIEA (ANC): Thank you, Madam Speaker, fifty years ago the
Congress of the People declared in the Freedom Charter that there shall be
houses, security and comfort. The apartheid regime bequeathed to the
democratic South Africa informal housing segregated along racial lines.
Special distortions reinforce apartheid cities and confine black people to
areas with no economic opportunities.

The democratic government is turning the tide on housing delivery. The new
settlements plan seeks to promote the achievement of a nonracial,
integrated society through the development of sustainable human settlements
and quality housing. Joe Slovo is but one of the informal settlements where
by December 2005, the ANC-led government will deliver 22 000 units of
housing stock, and 8 000 units will be completed.

The transformation of informal settlements into integrated, sustainable
housing contributes to job creation. Local economic development, black
economic empowerment and special integration and the implementation of a
people’s contract to create work and fight poverty will bring a better life
for all. I thank you.




                      MONEY CHANNELED TO ANC BY IMVUME


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H ZILLE (DA): Thank you, Speaker. At the heart of the Oilgate scandal
lies the undisputed fact that R11 million of taxpayers’ money was
channelled into the ANC’s 2004 election campaign from the state company
PetroSA, by Imvume Management.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: What is wrong with that?

Ms H ZILLE: What’s wrong with that? [Interjections.] I’ll tell you what is
wrong with that. A sum of R11 million cannot simply vanish without somebody
being called to account. That is the problem. The ANC says: What is wrong
with that? It is the utmost corruption that any government can perpetrate.
[Interjections.] And yet, none of the parties involved have adequately
explained what amounts to a gross abuse of state resources for the ANC’s
political gain.

Whether it is placing loyal ANC cadres into key positions in independent
institutions, such as the Public Protector who also doesn’t see anything
wrong with it, or misusing public money for party-political purposes, the
ANC continues to place its own interests above those of ordinary South
Africans. In doing so, the ANC ignores the distinction between party and
state – and I suppose you’re going to ask: What is wrong with that? It
undermines the integrity of our Constitution’s Chapter 9-institutions.

Until the ANC repays that money and answers all outstanding questions
satisfactorily, the DA will not let this matter rest. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Speaker, on a point of order: If I heard Ms Zille correctly, she accused
the government of corruption. As far as I know, the government has not been
found guilty of corruption. It is unparliamentary and I would ask that it
be withdrawn unconditionally.

The SPEAKER: I think it is better for me to check the Hansard, hon member,
and then I will come back to the issue.




               THE ROAD BETWEEN ZEERUST AND MAFIKENG-MMABATHO


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B E PULE (UCDP): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The UCDP would like to
congratulate the North West provincial government on the improvement of the
road between Zeerust and Mafikeng-Mmabatho. The concern, however, is the
method used to construct it, because it is a recipe for more accidents, as
has happened already.

The road is approximately 80 kilometres long and two contractors are
engaged for phase 1 and phase 2 respectively. There is always a traffic jam
because of the two stops per phase, with vehicles having one pair of wheels
on the old tarred road and the other pair on the gravel road that is never
maintained, except for pouring water on corrugations. One drives for almost
two hours to cover such a short distance.

It would have been more cost-effective to make detours than to try and save
money at the expense of losing lives. An intervention by the Department of
Transport, even at this late stage, will still save some lives. Driving on
that road, especially at night, is real mayhem.

                              ISRDS IN LIMPOPO


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs T L P NWAMITWA-SHILUBANA (ANC): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ANC is
happy to note that there is remarkable progress in the Integrated
Sustainable Rural Development Strategy, launched in 1999. In 2000 President
Mbeki visited the Sekukhune Area in Limpopo, this area was included in the
ISRDS and he declared it a presidential nodal point.

The rural area of Sekukhune in Limpopo, like many other rural areas of our
country, was neglected by the past racist government. Since then, a total
of R355 million was spent to supply water and a total of R12,8 million was
spent on the supply of electricity. Klara Sekwathi who has lived in Mamone
village outside Jane Furse for more than four decades says, “Sekukhune used
to be a very poor area with only teachers and nurses able to find
employment. Today Sekukhune has been put on an improved path for
sustainable development.”

The ANC commends the initiatives taken by our government to extend the
fight against poverty and unemployment to rural areas and other poverty-
stricken communities. I thank you. [Applause.]




                    DISMAL PERFORMANCE OF MUNICIPALITIES


                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Madam Speaker, the ANC has dismally failed in its
governance of municipalities. Communities all over the country have
realised that they were misled by empty promises and violent protests have
engulfed many municipalities. Evaluated on performance, I do not know of
one ANC-governed municipality where the ANC deserves a second term.
[Interjections.] On the other hand, the DA municipalities such as Nokeng,
Satemane, George and Cape Agulhas are shining examples of how
municipalities should be run.

The government itself admits that 136 out of 284 municipalities need to be
rescued. A staggering amount of R32 billion is owed to municipalities in
outstanding rates and taxes. This figure has doubled since 2000 as a result
of the ANC’s lack of political will. Many ANC-appointed municipal managers
do not have the necessary qualifications but are awarded salaries
approaching the million rand mark.

Nog erger as die swak administrasie is die nepotisme en korrupsie wat
feitlik in elke munisipaliteit aanwesig is. In Kaapstad het die ANC-
burgemeester Mfeketo net nou die dag die beheer oorgeneem en haar broer is
al reeds aangestel as die adjunkhoof van die munisipale polisie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Soos die ANC aangaan, sal familiegeskiedenis in die
toekoms deur munisipale aanstellings nagevors kan word.

Wat korrupsie betref, is daar ondersoeke hangende in feitlik elke
munisipaliteit wat deur die ANC beheer word. In Bloemfontein is die
burgemeester van die Mangaung-munisipaliteit verlede maand saam met sy vrou
en vier ander beamptes in hegtenis geneem en van diefstal, bedrog en
korrupsie aangekla. Meer as R100 miljoen van die belastingbetaler se geld
is daarby betrokke.

Daarom, geagte Speaker, vereenselwig ek my met wat mnr Tony Leon gister
gesê het: Ons sal net slaag as ons die behoefte aan regstellende aksie
opweeg teen die meer basiese en grondliggende behoefte aan bevoegdheid en
doeltreffendheid in plaaslike regering. Ons moet mislukkings straf en
prestasie beloon. Bowenal, ons moet die mense voorop stel, en dit is wat
die DA doen. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Nepotism and corruption, which are present in virtually every
municipality, are even worse than the poor administration. In Cape Town ANC
mayor Mfeketo took over just the other day and already her brother has been
appointed as the deputy chief of the municipal police. [Interjections.] The
way the ANC is carrying on, in future it will be possible to trace family
lineage by way of municipal appointments.

With regard to corruption, there are investigations pending in virtually
every municipality that is controlled by the ANC. Last month the mayor of
Mangaung in Bloemfontein, his wife and four other officials were arrested
and charged with theft, fraud and corruption. More than R100 million in
taxpayers’ money is involved here.

Therefore, hon Speaker, I agree with what Mr Tony Leon said yesterday: We
will only succeed if the need for affirmative action is weighed against the
more basic and fundamental need for competency and efficiency in local
government. We must punish failures and reward accomplishments. Above all,
we must put the people first and this is what the DA is doing. [Applause.]]

                   DISTRICT EDUCATION AND SERVICE DELIVERY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Madam Speaker, the IFP is concerned that the
provision of education remains and continues to be the weakest at district
level in spite of the department’s undertaking two years ago to turn our
districts into sites of delivery.

In some districts, particularly in the Eastern Cape, officials have to
contend with makeshift buildings. At this level, inspectors of schools do
not have decision-making powers except for the powers of a messenger. Hence
the system cannot deal effectively with the question of temporary teachers.

In some instances it takes more than three months to pay teachers, again
because of disorganisation at this level. Again, we urge the Minister to
take urgent steps to ensure that districts become accountable sites of
delivery. I thank you.

                     MANAGEMENT OF ECONOMY BY GOVERNMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S E ASIYA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC welcomes the decision taken by
hon President Mbeki to form a task team to investigate ways to accelerate
economic growth, generate more jobs and reduce poverty and
underdevelopment. The task team will be led by the hon Deputy President of
the Republic of South Africa, Comrade Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka.

We applaud the progress made by the ANC government in managing the economy.
These efforts have not gone unnoticed. Recently the Centre for Policy
Studies reported in a special edition, and I quote:


   South Africa’s macroeconomic success over the past decade has been
   considerable and unprecedented by global standards.


The Deputy Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, Ms Anne O
Krueger, said of our country, and I quote:

   These achievements are remarkable; all the more so given that this
   economic progress has been made during a period of unprecedented
   political and social transformation.

The setting up of the task team should ensure that the nation goes beyond
these remarkable achievements with the specific objective of including in
the economic prosperity more South Africans, especially blacks, women, the
youth and other marginalised sections of our nation.

We wish the hon Deputy President and her team success in its work to ensure
a growing economy that benefits all South Africans. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Before we move on to ministerial responses, I just want to
point out to hon members that they should not exceed the time allocated for
their statements. I have been as generous as I could be, but next time I
won’t be so generous. Members have taken between 30 and 50 seconds beyond
the time they are supposed to take. So please, hon members, when you plan
your statements, do budget according to the time allocated and agreed.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: On a point of order, before that,
Madam Speaker: When the Minister of Finance entered the House, I saw him
kiss the Minister of Correctional Services. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Is that a point of order or a point of observation?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: On enquiry, I was informed that it is
the birthday of the Minister of Correctional Services. I would like you to
rule whether it is parliamentary for Ministers to kiss each other in the
House. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, may I address you on that
point of order, because today also happens to be the birthday of the shadow
minister of correctional services. [Laughter.] I haven’t kissed him yet,
but I will now, if you’d like.

The SPEAKER: Maybe, from the Chair, I should take the opportunity to wish
the hon members a happy birthday. [Applause.]

      HOUSING IN THE WESTERN CAPE AND THE INTEGRATED RURAL DEVELOPMENT
                                  PROGRAMME

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker and members, I
would like to react to two statements that were made by members. The first
one was on the housing issue here in the Western Cape, that indeed is a
matter of concern for government. I think that all of us, as
parliamentarians in the House, have to be concerned about it because,
indeed, when we try to ensure that we improve the quality of life of the
people, we need to do so with honesty.

As members of Parliament and as government, as well as South Africans, we
are dealing with the legacy of our past that ensured that the majority of
our people never had access to even basic services, including shelter. It
can, therefore, not be correct that those among us who might have enough
resources to buy other people out can actually have the privilege to do so
at the expense of the poor. And I hope that the Portfolio Committee on
Housing, together with the Minister of Housing, will be able to reflect on
this matter so that we can find a way in which we can ensure that we
protect the poor from those who have access to resources.

Members will recall that this issue also arose in relation to the issue of
tenure security in rural areas, where the debate was whether we move
immediately to full title and what the dangers inherent in this were. I
think this example of the Western Cape indicates to us what the likely
dangers are if we were to move immediately to a full title programme
without taking into consideration the issue of protection of the vulnerable
and the poor.

Secondly, I think that on the issue of the Integrated Rural Development
Programme Strategy, it is true that when we identified this programme our
intention was to ensure that we changed the character of South Africa, with
a clear focus on those people who are underprivileged, and that as we did
so as government, to ensure that there was a level of co-ordination amongst
all spheres of government.

We have also indicated in this House some of the difficulties that have
resulted in our not being able to move with speed with regard to some of
these issues. Some of them relate to the capacity levels in municipalities.
Other issues, of course, relate to resources, given the competing needs.
But I can assure hon members that in all the rural and urban nodes there
have been interventions. They might not be what we all wanted today, but I
think they are a step in the right direction.

Through those interventions we have been able to learn how we can work as
the different spheres of government in attacking the problem of poverty. I
thank you. [Applause.]

       MANAGEMENT OF ECONOMY, RESPONSIBLE USE OF PUBLIC RESOURCES AND
                         COSATU’S LAUNCH OF NEW UDF


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, I’ll deal briefly with three
issues. Firstly, responding to hon Asiya: it is correct that there is a
large task force that the Deputy President is heading. The job has just
become a lot easier because the GDP figures for the second quarter which
were released this morning reflect that the economy grew by 4,8% in this
second quarter. So the work has become a lot easier for all of us.
[Applause.] It is clear that the hand of the Deputy President is helping
the growth very quickly. [Applause.]

In response to the hon Mulder, I can give him the assurance that I have
given publicly, that we will not be cavalier with public resources in South
Africa. We can deal with this issue in different ways. On Zimbabwe or on
everything that you have ever spoken about, hon Zille, we are not cavalier
with the finances of this country, or of the taxpayers. Thank you very
much.

I want to turn next to the hon Stephens. It’s not often that I find myself
in agreement with what is said by members from across the House, but I want
to agree with him. You see, I think that it is important to recognise that
this initiative, which was launched last night, is trying to capture the
spirit of the United Democratic Front in a very different time and space.

The United Democratic Front served its purpose and had amongst its guiding
principles the fact that it would not ever replace the liberation movements
of our people. So whatever individuals are trying to achieve in the name of
the United Democratic Front has to be written off as populist and
opportunist. [Applause.]

The history of the struggle is the history of collectives. I have not seen
anything but one individual’s name associated with this. Unfortunately he
missed out because he wasn’t there for the United Democratic Front. He has
also never been a member of the ANC. If he were, he would know exactly what
our policies are. He would know that a resolution was adopted by the ANC at
the Mafikeng conference in 1997 that confirms that there is an
interrelationship between the RDP and Gear, and he would not be so silly as
to ask the ANC to campaign against its own existing policies.

I thought that we shouldn’t actually give this initiative too much
attention because I am sure that it will float like a lead balloon. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

            DEVELOPMENT OF FRAMEWORK TO GUIDE EDUCATION DISTRICTS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, for once, mina noBaba uMpontshane
siyavumelana [Mr Mpontshane and I agree]. I agree that indeed more needs to
be done to strengthen the districts so that they can execute a professional
mandate adequately.

With my colleague in the Eastern Cape, we are working very hard to ensure
that this happens, but it must happen nationally. Therefore, out of the
study on the functioning of districts, we have begun to develop a framework
that will guide districts throughout the country and guide provinces in
terms of resources and structures of the district offices so that they are
able to execute a mandate that promotes the kind of quality educational
support that you are referring to.

Bendifuna ukuthi nje ndiyavuya, ngoba siyavumelana namhlanje, kwaye
ndiyathemba ukuba nangomso siza kuvumelana. Ndiyabulela. [I just wanted to
say that I am happy, because we agree with each other today and I hope that
we will agree tomorrow. I thank you.]


                    RECOGNITION OF CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, the struggle against the old order
was basically a struggle for constitutionalism. It took root from the fact
that the Union Act of 1910 denied the majority of South Africans their
constitutional rights, and subsequent actions of white rule perpetuated
that.

Successive generations of the people of our country, black and white, who
joined the ranks of the liberation movement understood that it was crucial
that if the future was to benefit everybody a constitutional order should
be introduced that recognised the rights of all.

I think that the 1994 achievement of our democracy crowned the efforts of
all of us with the success that we have been hungering after. The rights
enshrined in our Constitution are there for all. Everyone has, amongst
other things, the right to freedom of speech. So we will grant this right
and we must maintain it for all South Africans.

What, nevertheless, we would not allow is for that right of expression to
be used to undermine the Constitution, to be abused in such a way as to
make a banana arrangement of the current democracy and the Republic.

So the statement by hon Mlangeni that we carry a responsibility to defend
the Constitution in our democracy, that has our full support and Cabinet
will remain loyal to that goal. [Applause.]


                        PERFORMANCE OF MUNICIPALITIES


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Speaker, in
response to what the hon Doman has referred to … [Interjections.] It’s not
important. What I would like to say is that it is very easy for him to
start blaming the ANC local government, forgetting that they were, in fact,
in charge in the City of Cape Town and they left that mess untouched. That
is the reason the ANC government is struggling in this province. Don’t
forget so easily. You were there before and you did nothing about it.

Now, what the ANC local government is doing at the moment is dealing with
the legacy of the past. What we are trying to do is to empower these
municipalities because the past gave us the bucket system, and we are
trying to get rid of that. That is exactly what we are doing now.

He has failed to mention what the DA mayor in the West Coast has done in
terms of corruption. That mayor paid with municipal credit cards for his
wife’s overseas trip. That you must mention. [Interjections.]

When it comes to the local government elections we will all be in the
field, but I am telling you that the ANC is going to show you. Perhaps you
are heartbroken because you have failed to gain from the floor-crossing.
You have won nobody and you are not going to win anybody. You will remain
the small party that you are. Thank you. [Applause.]

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY
       PUBLIC PROTECTOR – NOMINATIONS FOR APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY PUBLIC
                                  PROTECTOR


    There was no debate.


    The Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved: That the report be adopted.


    Motion agreed to.


    Report accordingly adopted.

  RATIFICATION OF DECISION TO ESTABLISH AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER
   DRAFT AMENDMENT REGULATIONS TO PUBLIC FUNDING OF REPRESENTED POLITICAL
                              PARTIES ACT, 1997


    There was no debate.


    Decision of the Speaker of the National Assembly and Chairperson of the
    National Council of Provinces to establish an Ad Hoc Joint Committee to
    consider draft amendment regulations to Public Funding of Represented
    Political Parties Act, 1997 (Act 103 of 1997), ratified.


      RATIFICATION OF DECISION OF JOINT SUBCOMMITTEE OF JOINT PROGRAMME
               COMMITTEE TO FAST-TRACK CONSTITUTIONAL MATTERS
                               AMENDMENT BILL


On 4 August 2005, the Joint Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee
decided, in accordance with Joint Rule 216(2), that the Constitutional
Matters Amendment Bill (B 22-2005) should be fast-tracked, where necessary
dispensing with any relevant House Rule or Joint Rule and shortening any
period within which any step in the legislative process relating to the
Bill has to be completed, including the submission of the translated
version of the Bill as introduced before the debate in the National
Assembly takes place because the process must be completed in order for the
Bill to be enacted and for the Act to be published in the Government
Gazette by 31 August 2005.


There was no debate.


Decision of the Joint Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee to fast-
track the Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill ratified.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
       CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON CONSTITUTIONAL MATTERS AMENDMENT
                                    BILL




    There was no debate.


    The Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved: That the report be adopted.


    Motion agreed to.


    Report accordingly adopted.





                    CONSTITUTIONAL MATTERS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam
Speaker, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers and hon members, comrades and
friends, ladies and gentlemen, I want to start by apologising on behalf of
Minister Mabandla who is abroad and could not be here today to address the
House on this Bill. I also want to commence by thanking in advance all
those parties who will be supporting the passing of this legislation.

The principle objects of the Bill before the House today are twofold,
namely, to amend the Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act of
1997, and to amend the Determination of Delegates (National Council of
Provinces) Act of 1998.

The majority of the amendments to these two Acts are necessary as
consequential amendments to address certain matters emanating from the
floor-crossing legislation that was passed by this Parliament in 2002 and
2003. I therefore want to make it clear, upfront, that the Bill does not
deal with the principle of floor-crossing, but merely seeks to regulate
matters in other legislation consequential to such floor-crossing.

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, in 2003,
in its report on the floor-crossing legislation recommended, amongst
others, that the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development:

   Review the laws pertaining to the funding of political parties, in
   particular parties represented in a legislature, and take such steps as
   may be necessary to ensure that those provisions are aligned with the
   changes effected in terms of the above legislation, and consider all
   legislation which may need to be amended in order to bring it into line
   with the new laws referred to in paragraph 1, and make recommendations
   regarding such changes as may need to be effected.


As a direct outcome of this injunction of the portfolio committee in 2003,
the Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill before the House today seeks to
amend, inter alia, the delegates Act so as to make provision for the
redetermination of certain delegates of a provincial legislature to the
NCOP, which has been reconstituted on account of changes in party
membership and mergers or subdivisions of parties in that legislature,
because of the floor-crossing.

As the amendments to the delegates Act do not affect this House or its
members, I will today concentrate on the amendments to the funding Act. In
terms of section 236 of the Constitution, ``national legislation must
provide for the funding of political parties participating in national and
provincial legislatures on an equitable and proportional basis’’. The
funding Act that was enacted to give effect to that constitutional
requirement, among other things, established the Represented Political
Parties Fund, with a view to making provision for the funding of political
parties participating in Parliament and provincial legislatures, and it
regulates the allocation of moneys from the fund by the Independent
Electoral Commission to political parties.

In terms of section 5(2)(a) of the funding Act, allocations from the fund
must be made and paid to each of the political parties concerned in
accordance with the prescribed formula, based in part on the principles of
proportionality and equity. Consequently, if a political party’s
representation in the National Assembly or a provincial legislature has
been affected as a result of floor-crossing, this will of course affect the
allocations from the fund.

In terms of the regulations made under section 10 of the funding Act, the
IEC must, within two weeks of the beginning of a financial year of the
fund, announce the total amount of funding available for allocation.
Provision is further made that the allocations from the fund to be made and
paid to each of the political parties concerned are calculated by
allocating 90% of the total amount of funding proportionately, and 10% of
the amount equitably.

The regulations also provide that all allocations each year are paid in
four equal instalments. These instalments are payable in April, July,
October and January of each year. The window for floor-crossing, which is
from 1 to 15 September, falls between the date on which the second
instalment has been paid and the date on which the third instalment is
payable.

Consequently, if a political party’s representation in the National
Assembly or a provincial legislature has been affected as a result of floor-
crossing, this will also affect the third and fourth instalments to which
it is entitled. A need has therefore arisen to regulate the reallocation of
moneys from the fund after the window period for floor-crossing for that
particular year. In order to address that need, it is necessary to amend
the funding Act, and the regulations made under that Act.

This Bill therefore seeks to amend the funding Act so as to regulate the
repayment of unspent balances of all allocated moneys in terms of the
funding Act, when parties cease to qualify for such allocations as a result
of changes in party membership, mergers or subdivisions during the window
period of floor-crossing, and provide for the reallocation of moneys in the
year in which floor-crossing takes place where a member of a legislature
becomes a member of another party whilst retaining membership of that
legislature, or where an existing party merges with another party,
subdivides into more than one party, or subdivides and any one subdivision
merges with another party.

The new section 6(a) that the committee has included, that is to be
inserted in the funding Act, regulates the circumstances in which a
political party, after the window for floor-crossing, has to repay to the
IEC the unspent amounts of all moneys that had been allocated to it in
terms of the funding Act.

The main principles contained in that new section can be summarised as
follows: Firstly, if a member of a legislature becomes a member of a party
other than the party which nominated that person as a member, the
nominating party does not have to repay to the IEC its unspent balances in
respect of the seat held by the member concerned.

Secondly, a party which immediately prior to the window for floor-crossing
qualified for an allocation does not have to repay to the IEC its unspent
balances, if it subdivides into more than one party or subdivides and any
subdivision merges with another party during the floor-crossing, and any
subdivision of the original party continues to represent that party and the
legislature concerned after the date on which the speaker of a legislature
has published a notice required in terms of item 5(3) of Schedule 6(a) to
the Constitution that reflects the number of seats allocated to that party
in that legislature, and the name of and party represented by each member,
and qualifies for the allocation of moneys from the fund, whether the
subdivision of the original party has changed its name or not.

Thirdly, a political party which, immediately prior to the window of floor-
crossing, qualified for an allocation must repay to the IEC its unspent
balances if it ceases to qualify for the allocation of moneys from the fund
as a result of its only member or members changing party membership, a
merger with another political party or subdivision into more than one
party.

The new section 6(a) also places some obligations on the accounting officer
or leader of a political party that has to repay to the IEC its unspent
balances. Provision is further made that an accounting officer or a leader
of a party who fails to comply with these obligations will be guilty of an
offence in certain circumstances.

In order to enable a political party that ceases to qualify for the
allocation of moneys from the fund and that has to repay its unspent
balances to comply with its existing legal and financial obligations, the
IEC has granted the discretion to determine the amount of any unspent
balances that must be repaid.

The regulations made under the funding Act have been amended to empower the
IEC to reallocate 50% of the total amount of funding for the financial year
in which floor-crossing is permitted to the political parties that, after
the date on which the speaker of a legislature has published the notice in
terms of item 5(3) of the Constitution, qualify for the allocation of
moneys from the fund, and regulate the times and intervals of payment of
the reallocations.

You may well ask: What on earth has he just said? In a nutshell, let me say
this. Basically, what we are saying is: In the year of floor-crossing at
provincial and national level, there are two instalments that have not yet
been allocated, and then, if parties change, this Act will allow those two
instalments, for that year only, to be reallocated, and in the next year,
the IEC will, of course, then make the allocations in terms of whatever
proportions there are.

The second point it deals with is that in certain instances where parties
really cease to exist ... [Interjections.] Yes, like the National Party,
but they will join a decent party now, a bigger party, so hopefully they
will bring all their money with them, and they won’t have to give it back.
[Interjections.] Forget that party for the moment. The principle is that
the unspent balances of certain parties that cease to exist is taxpayers’
money and must be given back to the IEC. In the next year, it will then be
allocated downwards.

I have also noted the report of the portfolio committee and will bring its
contents to the attention of the Minister as a matter of urgency, because
they raised a few points that we have to investigate further.

Lastly, I thank the portfolio committee, especially its chairperson, Ms
Chohan-Khota, and the leaders of the parties in the committee for a job
very well done, and especially for doing it in a very short space of time
as a fast-tracked Bill. May you all do very well during the floor-crossing,
and may this Bill help you to get more money into your coffers. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon members, I’ll try not to
explain as well as the Deputy Minister did, but let me just begin by saying
that because this is called the Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill, many
people have come to me to ask: Do we need a two-thirds majority to pass
this Bill?

The immediate answer is, no, this does not pertain to a constitutional
amendment at all. This does, however, deal with the consequences of certain
constitutional provisions and therefore the Bill was introduced as a
Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill.

In essence, as was explained earlier, the Bill deals with the consequences
of the floor-crossing regime, and amends the Public Funding of Represented
Political Parties Act of 1997, as well as the Determination of Delegates of
the National Council of Provinces Act of 1998.

Insofar as it pertains to the funding Act, this Bill now obliges the IEC to
reallocate funding to qualified political parties in recognition of the
changes occurring during a floor-crossing period. The Bill, read with the
regulations, requires the IEC to reallocate 50% of the funding available to
parties in a floor-crossing year in a manner that takes cognisance of the
changes in party representation immediately following a floor-crossing
period.

The funding to political parties in October of the relevant year would have
to be reallocated on the basis that those parties that gained seats would
qualify for and be entitled to more money, and those that lost seats would
have their allocations reduced accordingly.

The formula on which allocations to parties is currently based, remains
completely unchanged. It is possible for many things to happen during a
floor-crossing period - some parties become stronger, others become weaker,
and some vanish completely from Parliament and the legislatures. Sometimes
brand-new parties even emerge. The Bill takes care of all of these
possibilities.

As far as unspent moneys are concerned the Bill has provided for unspent
moneys to be paid back to the IEC under certain circumstances, but not
others. The committees conferring felt that a principle had to be developed
and adhered to under all circumstances. The principle we devised was that
if, after a floor-crossing period, certain parties are no longer
represented in the legislatures, those parties will cease to get funding
and must also repay unspent moneys.

So parties can be disqualified from receiving funding if they merge into
other existing parties, if all their members cross to other parties, or
through subdivisions and mergers. The principle, simply stated, is this: As
long as a party is no longer entitled to funding at the level of a
legislature or Parliament it has to pay back unspent moneys.

It is also significant to note that it is the IEC, and not the political
parties themselves, who will determine what the unspent moneys amount to in
each case. In deciding what moneys would have to be repaid we considered
the fact that political parties incur certain obligations that may extend
beyond the floor-crossing period.

The aim of the legislation is not to create parties that can’t meet their
legal obligations. We therefore provide that political parties who are no
longer represented in Parliament or legislatures after floor-crossing must
submit to the IEC their financial statements, as well as supporting
documents of things like leases, contracts of employment, and suchlike,
which the IEC must take cognisance of before determining the amount of
unspent moneys. Unspent moneys must be repaid to the IEC and will go into
the fund, and be redistributed amongst the parties that qualify for funding
in the following financial year.

In the report of the committee we point out that unspent moneys are to be
paid back under two further circumstances, which are provided for currently
in the funding Act: Firstly, when a political party ceases to qualify for
allocations of moneys from the fund, that is when it loses an election; and
secondly, where any or every legislature or Parliament dissolves.

In our report we suggest that the desirability of aligning matters related
to unspent moneys be investigated, bearing in mind those may be mutually
exclusive circumstances. However, in regard to who should be responsible
for actually paying the unspent moneys the Act, as it currently stands, is
silent.

It is with this in mind that we suggest a closer look at the funding Act.
In amending the funding Act we have inserted a new section 9(a), which
makes it an offence for a party’s accounting officer not to comply with
certain financial accountability mechanisms and the repayment of moneys by
a certain period.

While we do not envisage that unspent moneys will mean huge sums of money
being returned to the IEC, the principle adopted in this legislation,
because it deals with public money, is that of accountability and
transparency. Both these issues have to be fine-tuned in the rest of the
Act. We were unfortunately unable to deal with these matters in the two
weeks we had to process this Bill, and have therefore requested the
department to investigate further and return with proposals after
consulting all stakeholders.

Coming now to the Determination of Delegates (National Council of
Provinces) Act, the Constitution, in Part B of Schedule 3, indicates the
formula that is to be used to determine the number of NCOP delegates that a
party represented in a legislature is entitled to. The formula to be used
to determine the number of special and permanent delegates is to be found
in the delegates Act.

Essentially, the formula in the delegates Act mirrors, as far as possible,
the formula in the Constitution. We have now amended this to provide for
the possibility of the extreme changes that may occur in legislatures and
in Parliament during the floor-crossing window periods. In this regard,
when the formula provided for in the Act results in more than six permanent
delegates, or less than four special delegates, the deadlock-breaking
mechanism was to resort to the number of votes actually cast for a party
during the preceding election.

During a floor-crossing period, however, brand-new parties may emerge that
have never participated in elections at all. Mindful of the fact that our
system is essentially a PR system, and that votes are cast for parties and
not individual members, in such a case we provide that a zero or nil vote
is recorded for such parties in the deadlock-breaking mechanism.

At the other extreme is the possibility that two parties who have contested
elections, each one of them recording votes in the preceding election, may
merge in their entirety. In such a case, as long as no single person
remains who is representing such parties, and that the merger was not a
result of a subdivision and merger, the combined number of votes cast for
each party would be considered for the purpose of the deadlock-breaking
mechanism.

If, however, there remains further deadlocks, ie in the case of two parties
recording exactly the same number of votes at the polls, or two brand-new
parties emerging after the floor-crossing, the Act now provides that the
legislatures determine, in accordance with the principles of democracy, the
question of which party gets the permanent delegate.

I would like to raise a matter that we have not dealt with in the report.
It seems to me that there is absolutely no reason why the formula in the
Constitution should not be amended to reflect both these extremes that
arise during floor-crossing.

Currently, as it stands, the Constitution does take into account the one
extreme, ie when two parties merge, but it doesn’t take into account the
possibility of brand-new parties emerging during floor-crossing. This is
then a matter that the department should also consider at an appropriate
time.

Finally, let me take this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to thank all the
members of the committee, across party lines, for their frankness and co-
operation over the last two weeks. Thanks to the state law advisers and
departmental officials, in particularly, Mr Johan Labuschagne, who worked
really tirelessly on this Bill and dealt with me with great patience and
compassion. Thank you, Mr Labuschagne.

I’m told that he is also continuing to try to beat the clock to ensure that
this Bill gets promulgated before 1 September. I do thank you for your
attention. [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, the DA supports the Constitutional Matters
Amendment Bill. However, we find ourselves in the invidious position of
supporting amendments to legislation which we as a party are now entirely
opposed to. In fact, the DA will be introducing a motion, asking Parliament
to review and rescind floor-crossing legislation.

It is true that the DA has supported the right of public representatives to
change parties on the basis of conscience. In fact, the DP’s negotiator on
these matters at the constitutional negotiations, Colin Eglin, proposed
that this right to cross the floor be incorporated in the Constitution from
the beginning. However, experience has taught us how inappropriate floor-
crossing has become in our current constitutional dispensation.

Forget principle. In the hands of the ANC majority, floor-crossing has
degenerated into the lowest form of chequebook politics, a legal form of
bribery at the taxpayers’ expense. [Interjections.]

The ANC is currently driven by lines of dissent: the Mbeki camp versus the
Zuma camp. Which one are you in, hon Minister? [Interjections.] Cosatu
versus Minister Trevor Manuel’s economic conservatives. The centralists
versus the new UDF.

In order to shore up its faltering unity, the ANC will no doubt attempt to
use the upcoming floor-crossing period, which starts next week, to
cannibalise several smaller opposition parties.

According to the highest decision-making body of the DA, its federal
council, at our last meeting in June we accepted the following motion: “In
light of the perversion and abuse by the ANC of floor-crossing, chiefly
through . . . ”

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order.

The SPEAKER: Order, hon member. Yes, hon member?

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: Madam Speaker, if I understood the Deputy Minister
correctly, this Bill does not deal with the principle of floor-crossing,
and it appears as if the person at the podium is now addressing the
principle.

The SPEAKER: That is true actually, hon member. It is not about the
principle of floor-crossing; it’s about issues surrounding it.
[Interjections.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Exactly. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

I’ve noticed that a number of government members have been raising issues
around floor-crossing during the proceedings today.
Anyway, we accept the motion, but because of the revulsion it arouses among
our voters who believe their mandate has been betrayed, the party has
revisited its position and now opposes floor-crossing.

Within the provisions of the law, the DA will penalise any of its own
public representatives who cross the floor to another party in defiance of
the mandate of the voters. The DA, however, will accept representatives of
other parties into its ranks who join for reasons of personal conscience
and who are committed to our principles and policies. [Interjections.]
However, to minimise opportunistic enticements, no person joining the DA
can be offered or assume a post within the legislature or council which
attracts more remuneration than he or she was earning before joining the
party, for a period of two years. [Interjections.]

The DA also believes that the task of South Africa’s only remaining
national opposition is to hold the line against the ANC. Whereas the ANC
uses floor-crossing as a way of expanding its power, opposition parties
must use it as a way to make sure that ordinary people have a say in
government. The DA will welcome those public representatives who choose to
join our ranks out of a sincere commitment to strengthening the opposition
and upholding our democratic principles. [Interjections.]

This Bill has two main purposes. In the first instance, it seeks to clarify
the rules pertaining to the allocation of funds to political parties in
terms of the Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act. The right
of public representatives to cross the floor was introduced after the
acceptance of the funding Act, which necessitates this amendment. The
amendment specifically provides for the allocation of funding after the
crossovers.

The basic principles upon which the amendments rest include the principle
that a recalculation is made of the funding allocation to parties as if an
election had taken place, and that the unspent balances, as defined in the
Bill, paid over to political parties, are required to be paid back to the
fund if the relevant party ceases to exist and therefore ceases to be
entitled to the funding. So, in the event of a party ceasing to be
represented as a result of the crossing of all its members because of a
merger or subdivision, unspent balances do have to be repaid.

A party does not cease to exist if one or more members cross, or there is a
subdivision, or there is a name change, but the party concerned – or
parties in the event of a subdivision – continues to be represented.
Criminal sanctions are introduced for failing to comply.

In the second instance, the Bill attends, as the Deputy Minister indicated,
to unfinished business. After the debacle of the original floor-crossing
legislation, as it affected national and provincial government, being found
to be procedurally defective and invalid by the Constitutional Court in
October 2002, the matter was rectified by the passing of the Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa Amendment Act of 2003, the principal object
of which was to re-enact floor-crossing legislation in a procedurally
correct manner.

However, the amendments to the Determination of Delegates (National Council
of Provinces) Act of 1998 were not re-enacted. Accordingly, this Act is now
amended to take care of changes in the composition of legislatures as a
result of crossings. Once again, the point of departure is that a new
calculation is made as if an election had taken place.

The only aspect that this amendment affects are the rare cases in which it
is necessary to refer back to the votes obtained by a party in order to
allocate a delegate to one or more parties who tie on a fraction. Also, the
Bill provides that in the event of a new political party coming into
existence or in the event of a subdivision – and, consequently, no previous
election participation – the new party will be regarded as having obtained
no votes in the previous election. This was the DA’s proposal, which was
accepted by the committee.

The committee, as has been indicated by our chair, has raised one or two
further points in a report to the House and has recommended that the
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development look into them for
possible further action.

While this legislation may now more or less be complete, the whole floor-
crossing system as it is now practised remains as odious as ever. The DA
can only call on genuine opposition MPs, marooned in disintegrating parties
or movements as a result of the ANC’s depredations, to join with us during
the window period to honour the mandate of opposition voters in South
Africa. The DA looks forward to the forthcoming local government elections,
which we believe will considerably strengthen our political position. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr L K JOUBERT: Chairperson, hon members, as pointed out by previous
speakers, the need for these amendments emanated from floor-crossing
legislation that has been adopted since 2002. That legislation is now part
of our positive public law and, as was also correctly pointed out, is not
part of this debate. However, the parliamentary record will show that the
IFP voted against that particular legislation.

As far as the present amendments are concerned, it is conceded that they
are necessary in view of the existing legislation, and we will therefore
support this Bill in so far as it addresses a void created by the previous
legislation.

However, apart from the merits or demerits of this Bill, what is worrying
is that although we had two to three years to address this matter and make
the necessary provisions timeously, this matter only became urgent as the
date for the forthcoming window period came nearer, with the result that
the Bill had to be fast-tracked in the past couple of weeks to have it in
the statutes by 1 September 2005.

I have no doubt that we will be meeting this deadline, but my question is:
Do we have our priorities right? Here we gave priority to a matter that
basically only concerns the financial interests of political parties. We
gave it such a high priority that it was fast-tracked and joint sittings of
the portfolio committee and the select committee of Justice and
Constitutional Affairs were held.

Do we have our priorities right if we fast-track legislation that concerns
us as political parties, while there are more pressing matters concerning
the public at large that remain under the line? If a deadline is our
criterium for fast-tracking legislation, should we not have deadlines for
all the important matters before such matters become urgent?

We call this the People’s Parliament and we talk about taking Parliament to
the people. We should therefore give priority to matters that concern the
people directly. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson, hon members, the Bill before us is a
continuation of a legislative process which, in our opinion, disgraces this
House and undermines democracy. Voters entrust parliamentary and
legislative seats to parties and not individuals, yet the two biggest
parties in this House have seen fit, for reasons of political expediency,
to amend the Constitution in order to introduce into our body politic
unnecessary instability.

It is common knowledge that floor-crossing always tends to favour the
ruling party, and so it greedily pursues those seats which the voters did
not entrust to them. We have repeatedly said to the ruling party that floor-
crossing in a proportional representation electoral system is a betrayal of
the voters.

In a constituency-based system, floor-crossing could be allowed because
then the voters could be consulted in the by-elections about individual
public representatives’ decisions to defect. It is the height of irony that
whilst the majority of political parties support a constituency-based
electoral system, the ANC opposes it.

The Bill before us, in all its convoluted glory, is a legalistic tap dance
to accommodate the effects of floor-crossing. In itself it is proof of the
unseemly eagerness with which floor-crossing was introduced without
considering all the consequences.

We will have nothing to do with anything that has to do with floor-
crossing. The UDM does not support this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C B JOHNSON: Chairperson, hon members, the Constitutional Matters
Amendment Bill is a Bill which has been drafted specifically to provide for
certain inevitable consequences of floor-crossing. It’s a technical Bill.

The Bill’s primary aim is to regulate the funding and the financial
implications of floor-crossing both during and after the window period is
opened. Also, if one bears in mind that all the funds from the IEC to
political parties are, after all, public funds and taxpayers’ money, we are
of the view that the Bill makes adequate provision for proper transparency
and accountability in the way that these funds are managed. In view
thereof, we support the Bill.

May I respond to what the hon Camerer said? I can’t believe that the DA can
be against a principle when it doesn’t suit them, but for the very same
principle when it does suit them. I find that unprincipled in the extreme.

Then, hon Camerer, I am glad that you brought up chequebook politics,
because I don’t know if you are aware that the DA in the Western Cape is
currently offering persons MEC positions as well as the premiership of the
Western Cape in order to lure them to cross the floor. [Interjections.]

So, Mrs Camerer, you are either against something or you are for something.
You cannot be both. You cannot have your cake and eat it. So, let me
explain this to you in terms that you might understand. Political
principles are not Italian shoes. You cannot have a different pair for each
day of the week. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP is on record as being opposed to floor-
crossing. When the legislation was considered in 2002, I pointed out the
impact that floor-crossing and reduced party funding would have on existing
legal obligations of a party, such as employment and rental contracts.
Whilst we thus remain firmly opposed to floor-crossing, we believe that the
inevitable consequences of floor-crossing, as undesirable as they may be,
must be properly regulated – particularly as we are dealing here with
public funds allocated by the Independent Electoral Commission, and for
that reason we will be supporting this Bill.

If a party ceases to qualify for funds, as has been pointed out, it must
repay unspent balances, following an audit procedure, as set out in the
amending legislation. The IEC will, however, have discretion to consider
standing legal obligations, such as rental and employment contracts in
determining the repayment of such amounts.

Additionally, should a provincial legislature be reconstituted due to floor-
crossing, the provincial delegates to the NCOP may have to be redetermined.
This, again, is a consequence that must be properly regulated, particularly
regarding deadlock-breaking mechanisms. Where a new party competes with an
existing party on the basis of votes in the allocation of special or
permanent delegates, the new party must, of course, be allocated zero
votes, and this is contained in the Bill. This is eminently reasonable, as
this new party would not have competed in the previous election.

Thus, the ACDP will support this amending Bill, but as the threshold for
the window period opens, I would just like to say: Don’t call us; we’ll
call you. Thank you very much. [Interjections.]

Dr C P MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, vandag se debat het weer eens bewys
waarom dit soos ’n paal bo water staan dat die DA sleg is vir Suid-Afrika.
Die DA is die kampioen van politieke opportunisme. Wat is die feite? Die
aanvanklike Grondwet het nie oorlopery in Suid-Afrika toegelaat nie, want
dit maak nie sin by ’n proporsionele stelsel nie. Wie kom na vore en vra
dat die Grondwet gewysig moet word om oorlopery moontlik te maak? Die DA.
Hulle vra dat die ANC die Grondwet moet wysig. Die DA stem toe vir die wet
wat oorlopery moontlik maak. Toe hulle egter agterkom dat die publiek
daarvoor gril, is hulle skielik daarteen. Dit pas die DA en skielik is
hulle toe ook teen oorlopery gekant.

Vandag in hierdie Raad stem die DA weer vir die wet, want dit pas hulle om
dit vandag te steun. Hulle steun die wet vandag, maar in hulle toespraak sê
hulle hul is eintlik teen oorlopery. Die juweel van die dag is egter die
feit dat hulle tog almal uitnooi om by hulle aan te sluit.

Dit is ongelooflik! G’n wonder die publiek daar buite gril vir politici en
vir politieke partye nie. Dit is eintlik een party se verantwoordelikheid;
dit is die DA se verantwoordelikheid. Julle maak ons almal sleg. Hou op
daarmee asseblief. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.]

Die feit van die saak is die volgende: ten grondslap aan die demokrasie lê
die Grondwet en grondwetlike demokrasie - die verteenwoordiging daarvan -
in die hart van ons stelsel. Kiesers stem vir mense wat hulle
verteenwoordig en hul stemme word op daardie manier omgesit in
verteenwoordiging, maar dan word daar ook fondse gegee. Daardie kiesers wat
gestem het se belastingbetalersgeld word indirek gekanaliseer om daardie
ideale voort te sit.

Die probleem met hierdie wet is dat dit nie ’n goeie wet is nie, want dit
is ’n vooruitloping van daardie verkeerde beginsel. Nie alleen word daardie
kiesers van hulle stemme en verteenwoordiging ontneem nie, maar nou word
ook daardie geld wat eintlik saam met hulle gedagte moes gegaan het, hulle
ook ontneem.

Nasionale Party-mense wat vir die NNP gestem het se stemme is hulle reeds
ontneem. Nou word daardie belastingbetalersgeld hulle ook ontneem, want dit
gaan na die ANC. Julle is besig om op ’n verkeerde beginsel ’n vrot wet
deur hierdie Parlement te voer. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Hon Chairperson, today’s debate has once again proved why
it is so evident that the DA is bad for South Africa. The DA is the
champion of political opportunism. What are the facts? The initial
Constitution did not allow for floor-crossing in South Africa, because it
does not make sense in a proportional system. Who came forward and asked
that the Constitution be amended to allow for floor-crossing? The DA. They
asked the ANC to amend the Constitution. The DA then voted for the law that
makes provision for floor-crossing. However, when they realised that it was
irking the public they were suddenly against it. This suited the DA and
suddenly they were also opposed to floor-crossing.
Today in this House the DA is once again voting for this law, because it
suits them to support it today. They are supporting this law today, but in
their speech they say that they are actually opposed to floor-crossing. But
the best part is the fact that they are still inviting everyone to join
them.

This is unbelievable! No wonder the public out there is irked by
politicians and political parties. It is actually the doing of one party;
it is the DA’s fault. You are making us all look bad. Please stop that.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The fact of the matter is the following: The Constitution and
constitutional democracy are at the heart of democracy – the representation
of it at the heart of our system. The electorate votes for people who
represent them and in this way their votes are converted into
representation, but then funds are also given. The taxpayers’ money of
voters is indirectly channelled to pursue those ideals.

The problem with this law is that it is not a very good one, because it is
in anticipation of that incorrect principle. Not only are those voters
being deprived of their votes and representation, but now they are also
being deprived of that money that was actually supposed to accompany their
ideals.

National Party supporters who voted for the NNP have already been deprived
of their votes. Now they are also being deprived of that taxpayers’ money,
because it is going to the ANC. You are piloting a rotten law through this
Parliament, based on an incorrect principle. I thank you.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Could it be noted that there is no isiZulu interpretation?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): We’ll take care of that Mrs
Seaton. We will ask the Table to send a message up to them.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, the Bill we discuss today
seeks to shore up section 6 of the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa Amendment Act of 2003 by managing the retention of membership of the
National Assembly or provincial legislature after a change of party
membership.

We supported the Bill at the time, and we will do so even today, as
consideration is being given to the amendment of the Public Funding of
Represented Political Parties Act of 1997, because it has become necessary
to ensure that whoever leaves his or her party to go to another party
should have the necessary financial support from the day he or she changes
party membership.

We in the UCDP have always maintained that although it is immoral to change
party membership midstream, there is nothing to be done if members are not
happy. All we are against, and will continue to view with contempt, is the
overt recruitment of members of one party by another. We maintain that
members should uphold the spirit and the letter of the Act, which
stipulates that people may leave parties voluntarily without being coerced,
recruited and promised heaven and earth.

We lament that there are spineless and intolerant rolling stones in our
midst who masquerade as representatives of the people, yet are only there
to satisfy their personal political lust. One wonders where such people
will be during the next floor-crossing period before the end of the five-
year term of this Parliament.

The UCDP believes that all we need are men and women of substance who would
not be blown over by just any wind. The unfortunate part of the law is that
it is fertile ground for the proliferation of insignificant parties that
then also subdivide in amoeba-like fashion, or strengthen the ruling ANC
through the backdoor.

Notwithstanding all that, as we said, the UCDP will support the Bill.

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, Comrade Deputy Minister, comrades and hon
members, I wish to state from the onset that the PAC supports this amending
Bill. The amendments to be effected do not seek to introduce anything
substantively outside the current framework of our parliamentary and
political landscape, but rather to adjust and better regulate certain
practices and aspects currently in operation.

Although, when introduced, the PAC vehemently opposed what is generally
known as the floor-crossing legislation, we do take cognisance of the fact
that it is now law and operational. We are not going to act like
“bittereinders”. We are a revolutionary and forward-looking party. I am not
going to waste time trying to kill a dead horse, because I do not think
anything substantive is being amended. Suffice it to say, for example on
the Determination of Delegates of the NCOP Act, that it is not only
logical, but long overdue, that these amendments should be effected, just
as it has been effected in the local municipalities where after floor-
crossing there is a redetermination in terms of delegates from local
municipalities to district levels.

I wish to state, Comrade Deputy Minister, that as far as the PAC is
concerned, floor-crossing is not a threat, but more of an opportunity. We
have declared that the PAC is a home for all those who believe that they
still want to contribute positively to the development of our country and
people. I thank you. [Interjections.]
[Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, please excuse me, I have very bad flu. The MF
returns to the podium on the matter of floor-crossing, which we are opposed
to. While we have no problem with parties merging and subdividing, we find
it unjust and immoral for a member to cross the floor in his or her
independent capacity.

We honour and cherish the people we represent, and we acknowledge our
responsibility to these people who voted for us in confidence. When voting
for us they trusted that we would be honourable leaders and bold
representatives of their needs, wants and existence. We are here because of
the faith our constituencies have in us. When we cross the floor we fail
our people.

We are a democracy, a government for the people by the people. We need to
remember that the people hold our seat that we represent, and that they
have voted for the party, and they have chosen to elect us as the people
best suited to represent them.

In terms of the amendments regarding funds we have assessed that it has
been compiled fairly and equitably. Amendments regarding the reallocation
of funds to political parties whose membership has been affected by floor-
crossing have been given an appropriate formula to ensure the equitable and
fair distribution of funds.

Provisions made for the reconstitution of provincial delegations to the
NCOP when floor-crossing affects party membership in that House also seem
apt.

We once again appeal to those intending to cross the floor in September
2005: Remember the people, don’t fail them. Our nation is a family, not a
division of individualists.

The MF supports the Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

Mr G SOLOMON: Chairperson, this piece of legislation seems to irritate a
number of political parties here. It might be because of the legislation or
maybe because of floor-crossing and the impact it will have on their
parties. Maybe we should talk about floor-crossing and remind this House
and the members who are irritated by this piece of legislation about the
rationale behind floor-crossing and the principles in the Constitution
which gave rise to floor-crossing. In any case, this piece of legislation
before us is a very important piece of legislation, which is part of a
series of pieces of legislation in the process of the democratisation of
our electoral system, including floor-crossing.

There is no doubt that this legislation, together with the electoral
principle of proportional representation and an anti-defection clause -
section 43(b) of the Interim Constitution of 1993 – was necessary for the
political stability that was required for institutional and social
transformation in South Africa during a very critical period in our
democracy. If we were, for example, to allow free floor-crossing
indiscriminately, we would not have this political stability which we need
in order to bring about those changes in South Africa.

Whilst the anti-defection clause of the Interim Constitution was strongly
supported as an intricate component of the party list system - the DA, at
that time the DP, strongly supported this system on which the 1994 election
was based - it became one of the most contested elements in our system of
representative democracy. And we heard it here today. It was heavily
criticised, and correctly so, for being undemocratic and that it allegedly
stifled freedom of speech and association and, in the interests of
democracy, the government decided to change this.

Whilst democracy demands that the process must be allowed to develop
without undue interference, the challenge that faced the government was to
find a way of allowing crossing of the floor within our party list system.
The most important factor we need to take into consideration, and I quote
our previous chairperson – the present Deputy Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development, the hon Mr Johnny de Lange, during the heat of
the debate in 2002 – as saying: “We need to take into consideration the
possible impact the legislation may have on the stability of all three
tiers of government.” We were also alerted to the dangers of political
corruption, intimidation, enticement and opportunism by various scholars
and legal teachers at universities.

The introduction of the concept of floor-crossing into our electoral system
has taken a number of forms in the heat of the debate. There was complete
opposition from the IFP - and we appreciate and respect them, they still
have the same position. The UDM also have the same position as do the ACDP.
There was support for complete and unimpeded freedom to cross the floor
from Mr Collin Eglin, at the time of the then DP. The FF Plus might have
changed, but not the DA.   I am surprised by what Mrs Camerer said today.

The ANC’s position is, however, quite clearly based on the principle of the
South African constitutional order, namely the party list system of
proportional representation, political accountability to the electorate
through the nomination of parties and the value of a multi-party system
that encourages the representation of all significant voices in our
society. All these must be underpinned by the critical need for political
stability in our system.

In view of these principles, the ANC believes that it is in the interests
of the democratic process to accommodate the differences of opinion that
might arise in parties. If during the lifespan of a party these differences
in principle or policy become unmanageable and threaten the stability of
the party, it would be undemocratic to allow such representatives to be
booted out of parties and out of the legislature. We therefore should allow
defections, subdivisions and mergers.

A critical question, however, is: When are such moves worthy of
constitutional protection? The ANC was of the opinion that a threshold of
10% is reasonable to ensure there is sufficient consensus of opinion where
changes in political affiliation are contemplated. To avoid constant
reconfiguration of the representational profile of parties in legislatures,
only two 15-day window opportunities to cross the floor should be allowed
in September of the second and fourth year respectively of the five-year
term of office.

We believe that the threshold of 10% and the limitation to the windows of
opportunity imposed on defections, mergers and subdivisions are in the
interest of political stability and integrity while allowing changes in
political affiliation without compromising the principle of proportional
representation.

Today, however, strange things are happening on the eve of the cross-over.
Different parties respond in different ways, and I will quote the positions
of some of them. The UDM says: “You walk - take your pick - I fire, why
shoot? The DA says: “We did not do so well the first time, but this time we
have a dream team and a ghost cabinet; we want to become Premier,
particularly of the Western Cape, or an MEC; walk to the democratic
circus.” The ANC says: “We are the people’s party; we are popular,
particularly amongst the working class, the poor and the marginalised; we
have a hardworking team clearing up the mess caused by others; we are
making great headway despite many challenges; we are quite full presently,
but there is always space for more. You know that we believe that South
Africa belongs to all who live in it, both black and white. So you will be
welcome.”

To come back to the Bill in front of us, we believe that this finely
balanced mechanism to allow floor-crossing under controlled conditions,
together with today’s amendments unanimously agreed upon in the portfolio
committee, including by the DA, will facilitate the allocation of the third
instalment of funds from the IEC and the allocation of representation in
the NCOP in a manner consistent with our democratic principles.

In conclusion, to those who will receive a bigger third and fourth
instalment from the IEC and increased representation in the NCOP by the end
of September, good luck. For the rest, there will be another opportunity in
September 2007. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, I thought today was going to be a nice calm day, no problems
and that everyone was going to be happy. But, it does not work like that in
this Parliament.

I am going to start off by congratulating Dr Mulder, because Dr Mulder will
remember that it was he who came to the committee in 2003 and said look,
there are a whole lot of consequential issues that you are not addressing
here, please address them. So, we passed a resolution to accommodate Dr
Mulder. We went back to see how we could fix this thing up. We fixed it up,
but when we came back he said he didn’t like it. You just can’t please
everyone all the time. Dr Mulder, this one is yours, congratulations!

To the member from the UDM, I imagine that you are not one of those members
who has been suspended, because you spoke with so much enthusiasm and you
were so strong on principle that I couldn’t understand what you were
saying. But I could see you felt strongly about it. So you might still be
one of them, if you have not been suspended, obviously. [Laughter.]

I want to thank the department, particularly Johan Labuschagne who has done
a great job and everyone else who has been involved. And I want to thank
the parties for processing this very quickly.

You know, Sheila, I love you so dearly. You are such a wonderful person.
You are the biggest bag of contradictions that one can imagine. [Laughter.]
You come and tell us about principles. I looked in the Oxford Dictionary
and found that the word ``principle’’ is defined as a fundamental truth or
in law as the basis for reasoning or action, or as a fundamental source. In
other words, it is something fixed and immutable. It’s something that you
don’t just change as you wake up in the morning and so on.

Now, I’ll tell you what isn’t a principle. It can’t be a principle when
your party is one of the strongest initiators of floor-crossing. You know
what happened, you guys got into a marriage. It was a disaster and you
pushed us in all kinds of ways to go for floor-crossing. And we went that
route to try and solve the problem. Then you, hon Mrs Camerer, were one of
the members that took the opportunity to walk from one party to the other.
Then you come here today . . . [Interjections.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chair, on a point of order: Is the Minister not refusing
to talk about the Bill but instead talking ``chequebook’’ politics here?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Now, you
are making confessions. Did they buy you? Oh, that is even worse. Did they
buy you?

Mrs S M CAMERER: They wanted to buy me. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I could
forgive you for all those things, but you can’t come here today and say
it’s a principle of the party to oppose floor-crossing but you are going to
accept anyone who comes to you. I mean that can’t be a principle. That is
opportunism. [Laughter.] And it’s opportunism of the worst kind. I’ll tell
you why, because you stand on a platform and say we have principles. And
when we ask you what principles, you say you don’t like floor-crossing and
that if a member crosses the floor in your party you are going to penalise
that member, you are going to hammer them, but anyone who wants to come and
join you must please come and join you. That is not a principle.

So, your whole confused logic, I think, has made it quite fun for this
debate because it has exposed a whole lot of stuff. And what I want to say
to you is that if you want to cross, Mrs Camerer, we will talk, without a
``chequebook’’. You have made a habit of these things, so we can keep
letting you walk across this room. [Laughter.]

So, the issue of floor-crossing you are opposing now is definitely not a
principle, it’s clearly very opportunistic and we should be careful about
trying to sell it to people because people are not fools. I mean anyone
will know that if you say you are against anyone crossing the floor and
then you accept people, they know that is opportunism. It’s nothing else.

For example, people know that you guys didn’t do very well in the last
floor-crossing. So, what is it that the party can do? They are scared about
the next floor-crossing, what they then do as a principle is to oppose it
and try and dress it up as principle. It is not! It’s not a principle! It
never has been a principle! And in the case of this particular party and
the way they are dealing with it, it could not be that. But what it does do
is create a lot of fun and a lot of excitement in the House.

I want to assure the hon Joubert, as well. I agree with the point made
about fast-tracking. We should be very careful in this House not just to
fast-track issues, particularly if they affect political parties. But I can
assure you in terms of this legislation that nothing was set aside, nothing
was put aside to let it pass through on this occasion. So, you do not have
to worry about that.

Lastly, I think there are still some outstanding issues that need to be
dealt with. Some of them have been raised in the resolution, some in the
debate of the chairperson, some by one or two other persons. Again, can I
just say thank you very much to all of you. And again, make use of the
floor-crossing. You may not be here afterwards. So, don’t stand on your
principles because you may become very, very small in the process.

Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 217: Abram, S; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Balfour, B
   M N; Baloyi, M R; Batyi, F; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Biyela, B P; Bloem,
   D V; Blose, H M; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G;
   Cachalia, I M; Camerer, S M; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S;
   Chohan-Khota, F I; Cronin, J P; Cupido, H B; Davidson, I O; Davies, R H;
   De Lange, J H; Dhlamini, B W; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dlali, D M;
   Dodovu, T S; Dreyer, A M; du Toit, D C; Farrow, S B; Fihla, N B; Fraser-
   Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Fubbs , J L; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E ;
   George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gibson, D H M; Gigaba, K M N; Gillwald, C E ;
   Godi, N T; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Green, L M; Greyling, C H F;
   Gumede, D M ; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hendrickse, P; Hogan,
   B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P;
   Joubert, L K; Kalako, M U; Kalyan, S V; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J;
   Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P;
   Kohler-Barnard, D; Komphela, B M; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W;
   Labuschagne, L B; Landers, L T; Likotsi, M T; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T;
   Louw, S K; Lowe, C M; Lucas, E J; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N;  Maake, J
   J; Maduma , L D; Magau, K R; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N M;
   Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Maloney, L;
   Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Mars, I; Martins, B A D;
   Masango, S J; Mashangoane, P R; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathibela, N
   F; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D;
   Mdladlana, M M S; Mdlalose, M M; Mfundisi, IS; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z
   S; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T
   R; Mogale, O M; Mohamed, I J; Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T; Moloto, K A;
   Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R;
   Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, M I; Mpontshane, A M; Mthembu, B;
   Mthethwa, E N; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-
   Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngema,
   M V; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nogumla, R Z; Nonkonyana, M; Ntuli,
   B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, S N ; Oliphant, G G;
   Pahad, E G; Phala, M J; Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E ; Rabie, P J; Rajbally,
   S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M;
   Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Rwexana, S P;
   Saloojee, E; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman,
   E A; Seaton, S A; Sefularo, M; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; September , C C;
   Seremane, W J; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau, Sylvia N; Sithole,
   D J; Skosana, M B; Smith, V G; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Steyn, A C; Surty,
   M E; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Thabethe, E; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L;
   Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van
   der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Wyk, A; Vezi, T E; Vos, S C; Vundisa, S S;
   Waters, M; Weber, H; Woods, G G; Zikalala, C N Z; Zille, H; Zita, L;
   Zulu, B Z ; Zulu, N E.


   NOES - 7: Groenewald, P J; Madikiza, G T; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A;
   Nkabinde, N C; Pheko, S E M; Spies, W D;


   ABSTAIN - 1: Greyling, L W.

Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO 49th SESSION OF UN
                     COMMISSION ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN -
                          (BEIJING +10 CONFERENCE)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, the
Inter-Parliamentary Union affirms:


  The concept of democracy will only assume true and dynamic significance
  when political policies and national legislation are decided upon jointly
  by men and women, with equitable regard for the interests and aptitudes
  of both halves of the population.

In September 1995, South Africa participated in the United Nations’ Fourth
World Conference on Women, which was held in Beijing, China. At this
conference, our government committed itself to the Beijing Platform for
Action.

The 49th session of the United Nations’ Commission on the Status of Women,
which was held in New York from 28 February to 11 March 2005, provided an
opportunity to review progress made towards gender equality since the
Fourth World Conference on Women held in 1995.

The primary objective of the session was to reiterate, renew and enhance
the Beijing commitments. As Parliament, we have a particular role to play
with regard to overseeing the implementation of the Beijing Platform for
Action. One of the primary areas of work of the Joint Monitoring Committee
on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women is to monitor and
evaluate progress made in relation to enhancing the quality of women’s
lives in South Africa, with specific reference to the government’s
commitment to the Beijing’s Platform for Action, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, Cedaw, and any
other specific international instruments.

The programme for the 49th session of the Commission on the Status of Women
was structured around the following thematic areas:
Innovations in institutional arrangements for promoting gender equality at
national level; review of the implementation of the Beijing Platform for
Action and the outcome documents of the special sessions of the General
Assembly; current challenges and forward-looking strategies for the
advancement and empowerment of women and girls; observance of Women’s Day;
remaining challenges in relation to statistics and indicators; building on
the discussions at the high-level round table organised during the 48th
session of the commission last year; available data from The World’s Women:
Trends and Statistics, 2005, and the world survey on the role of women in
development; future perspectives on the promotion of gender equality
through the eyes of young men and women; and the role of regional and
intergovernmental organisations in promoting gender equality.

In addition to the main programme outlined above, the African Union
organised a panel discussion on monitoring gender equality commitments.

The Inter-Parliamentary Union also organised a session to explore the role
of parliaments in giving effect to the promotion of gender equity. Various
non-governmental organisations also organised a series of side events,
which ranged in thematic focus. This included sessions on violence against
women; critics of Beijing +10; women in armed conflict; the economic
empowerment of women; women and the environment; the trafficking of women
and girls; women with disabilities, and widows.

Governments reaffirmed their commitment to the implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome document of the
23rd Special Session of the General Assembly in 2000.

The declaration emphasises that the full and effective implementation of
the Beijing Declaration and the Beijing Platform for Action are essential
in achieving the internationally agreed upon development goals, including
the millennium development goals, and highlights the need to ensure a
gender perspective in the high-level plenary meeting on the review of the
millennium declaration.

It calls upon the United Nation systems, international and regional
organisations, civil society, women and men to commit themselves and
intensify contributions to the implementation of the Beijing Declaration
and the Beijing Platform for Action, and the outcome document of the 23rd
Special Session of the General Assembly. The report we are tabling here
today should enable them to chart a course of action for acting upon its
recommendations.

One of the mechanisms suggested is that the report be referred to the
relevant committees for discussion, including recommendations on taking the
issues forward. It is further suggested that a number of debates be held in
both Houses on the content area above. For example, in a week’s time, we
will be hosting a Women’s Parliament over two days, which will evaluate and
discuss the contents of the Beijing +10 report in depth.

We expect members of Parliament to be there on 30 and 31 August when we
celebrate the Women’s Parliament. We have involved provinces. Each province
will be sending 5 delegates; one of the delegates will be a girl-child, so
that they are here to chart their future. [Applause.]

Most of the members of Parliament who formed part of South Africa’s
national delegation to the 49th session of the United Nations - the members
of the South African parliamentary delegation include myself, the hon
Nhleko, hon Botha, hon Windvoël, hon Morutoa, hon Mabe, hon Roopnarain and
hon J Semple - will be addressing you today. They will tell you how
difficult it was for us to close our eyes under the leadership of Minister
Nkosazana Zuma and Minister Frazer-Moleketi, that we were working into the
night, because we as parliamentarians would be in all the committee
meetings, and then in the evening, we would meet together with the
officials and the Ministers to plan for the next day. It was a very
fulfilling experience. We worked a lot and it was freezing, but it was
worthwhile to put our country where it is supposed to be.

In 1992, the Nobel Peace Prize winner Rigoberta Menchu, advocate for Indian
rights in Guatemala, said women should be:

   . . . . a beacon of hope, to change systems promoting racism,
  discrimination, exclusion and the lack of economic opportunity. It is us
  who will eventually have to convince our governments that women need to
  be given equal space, to be given an opportunity to exploit their
  potential, and that it is not a gift for women to participate in decision-
  making - it is a right.


Recent statistics from the International Parliamentary Union show that, by
the end of 2003, for the first time, women had broken the 15% barrier
across all national parliaments. Globally, women currently comprise 15,2%
of the combined numbers of both lower and upper houses.

However, only 14 countries have so far managed to reach the 30% threshold
of women in national parliaments, a figure widely considered to signify the
point at which women can make a meaningful impact on the work of
parliament. It is very exciting that South Africa is one of those 14
counties.

Rwanda’s elections in 2003 saw one of the most significant increases in
women’s representation in parliament. This increase amounted to 23,1% more
women being elected to the national assembly. The representation of women
in parliament currently stands at an impressive 48,8%, rendering Rwanda the
country which has come closest to reaching equal numbers of men and women
in national parliament. Among the reasons for this shift is the fact that
woman MPs in Rwanda benefited from a constitutional quota, which reserves
24 of 80 seats in the lower house and 30% of the seats in the upper house
for women.

From a regional perspective, sub-Saharan Africa has also made significant
shifts, where the regional average has increased from 11,3% in 2000 to
15,3% in 2004. South Africa does not have an electoral quota for women, or
a constitutional guarantee that spells out numbers with respect to the
National Assembly, the National Council of Provinces or appointments in
Parliament.

However, we are a signatory of the SADC Declaration on Gender and
Development of 1997, and its addendum on the prevention and eradication of
violence against women, signed by heads of state in 1998. Article H of that
declaration refers to a minimum of 30% representation of women in decision-
making structures.

We have made substantive progress in advancing women in political and
decision-making positions, especially in the public sector. The private
sector still remains a challenge, even though matters are progressing
there. We have reason to celebrate the great strides this government has
made in advancing gender equity and representivity.

The Office on the Status of Women resides in the Presidency. The gender
machinery has been implemented effectively, with each department having its
own gender division. Women currently comprise a significant part of the
South African Cabinet. Within Cabinet the representation of women in 2004
was 42,8%, which is a 9,5% increase from 33% in 2003. In 2002, women made
up 57,1% of Deputy Ministers. In 2003, the figure was 50% and, in 2004, the
figure stood at 47,6%.

The decrease in the percentage does not translate into a decrease in the
actual number of women, but to an increase in the number of Deputy
Ministers. For the first time in the history of the country, the Deputy
President is a woman. Of the 28 Ministers, 12 are women of the 19 Deputy
Ministers, 10 are women, and of the nine provincial premiers, four are
currently women. Please give South Africa a big hand. [Applause.]

There are six office-bearers in the National Assembly, and women currently
fill three of these positions. There are currently 400 members in the
National Assembly, of these 134 are women. I am told the number has
increased, but the last time I checked the statistics, they came to 134.

Women make up 52% of the adult population in South Africa, and 41% of the
working South African population. They constitute 19,8% of all executive
managers, 10,7% of all directors in the country, and 6,2% of all CEOs and
chairs of boards. In essence, the above means that, altogether, 4% of
chairs of boards in South Africa are women, while only eight CEOs in South
Africa are women. Both statistics have increased since 2004, where only 11
chairs of boards were women and seven CEOs were women. I think a lot of
work has to be done, but at least there is some improvement.
Politics should involve an equal partnership between women and men, afford
equal standing to the needs and interests of both sexes, and allow both
women and men to participate in the pursuit of such needs and interests.

This principle of gender equality has been entrenched in numerous treaties,
including the United Nations Charter, the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination, and its protocol, which we rectified earlier
in the year, and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. However,
statistics indicate that many parliaments throughout the world are still
dominated by male representatives, and are thus neither gender balanced nor
gender sensitised.

I am aware that all South Africans throughout the country are committed to
ensuring that we do achieve gender representivity in all spheres of our
society. However, one of the key challenges is: what do we do once we get
there? We need to make a difference, move from commitment to
implementation, and lift other women as we rise. Don’t leave them down
there.

Remember, it is very lonely up there, and one would need a foundation of
people that will form a support base, so that when the challenges that come
with the territory cause you to trip and fall, there are warm hands that
encourage you to rise and fly again.

We need to qualitatively change the lives of those who are most vulnerable.
Gender equity means that we need to raise our voice to be the champions of
fairness and equity. It also means that we need to impress upon our girl
children that abuse is wrong and must be confronted at all times. More
importantly, there is a greater need to raise strong girl and boy children,
who have a heightened sense of botho, Ubuntu, tlhompho le maitseho
(humanity, respect and manners).

Advancing women’s issues in Parliament ought to lead to policies, laws, new
attitudes, and a public culture that empowers women in broader society.
This is less likely to happen if women do not have a public face, and if
those in the corridors of power, marginalise women’s issues.

It has been shown that setting minimum levels of women’s involvement in
politics and other spheres, forces organisations to examine their attitudes
and policies. It forces them to develop criteria and draw on wider pools of
talent, and make concerted efforts to attract people they would normally
use, but who prove to be highly talented members of Parliament.

It is important that Parliament is composed of members who are, in turn, a
reflection of the broader society in terms of gender, race, and its socio-
economic diversity. Surely, we can be proud of what we have achieved. In
fact, hon members, we should, as a challenge, put it to Parliament to
review its electoral law, so that all parties reflect agreed minimum women
participation in election lists, so that we do not only rely on the ruling
party’s commitment to affirming women, but on South African law for gender
parity which is already in our Constitution.

In the upcoming local government elections, I know for a fact that the ANC
candidates’ list will reflect 50:50 of both men and women. I challenge the
remaining parties to follow suit.

We need to create a chain of sisterhood that encourages support and growth
within our ranks. It is a strong chain that identifies, nurtures and
promotes talent. I am challenging all of you present here to begin to build
a legacy that we will be proud of by stretching the net much wider. Let us
ensure that through all our activities, be it in the public or private
sector, a lot more women do have a better life.

Let us link with other women’s groupings, and influence the shape of
things. Let us destroy the chasm that separates us from our communities.
Let your leadership and knowledge have a dramatic impact on our sisters and
mothers in the rural areas, by including and not excluding them from the
net of empowerment and development.

As human beings, we have a lot to learn from the animal kingdom. You would
understand with my environmental background that I can never leave the
animal kingdom.

In conclusion, I am going to tell a story of robins. Robins fly by making
wonderful patterns on the skyline. They do this with the first one telling
the next one to turn left or right. This message is passed from the first
bird to the last. At no stage do you hear the next robin saying, “I am too
stressed to turn left, let somebody else do it.” [Laughter.]

As women we need to unite and make synchronised patterns on the political,
social and economic landscape, because it is only as a united force that we
can make significant and lasting change. Let us take up the baton and raise
our national flag on high. “Igama lamakhosikasi. Malibongwe.” [Let the name
of women be praised.] [Applause.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Chairperson, hon members, I would like to start off by
thanking Parliament and the Democratic Alliance for allowing me to
represent them in New York this year. It was the most wonderful experience
to see thousands of women from all over the world congregating at the UN
and practically taking over that huge office and building for at least two
weeks. Thank you.

I am also pleased today to be able to talk about women and the environment;
something that I know is close to the Deputy Speaker’s heart and to mine.
As the primary caregivers of the family, women bear the worst consequences
of policies that ignore principles of environmental sustainability, since
they must cope with the increased difficulties of the day-to-day survival
of their families.

The Beijing Platform for Action and Cedaw both call for women to be
actively involved in environmental decision making, for gender perspectives
to be integrated into policies and programmes, and for national, regional
and international mechanisms to be established, to assess the impact of
environmental policies on women.

Beijing +5 also emphasised women’s rights to own land. The extent to which
these mandates have been implemented varies greatly throughout the world,
but despite country differences, women everywhere are mobilising around the
issue of access to and control over natural resources.

Women are major contributors to the wellbeing and sustainable development
of their communities and nations, and to the maintenance of the earth’s
ecosystems, biodiversity, and natural resources. Very often, the survival
of their families depends on the sustainability of the surrounding
environment in terms of water, firewood, indigenous plants and animals, and
the soil.

Across the globe, women are working to become more involved and more
adequately represented in decision-making on natural resources. South
African women are proud to have Madam Rejoyce Mabudafhasi as our Deputy
Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism. In those areas where
governmental representation is low, women still work at grassroots level on
environmental issues.

In Kenya, for example, most community-based organisations working on
environmental conservation are women led. Wangari Maathai, assistant
Minister for Environmental and Natural Resources, and the chairperson of
the Greenbelt Movement, won the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize for her contribution
to the environment, sustainable development, democracy and peace.

It was my great pleasure to listen to her on several occasions during the
New York declaration summit, and to present to her a gift on behalf of the
South African delegation. Ms Maathai correctly points out the direct
correlation between democracy, rights and the environment. It is always the
poorest communities with the least rights that suffer most from
environmental degradation.

Her Greenbelt Movement planted over 20 million trees in Kenya alone, which
helped prevent soil erosion, while at the same time providing shade and
fuel. This is why I believe every house that is built in South Africa
should have a tree planted in its yard. If it’s a fruit tree, all the
better, as it will also be a food source.

We learnt of women in the Pacific Islands who have been developing
partnerships with national and international agencies, using a community
approach to raising awareness. For example, rural women have worked with
the World Wildlife Fund for Nature on a wetlands conservation initiative.
Women in CARICOM countries are also highly involved in civil society
organisations that work on environmental affairs, and the ministries and
departments of gender affairs have played a part in supporting these
initiatives.

However, in other parts of the world, things are not going so well. In
Bangladesh, for example, women remain largely absent at all levels of
policy formulation and decision-making in natural resource management,
conservation, protection and rehabilitation, and their experience and
skills too often remain marginalised in policy-making and decision-making
bodies.

Even bodies like the EU, which one would expect to be more gender
compliant, have failed to develop a gender perspective in environmental
policy. No legislation has been adopted that deals with women and the
environment directly, even though there is increased knowledge that
environmental hazards impact on women and men differently, such as the
possible link between breast cancer and high levels of toxic chemicals in
women’s bodies.

I would like to show you a picture that probably only the front people can
see. This is actually in China. It shows a mother and daughter standing in
a sorghum field with a highly polluting power station behind them. That
picture could have been taken in any one of our environmental hotspots in
South Africa, like Vanderbijlpark or Mpumalanga.

In many parts of Southern Africa women are not adequately involved in the
management of the environment. We welcome Pam Yako’s appointment as
Director-General of our Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
and we hope that under her guidance, environmental policies will now have
the gender perspective that was previously lacking. Perhaps we should
consider having a feminine EIA process to assess the impact of
environmental policies on women, both rurally and in urban areas.

Environmental degradation disproportionately affects women and subsequently
increases their workloads in the informal sector. In Somalia, grassland
degradation, marine pollution, deforestation and coastal desertification
increase the amount of time women must spend looking for fuel wood, and
threaten the livelihood of women farmers. Have any similar studies been
done in South Africa? We have very much the same environmental problems,
and no doubt they have the same effect on women.

Indigenous women throughout the world are hit hardest by environmental
degradation. In Canada, environmental contaminants such as persistent
organic pollutants, known as POPs, have bio-accumulated in Artic wildlife,
and subsequently have impacted negatively on Inuit women’s health through
their diet, which primarily consists of meat.

In the US, POPs disproportionately affect native American women and
children, as toxic runoffs from factories near tribal land poison water and
food sources that are then consumed by women and transferred to their
children through breast milk. Do we know what effect air pollution hotspots
in South Africa are having on our women?

Ecological disasters also impact on women in particular ways. The December
2004 Indian Ocean tsunami made no distinction between men and women in the
death toll list, but according to the UN it produced gender-specific
aftershocks, ranging from increasing women’s traditional role in caring for
the sick, to an escalation in cases of rape and abuse. Once again, drought,
floods and shack fires, probably have the same effect on South African
women. We need to do specific environmental research to find out exactly
what these effects are.

At the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development held in South Africa,
women activists succeeded in winning landmark recognition of women’s rights
to inherit land. Yet throughout the world there are still laws blocking
women’s rights to inheritance and ownership.

It would seem that gender equality and equity in the environmental sector
have not yet been achieved, not only in South Africa, but throughout the
world. Women’s access to and control over resources needs to be
safeguarded, and their skills, knowledge and experiences and their
practical and strategic needs should be respected. South African women must
hold the government to account in ensuring that a rights-based approach to
gender and the environment, as specified in the Beijing Platform, is
promoted. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Hon Chairperson and hon members of this House, I would
like to begin my speech by thanking the Inkatha Freedom Party for allowing
me the opportunity to represent my party at the New York conference.

The 49th session of the Commission on the Status of Women provided a unique
opportunity to review progress made towards gender parity and equity. The
last two decades have witnessed far-reaching changes shaped by the influx
of women into the public sphere. The results of these events include shifts
in the labour market, educational achievements, significant decreases in
fertility rates and a modification in relationships within the family and
in certain decision-making areas.

Important issues were discussed at the conference, but the greatest
learning experiences at the Beijing Conference in New York didn’t happen
during speeches and resolutions. They happened during conversations. They
begin as a collective learning process. They happen when women of different
cultures and backgrounds share experiences and information.

My speech is premised on such an intervention. I was deeply touched when I
heard accounts of women with HIV/Aids, women with disabilities, women who
were victims of armed conflict, women who were affected by the tsunami
disaster, and many other accounts.

One point was clear: It is women’s voices that are heard above all others,
women are the advocates, and they are the activists. It is women who are
moved to act selflessly and speak publicly, often risking prejudice, abuse
or violence in order to improve the lives of others. The Convention on the
Elimination of Discrimination Against Women underlines that:


    . . . all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and
   that everyone is entitled to all rights and freedoms set forth therein,
   without distinction of any kind, including distinction based on sex.

Yet, what we as delegates listened to were in total contempt of this
convention. Woman after woman, from one country after another, spoke about
the inhumane oppression they suffered.

One factor that incessantly reared its head was the situation of HIV/Aids
and women, where women now account for half of all people living with HIV.
Why are more women vulnerable to the infection, you ask? Why is it that so
many are women, even when it is the men who have more sexual partners
outside marriage? Usually, it is society’s inequalities that put them at
risk.

A range of factors conspire to make women more vulnerable - poverty, abuse,
lack of information, coercion by older men, and men having several
concurrent sexual relationships. But one does not need to attend the
Beijing Conference to discover this. Here at home, young women are
desperate for the three Cs, as they are called – cell phone, clothes and
cash. And often, they engage in sexual relations with older men, ignorant
of the partner’s status.

Let me be clear: HIV/Aids is the most ferocious assault ever made by
communicable disease on women’s health. But it does not stop there. Other
calamities include female genital mutilation, violence against women and
sexual violence in particular, rape as a weapon of war, especially in
countries like Rwanda, Darfur, Northern Uganda, Eastern Congo, and marital
rape.

I pause to point out that studies now show that, in some parts of Africa,
the prevalence rates of HIV in marriage are often higher than they are for
sexually active single women in the surrounding community. Who would have
thought that this was possible?

One thing was clear at the conference: It cannot be business as usual. We
must be more strategic in our efforts to mainstream gender into the overall
macrocontext and the microcontext of communities, and certainly in our
response to HIV/Aids.

Another area that deeply touched me was the area of women with disabilities
and their vulnerability. Time and time again, women spoke about their
experiences. Very often, mentally challenged women became victims of
pornography. These women had no idea that they were being photographed,
only for their photographs to be published in pornographic material and on
websites.

Physically challenged women gave chilling accounts of how men repeatedly
raped them, and left them totally naked in a bathtub. These women were
wheelchair-bound and could not access help. Sometimes men deliberately
rearranged the furniture in the house without telling their blind partners.
This meant further hurt and injury. Many women gave accounts of how people
view disabled women as being asexual.

Research shows that women with disabilities face double oppression. Women
cannot continue to be denied access to fundamental rights, fundamental
health care and reproductive care.

When landmines, domestic abuse, genital mutilation and other forms of
violence continue to tear at the lives of women around the globe, we need
action. When prejudice, ignorance and other barriers stop women with
disabilities from getting the nutrition, physical activities and other
tools they need to survive, we need action.

We need to strive and work for the day when issues affecting women are not
dealt with as a side issue, a day when research on women with disabilities
is part of all research, and when health care for women with disabilities
is part of all health care.

Women and children make up a large majority of the world’s refugees. It is
a violation of human rights when women and girls are sold into slavery and
prostitution. It is a violation of human rights when women are doused with
gasoline, set on fire and burnt to death because their marriage dowries are
deemed too small. It is a violation of human rights when individual women
are raped in their own communities and thousands of women are subjected to
rape as a tactic or prize of war.

It is a violation of human rights when a leading cause of death amongst
women aged 14 to 44 is violence. It is a violation of human rights when
young girls are brutalised by the painful and degrading practice of genital
mutilation. It is also a violation of human rights when women and young
girls are denied access to antiretroviral treatment. It is a violation of
human rights when babies are raped and killed.

We need to look forward to the day when governments across the globe
understand that women constitute half of everything that affects mankind,
and women have to be involved in absolutely everything. The political
leadership of Africa needs to be lobbied with greater intensity on issues
of gender.

The IFP adopts this report, but we cannot just deliberate and have dialogue
on issues emanating from this report. We need to calibrate what
recommendations can be taken forward. And these factors cannot be addressed
piecemeal. These are non-negotiable. Change can only be brought about
through education of young girls, through legal or social reforms.

Finally, I would like to end by repeating what one representative told us,
“What will kill us more than Aids is despair and hopelessness; what we need
is hope”. Only if we put our report into action will we be able to answer
the question: Who will give Africa hope and who will look after Africa’s
children? Only we in this House can answer this question. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Chairperson and hon members, it is good that the
international community remains dedicated to the Beijing Declaration, as
well as the Beijing Platform for Action. Sadly, it seems that the United
States of America remains opposed to important aspects of gender equality.
Despite this, we can only hope that the international community will not
waver in their resolve and will continue with the vital work of
implementing the goals of Beijing +10.

As with all long-term international programmes, the important thing is to
keep momentum and ensure that regular reviews show progress and do not
become an end in themselves; in other words we must avoid the talk shop
syndrome.

In this regard, the various resolutions and recommendations reported on by
the South African delegation are welcomed on two fronts; firstly, because
it shows the continuation of a broad international front in support of
gender equality, and secondly, it demonstrates South Africa’s leading role
in this campaign.

Three of the resolutions deserve special mention, the economic advancement
of women, the elimination of the trafficking of women and children and,
finally, the mainstreaming of a gender perspective into all national
policies and programmes. It is our hope that these resolutions will result
in significant improvement in the quality of life of women around the
globe. In our view, these three resolutions tackle the problem of women
being marginalised and exploited in specific and relevant ways.

Turning towards the recommendations of the report, the UDM supports these
wholeheartedly. We urge government and this House to pursue the policy and
legislative development required vigorously. The leading role that South
Africa is playing in the international multilateral gender campaign, must
at all times be underpinned by our speedy domestic implementation of the
resolutions.

Therefore, the three resolutions mentioned earlier, must be implemented
within South African society immediately. Legislative measures against the
trafficking of women and girls must be introduced as a matter of urgency;
we must not countenance the possibility of our country as a haven for this
modern-day slavery. Similarly, the implementation and scope of our efforts
to stamp out violence and abuse of women must be stepped up. Our mothers,
sisters and daughters deserve to be free from the fear of rape and abuse.

The participation of women in the South African economy, as well as
mainstreaming gender issues within national programmes, require renewed
attention. Whilst these are not legislative issues, but rather a question
of policy, we need to ask whether the existing mechanisms are sufficient.
The question we need to ask is whether gender equality truly and adequately
informs all major economic and policy decisions. If the answer is, no, then
I would suggest that this House must be in the forefront of designing new
mechanisms to ensure that the needs and concerns of women are heard and
heeded. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms F BATYI: Chairperson, members of Parliament, South Africa has made
substantial progress with regard to the protection of women’s rights and
gender equality, as enshrined in our progressive Constitution, which states
that neither the state nor any person –

    . . . may unfairly discriminate directly or indirectly against anyone on
   one or more grounds, including race, gender, sex, pregnancy, marital
   status, ethnic or social origin, colour, sexual orientation, age,
   disability, religion, conscience, belief, culture, language and birth.


Overall, the ID wants to commend the South African government on its
efforts to uphold the constitutional provision by means of the Beijing
Programme for Action. We fully support the work of the institutions
established under our national gender machinery and are very pleased with
the accompanying progress and successes.

The increase in the number of women in the National Assembly after our last
general elections, and their lobbying for laws that promote gender justice,
such as the Domestic Violence Act, the Maintenance Act, the Recognition of
Customary Marriages Act and the Choice of Termination of Pregnancy Act, are
achievements we should all take pride in.

Moreover, the new credit scheme for small-scale farmers, as announced by
Finance Minister Trevor Manuel in his budget speech this year, provides
ample opportunity to ensure that women have access to land, as well as the
means to work their land.

Finally, the appointment of a female Deputy President has been an
invaluable step by our President to include women in important decision-
making positions. [Applause.]

Yet, many challenges remain to be addressed; women still constitute the
majority of the poor, homeless, jobless and dispossessed, where about 57%
of all unemployed people in our country are women and 80% of female-headed
households have no wage earners.

In addition, South Africa continues to have very high levels of sexual and
domestic violence, and our courts are still unable to deal with rape cases
quickly and sensitively. Illiteracy and lack of skills are still very
predominant amongst our women, especially in rural areas, which make it
difficult for them to access jobs and take part in our mainstream economy.

Finally, women, especially young women, are more vulnerable to the HIV/Aids
pandemic, as they are still powerless when it comes to negotiating safe
sex. The lack of health resources in schools and the absence of Aids
training information centres in rural areas exacerbate this problem.

In conclusion, the ID agrees with the NGO sector that the Beijing Platform
for Action serve as a minimum standard. South Africa and the rest of the
world should aim to achieve much more. South Africa has done extremely well
as far as legislation is concerned, but this means nothing if
implementation and a change in society’s attitude are not part of the
package.

We need to get back to basics and focus on action – action from government,
civil society and women themselves. Only then will we as government and
citizens of this country do justice to the right to equality as entrenched
in our constitutional Bill of Rights. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M R MORUTOA: Chairperson, Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, hon
Deputy Ministers, hon Deputy President, hon members of Parliament and the
public at large, I greet you all.

Sihlalo, ndizakuthetha ngohambo lwamalungu ePalamente awayeye kwinkomfa
eyayiseMelika isaziwa njenge 49th Session of the United Nations Commission
on the Status of Women eyayibanjelwe e-New York ngomhla wama-28 kuFebruwari
ukuya kumhla we-11 kuMatshi 2005.

Ndizakuthetha ngovavanyo lwamazwe onke jikelele mayelana nezivumelwano
ezazenzwe apho nguMzantsi Afrika, owayeyinxalenye yamanye amazwe kwinkomfa
yesine yeZizwe Ezimanyeneyo, kwinkomfa yamakhosikazi eBeijing naseChina.
Ndaye ndizakuchaza nemeko yethu apha eMzantsi Afrika malunga nezozigqibo
zazithathwe kuloo nkomfa. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, I rise to give a report about the visit of some members of
Parliament to the 49th Session of the United Nations Commission on the
Status of Women, which was held in New York in the United States from 28
February to 11 March 2005.

I will also touch on the review and appraisal of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action that was adopted in Beijing, China, during the
United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women by various countries,
including South Africa. The status and position of South Africa with regard
to the decisions that were taken at that conference will also be reflected
in this report.]

The 49th session provided an opportunity to review progress made towards
gender equality since the Fourth World Conference on Women held in 1995.
The objective of the session was to reiterate, renew and enhance the
Beijing commitments.

The Parliament of South Africa has a particular role to play with regard to
overseeing the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action. One of
the primary tasks of the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of
Quality of Life and Status of Women is to monitor and evaluate progress
made in relation to enhancing the quality of women’s lives in South Africa,
with specific reference to the government’s commitments, such as the
Beijing Platform for Action, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination Against Women, Cedaw, and any other specific
international instruments.

The programme of the 49th session of the Commission on the Status of Women
was structured around six thematic areas: Firstly, remaining challenges in
relation to statistics and indicators. We must build on the high-level
round table discussions we had when organising the 48th session of the
commission in 2004, as well as available data on the world’s women’s trends
and statistics of 2005 and the World Survey on the Role of Women in
Development.

Secondly, future perspectives on the promotion of gender equality through
the eyes of young men and women, and this was also discussed at the high-
level round table discussions, as was the role of regional and
intergovernmental forums in promoting gender equality.

In addition to the main programme outlined above, the African women
organised a panel discussion on monitoring gender equality commitments. The
International Parliamentary Union also organised a session to explore the
role of parliaments in giving effect to the promotion of gender equity.

Various NGOs organised a series of side events, which ranged in thematic
focus. These included a session on violence against women, economic
empowerment of women, women and the environment and the trafficking in
women and girls, etc.

Maybe I should hint at the declarations emanating from the 49th session of
the Conference on the Status of Women, namely that all governments reaffirm
their commitment. My focus will be on some of the resolutions of the
conference, such as the elimination of the trafficking of women and girls
for all forms of exploitation.

Internationally, the trafficking of persons has been identified as a
serious threat to human security and development. It thrives because it is
extremely profitable, with relatively few risks attached. It is easier to
move human cargo through borders and past immigration officials than it is
to traffic drugs or weapons. In Africa the situation is exacerbated by the
collapse of the rule of law in certain countries, widespread corruption and
failure to implement existing antislavery laws, which allows perpetrators
to go unpunished.

Trafficking of people, especially women and children, is considered to be
the third largest source of profits for organised crime next to drugs and
guns. The trafficking of women has become a global problem of such
magnitude that Interpol has established a working group on trafficking in
women for sexual exploitation.

The working group initially comprised 40 member countries, mainly from
Europe. Interpol has devoted its attention in 2005 to increasing the
participation from Africa, Asia and the Americas. The purposes for
trafficking persons are varied, including sexual exploitation, forced
labour or slavery practices, servitude, forced marriages, adoption or the
removal of organs or other body parts.

Human trafficking for sexual purposes constitutes a form of violence
against women and children and serves to bring about systematic gender
inequity, as it reinforces the premise that women and children are
commodities. The overwhelming majority of victims of trafficking for sex
work purposes are women and girls, while perpetrators are predominantly
men.

Limited research has been conducted on trafficking in South Africa. There
are no official statistics on the number of persons trafficked to and from
South Africa, particularly into the sex industry. South Africa does not
have antitrafficking legislation. This is one of the factors that make this
debate to be of utmost importance. We need to hasten the process of
legislating the antitrafficking legislation. South Africa is considered to
be mainly a country of destination for victims of trafficking. It is also
considered to be a transit point of trafficking operations between
developing countries and Europe.

Research conducted by Molo Songololo has brought this information to the
joint monitoring committee. The findings continue to tell us how street
children are coerced or forcibly abducted by men and taken across the
border to towns and asparagus farms in the Eastern Free State. They are
then held captive in private houses and are sexually assaulted over the
course of a few days. My good people of South Africa, we cannot keep quiet
about this.

One of the resolutions concerned violence against women - both domestic
violence and violence perpetrated in public arenas. This remains
unacceptably high in South Africa. Gender-based violence perpetrated
against women is widespread. Its occurrence cuts across geographical areas,
race, class and cultural boundaries.

South African government structures place considerable emphasis on the use
of quantitative data to inform policy and hence their spending priorities
and the availability of accurate statistics on gender-based violence are
key factors when determining government policy interventions. Unfortunately
the joint monitoring committee, when it exercised its oversight role last
time, discovered that these statistics were not readily available. If we
cannot collate reliable statistical information pertaining to violence
against women in the domestic arena, we will rely virtually on speculation
on this level of violence.

The development of an integrated response to violence against women is an
ongoing and evolving process. Measures have thus far included the
following: Policy framework development and law reform - this is a
comprehensive law reform programme that has sought to strengthen the
integrated approach to violence against women.

Law reform measures give priority to sexual offences and domestic violence
and a specific focus is placed on crimes such as trafficking in women and
children and child pornography. In terms of law interventions, the focus is
on bail, sentencing, victim empowerment and integrated responses.

Administratively, guidelines to support the implementation of laws have
been developed and include, for example, the sexual offences. Institutional
mechanisms have also been created to address violence against women. With
all the tools I have mentioned in place, we should be experiencing minimal
domestic incidents, but just the opposite is true: More women are being
killed by their partners.

Previously when we struggled for the emancipation of women, we knew that
women were triple oppressed: by virtue of their colour, at home, and at
their places of work. This escalated into domestic violence, intimate
femicide, and trafficking of women and children. These offences became
first class enemies to women and society.

Gauteng has been identified as one of the provinces where intimate femicide
is rife. A recent incident was related to a power struggle between a
husband and a wife, and what aggravated the situation was that the wife was
given authority over their property, which previously was a family house.
This means that women are not safe in their marriages.

Intimate femicide or intimate female homicide refers to killing of women by
intimate partners. This is one of the most extreme forms of violence
against women. International studies have linked the occurrence to a
history of domestic violence, the risk increasing where there is trial
separation or actual separation.

A study conducted in 1999 showed a link between the ownership of legal guns
and incidents of femicide. One in five of the perpetrators of intimate
femicide, ie 20,6%, had a legal firearm, compared to 3,5% of the
perpetrators of nonintimate femicide who had alcohol abuse problems, and
compared to 12,5% of the perpetrators of nonintimate femicide. Only 37,3%
of female homicides resulted in convictions. Lack of evidence was the
reason given in 69,9% of cases in which the perpetrators were acquitted.

The joint monitoring committee strongly appeals to male partners to be part
of the eradication of this source of violence against women. We know that
the Medical Research Council, MRC, and the Commission on Gender Equality
hosted a workshop on 1 June 2005, at which the findings of the MRC’s
national study on intimate femicide were presented.

In addition, here in Parliament, tomorrow, 24 August 2005, we are hosting a
discussion between civil society, members of Parliament, the Women’s Caucus
and their male counterparts, business people and, of course, girl children.
This is to describe the problem of intimate femicide in South Africa; to
identify the factors associated with intimate femicide and violence against
women and children; and to compare the management of women killed in
domestic violence.

If we, as parliamentarians, husbands, civil society and nongovernmental
organisations, do not make this our responsibility, we will experience a
negative result in the implementation of our laws. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the ACDP expresses its appreciation for the
excellent task performed by the parliamentary delegation to the 49th
Session of UN Commission on the Status of Women.

The report compiled by the delegation emphasises that women have a
significant role to play in restoring order to this country. Women are the
cornerstones of our society. Yet they suffer extreme abuse, exploitation
and degradation. It is extremely sad when government passes legislation
that renders women even more vulnerable, or when they neglect to pass
legislation that would effectively address the problems of women.

Parliament is urged to take cognisance of the references to legislation,
contained in this report, regarding pornography and child trafficking. The
ACDP is particularly pleased to note that the link between pornography and
violence has finally been acknowledged without reservation. We support the
call for legislators and civil society to protect our women and children
from the dangers of pornography.

We no longer have to wait for the official release of statistics to see the
devastating effects of moral degeneration on our women, our children and
our society. All South Africans know that babies are being raped on almost
a daily basis. We are all aware that children from as young as seven years
of age are being sold into prostitution. We are aware that prostitution
leads to misery for women and children: What kind of society are we trying
to create?

This question is also posed by the delegates in their report. At the 2004
Women’s Parliament certain South African women’s groups unfortunately
voiced their support for the legalisation of prostitution. However, the
Beijing +10 delegation is calling for a review of that demand. They ask the
question: What will better serve to protect women’s rights and their social
status? Is it the legalisation of sex work or its criminalisation?

The ACDP is of the view that there are many unintended consequences in
legalising prostitution. An obvious consequence would be a rapid increase
in the use of children in prostitution and trafficking.
The absence of legislation pertaining to trafficking of women and children
in South Africa - and this has been referred to by several speakers at this
podium - has meant that offenders have been given almost a free rein to
abduct, prostitute, degrade, abuse and exploit. Trafficking separates
mothers from their children. It exposes children to being used in
pornography and makes women and children more vulnerable to violence.

In conclusion, August is the month for women. Let us make a concerted
effort to address these issues that affect the lives of South African women
so profoundly. It is encouraging to witness the wisdom and clarity of mind
with which women are attacking the obstacles that confront them. Let us
harness all our strength and give them all our support in any way we can. I
thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairperson, our national liberation will be meaningless
if it allows the persistence, in any form whatever, of the oppression,
suppression, exploitation, depersonalisation, discrimination against and
social degradation of women.

The Beijing Platform for Action provides our nation with a scorecard and we
should do everything in our power to advance everything that will lead to
social equality between men and women.

The representation of women in this Parliament and in South Africa’s
Cabinet is commendable. The call by Salga for 50% representation of women
in the upcoming local government elections is a call that all political
parties must heed. We also need to call for the increased representation of
women in the private and economic sectors.

African women are taking up the banner of advancing equality in our society
evidenced by initiatives such as the fatherhood project and men as partners
in the fight to end gender violence. However, many challenges remain. South
Africa has one of the highest levels of gender violence in the world.
Whatever the statistics, one rape is one too many.

The long-awaited sexual offences legislation has been dormant in this House
for a long time. This is a scandal in a country with high levels of gender
violence. The implementation of this legislation is long overdue. We cannot
miss the opportunity to do so during this period of Beijing +10, before the
end of 2005.

Ten years after Beijing we should celebrate African women’s determination
and our liberation struggle to eliminate women’s landlessness,
homelessness, privatisation of water and health care, joblessness,
illiteracy, poverty, HIV/Aids, violence against women and negative cultural
practices, which return women to an archaic conception of tradition that
impacts negatively on women in our society.

Far from creating division, the struggle of our women is one of the key
instruments to speed up liberation and social advancement of the African
people. Let the Beijing Platform for Action move us from broken promises
and rhetoric to action. The PAC supports the report of the Parliamentary
Delegation to the 49th Session of the UN Commission on the Status of Women.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, all protocol observed, from 1991 South Africa
committed itself to being a democracy, a democracy that shall be
exemplified by the values of equality, freedom and human rights enshrined
in our national Constitution of 1996 that governs as the supreme law of the
land.

Since 1994 we have experienced a total metamorphosis of South African life
and society. No matter our colour, creed, religion or sex, we are free and
equal. With the machinery to pave the way to a true democracy in South
Africa, it is for South Africans to seize the opportunity to be whoever
they want to be.

However, even with a government of great competence to steer South Africa
to its true democracy, the aftermath of many years of exploitation by the
apartheid regime has left many challenges on our path to success. In ten
years, South Africa has achieved so much and has developed into a great
nation.

One of our greatest challenges has been to achieve gender equality, and the
MF is proud that South Africa is working hard to ensure the advancement and
the development of women in all sectors. However, loopholes and challenges
do exist and the MF especially expresses its concern on the matter of
violence against women.

We are proud to be part of the Beijing Platform for Action and its
commitment to improve the status and quality of life of women. We are
committed to the protection and status of women globally. South Africa is a
country that firmly advocates the adherence to and enforcement of human
rights and stands as a strong supporter of the Beijing Platform for
Action’s concerns that clearly correlate with our domestic concerns.

In view of our report at the Beijing +10 on our progress in achieving our
commitment to the Beijing Platform for Action, the MF is proud of our
achievement. The report, which engaged the contribution of our NGOs, served
to reflect the true status and progress domestically.

We are pleased that this strategy of a report was opted for, as it reflects
South Africa’s commitment to true advancement. Matters covered by the South
African report reflect on issues of great concern. The individual reports
of NGOs are strongly supported.

This commitment extends to the greater continent of Africa and we are
pleased at the achievements attained at the 7th African Regional Conference
on Women that took place in October 2004 in Addis Ababa, and the
recommendations made to the African continent are supported.

It is hoped that our African brothers and sisters excel at these
recommendations domestically and the liberation of women of South Africa
would be shifted from paper and words into reality.

The MF reaffirms its commitment to the Beijing Platform for Action and we
acknowledge that success domestically is beyond government and should be
all of South Africa’s commitment.

We are equal and free. Stop all violence against women and children. Women
celebrate who you are; you have the power to be whoever you want to be.
Malibongwe! Igama lamakhosikazi! [Let it be praised! The name of women!]
[Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Thank you, Chairperson. I would just like to say a few
words about the resolution referred to on page 34 of the report to the
commission which ensures that UN member states recognise the need to reduce
demands for trafficked women and children. This was introduced by the US
but the report makes it clear that South Africa demanded a holistic
approach to trafficking; saying that focusing on demand was too narrow. Our
delegation insisted that reference should be made to Cedaw and other key
international instruments, as well as contributory factors such as poverty
and unemployment.

South Africa, which eventually co-sponsored the resolution, got its way and
the final text of the resolution called on governments to take action to
address root factors, including poverty and gender inequality as well as
external factors that encouraged trafficking for protection and other forms
of commercialised sex and to take steps to criminalise trafficking in
persons.

It is ironic that South Africa was so upfront about this on the
international stage because as far as our own laws to criminalise
trafficking are concerned, we have not got our house in order. In spite of
the fact that the UN Protocol to prevent trafficking in persons is in force
in South Africa, we do not have any legislation as yet which specifically
outlaws trafficking in persons, especially women and girl children for the
purpose of sexual or any other form of exploitation.

This is in spite of the fact that there is ample evidence that trafficking
is on the increase in our subcontinent. The International Organisation for
Immigration contends that there is one long grass pathway between the DRC
and Cape Town with minimal border control and the main destination of
victims of trafficking from sub-Saharan Africa is South Africa – our
country.

I have recently listened to briefings by the SA Police’s sexual offences
and child protection unit as well as by specialists in sexual offences from
the NPA, and both deplore the fact that South Africa still has no specific
legislation outlawing trafficking in persons, in spite of years of requests
by these authorities and years of research by the SA Law Reform Commission.


Such legislation should also ensure that counselling and assistance to
victims of trafficking be made available by government. The NPA points out
that it is extremely difficult to prosecute successfully for trafficking in
the current legal environment.

As a signatory to the UN Protocol South Africa is obliged to adopt
legislative measures to establish trafficking as a criminal offence but we
are going about it piecemeal. For example, a provision has been included in
the recently passed Children’s Act to outlaw trafficking in children for
all purposes.

However, these provisions of the new Act have not yet been enacted so the
police and prosecution services still have to rely on section 28 of the
Constitution, which protects children, common law crimes such as abduction,
kidnapping, rape and indecent assault, and some statutory provisions in the
old Child Care Act and Sexual Offences Act which are ineffective. They have
even tried using the Prevention of Organised Crime Act, with limited
success.

Similarly for women, the Sexual Offences Bill, when it last served before
the Portfolio Committee on Justice prior to the April 2004 general election
contained a clause outlawing trafficking in women and children. This was
included at the specific request of the DA, as I had submitted a Private
Member’s Bill outlawing trafficking, which was supported by the relevant
committee of Parliament and the Department of Justice agreed that it should
be incorporated.

In the meantime, the Sexual Offences Bill has disappeared back into the
Department of Justice where it has remained for the past 16 months!
Repeated questions to the Minister of Justice as to when it might return to
Parliament have elicited the response that she regards it as a priority and
we will get it back this year. But it is already nearly September and there
is no sign of the Bill!

The bottom line is that as things stand now South Africa has not complied
with its international obligations to criminalise trafficking, and the
government is not assisting the law enforcement agencies to combat this
growing scourge in our sub-continent. We can only appeal to the government
to get a move-on, and I am delighted to see our new Deputy President, the
Leader of Government Business, present at this debate. The DA will soon be
making its own submissions for a comprehensive anti-trafficking Bill. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, Deputy President, let me start by saluting the
many heroines, sung and unsung, standing and those that have fallen, for
the gallant demonstration of dedication to struggle that they displayed in
1956 when they marched on the Union Buildings, as the Bapedi would say:
“Mmago ngwana o swara thipa ka bogaleng.” [If a woman wants to achieve
something she has to be courageous.] [Applause.]

I am deeply honoured yet humbled at having been afforded this opportunity
of addressing you on this subject, on which I am least qualified as indeed
are, in my humble opinion, all men. For, as men, we have never known how it
feels to conceive and give birth to new life, and to experience the pain of
delivery at childbirth; the anxiety associated with the intimate
responsibility of ensuring the survival and development of this new life;
the agony of its paternity being denounced and having to face the challenge
of raising it single-handedly whilst the paternal side of this joint
venture steps aside, completely indifferent to the situation.

Yes, indeed, social and economic inequalities between men and women in most
societies of the world, including our own, persist because human society,
steeped in its patriarchal legacy, continues to have cold feet and will not
take the plunge into the unchartered waters of gender equality. Yet many
lessons are there to be learnt from nature itself, even by observing the
social structures of various species in the animal kingdom itself.

In that kingdom, for example, it is generally unheard of that males
perpetrate violence against their offspring and female counterparts, let
alone within the same family unit. On the contrary, the males would perform
a supportive and protective role and share in the core familial
responsibilities of caring for, and protecting, the young.

But where could things possibly have gone wrong in our human society,
resulting in phenomena such as paedophilia, infanticide, femicide – the
killing of women - and other violent crimes against women and children?
Where did we lose our inherent human attributes of compassion, care and
responsibility commonly known as ubuntu, particularly for those who will
ensure our continued existence into the future, namely the women and
children they give birth to?

It is because of this and other similar concerns that the world gathered in
Beijing in November 1995 and made the following declaration, and I quote:

  We, the governments participating in the Fourth World Conference on
  Women, gathered here in Beijing in September 1995, the year of the 50th
  anniversary of the founding of the United Nations; determined to advance
  the goals of equality, development and peace for all women everywhere in
  the interest of all humanity; acknowledging the voices of all women
  everywhere and taking note of the diversity of women and their roles and
  circumstances; honouring the women who paved the way and inspired by the
  hope present in the world’s youth; recognise that the status of women has
  advanced in some important respects in the past decade but that progress
  has been uneven, inequalities between women and men have persisted and
  major obstacles remain serious consequences for the wellbeing of all;
  also recognise that this situation is exacerbated by the increasing
  poverty that is affecting the lives of the majority of the world’s
  people, in particular women and children, with origins in both the
  national and international domains; dedicate ourselves unreservedly to
  addressing these constraints and obstacles and thus enhancing further the
  advancement and empowerment of women all over the world; and agree that
  this requires urgent action in the spirit of determination, hope, co-
  operation and solidarity now, and to carry us forward into the next
  century.


In addition, the Beijing Platform for Action, BPA, which is an agenda for
women’s empowerment, was also adopted on the same occasion. It aims at
removing all the obstacles to women’s active participation in all spheres
of public and private life through a full and equal share in economic,
social, cultural and political decision-making. This means that principles
of shared power and responsibility should be established between women and
men, at home, in the workplace and in the wider national and international
communities.

Equality between women and men is a matter of human rights and a condition
for social justice. It is also a necessary and fundamental prerequisite for
equality, development and peace. A transformed partnership based on
equality between women and men is a condition for people-centred and
sustainable development. A sustained and long-term commitment is essential
so that women and men can work together for themselves, for their children
and for society to meet the challenges of the 21st century.

In June 2000, a special session of the General Assembly reviewed the
implementation of the BPA at the Beijing +5 conference. Governments
pledged, in the outcome document they adopted, to review domestic
legislation with a view to striving to remove discriminatory provisions as
soon as possible, preferably by 2005.

The 10-year international review and appraisal of the Beijing Platform for
Action took place at the 49th session of the Commission on the Status of
Women in March 2005 at Beijing +10. In addition to reviewing the
implementation of the resolutions of the Platform for Action, the
commission discussed current challenges and forward-looking strategies for
the advancement and empowerment of women and the girl child. After the
Beijing conference, many African governments, including our own, declared
their support for the implementation of the BPA resolutions and developed
national action plans to give effect to their commitment.

These action plans outlined governmental priorities in implementing the BPA
as well as the proposed methods and institutional frameworks within which
the stated objectives were to be met. In 2000, our government adopted the
national policy framework for women’s empowerment and gender equality. This
policy framework sets out the country’s vision for gender equality and
details the means by which the vision is to be achieved.

National gender machinery, which refers to structures that have been put in
place by the state to take responsibility for the periodic review of
changing conditions, or lack thereof, of women’s lives and for eradicating
the factors that perpetuate women’s subordination, were established to
drive the process.

The mechanisms and processes in the national machinery are set, among
others, to create the political, economic, legislative and judicial
environment that enables women to enjoy, exercise and defend all their
economic, social and political rights on an equal basis with men; achieve
equality for women as active citizens, decision-makers and beneficiaries in
the political, economic, social and cultural spheres of life; prioritise
the needs of women most in need of social upliftment; develop and implement
mechanisms through which the country can meet its constitutional and
international commitments towards gender equality, human rights and social
justice; promote the enactment of laws that take into account the needs and
aspirations of women; and allocate resources for the benefit of women in
rural and urban areas, and ensure that these resources reach them.

Several structures and mechanisms have been put in place at various levels
of state and civil society with the above aims in mind. Last year, in
October, I was privileged to be part of a delegation to the 111th
conference of the Interparliamentary Union in Geneva, where, amongst other
matters traversed, was the adoption and evaluation of progress made in
preparation for Beijing +10 by the Interparliamentary Union.

One of the specific areas covered by the recommendations emanating from
this report was that states and political parties needed to commit
themselves to gender equality and to prioritise gender as a permanent
feature of their policies. From the ANC, I can speak without fear of
contradiction of our unwavering commitment to the full attainment of this
goal.

In so far as our laws are concerned, a number of women-friendly laws have
been passed by Parliament that seek to advance the human rights and
freedoms of women. Amongst these is a package of laws calculated to protect
women against all forms of violence including, and in particular, domestic
violence as well as to introduce victim empowerment strategies that have
either been passed and are being implemented or are in the process of being
developed.

In addition, significant progress has been made in the implementation of
the new and more progressive measures contained in the current maintenance
legislation, through the injection of additional resources, both human and
material. The new Children’s Bill that has already been alluded to this
morning and that was recently passed by this House – and is also awaiting
passage in the NCOP – was aimed primarily at the protection of the rights
of children, as required by our Constitution and international law. It has
added protective measures that will specifically address the safety and
wellbeing of the girl child.

These measures include extensive provisions against child trafficking – as
has already been alluded to by some of my colleagues – child abduction and
the sexual exploitation of children. For the first time in our history,
provisions regulating the adoption of South African children by foreigners
will also ensure the necessary protection of those children in those
circumstances. The Bill also introduces a paedophile register and measures
to prevent paedophiles from working in close contact with children. There
is still a long way to go but we are getting there.

To back these measures up, government has extended the social security net
to the large majority of poor children to enhance social cohesion and in
pursuit of a holistic approach for the protection of children, especially
in support of poor women in their quest and challenge to protect and ensure
the survival of their children. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, on behalf of the
Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I move:

      That the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 17:44.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           THURSDAY, 23 JUNE 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 23 June 2005:


        (i)      Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2005] (National
             Assembly – sec 77)


        (ii)     Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 20 – 2005]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)

2.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         Tweede Wysigingswetsontwerp op Belastingwette [W 20 – 2005]
         (National Assembly – sec 75)


          This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Taxation
          Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 20 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
          75).


National Assembly

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bill passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 23 June 2005 and
        transmitted for concurrence:


        Older Persons Bill [B 68B - 2003]  (National Council of Provinces –
          sec 76)


        The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Social
        Development of the National Assembly.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on
Statute of the Centre for Science and Technology of the Non-Aligned
Movement and Other Developing Countries, dated 21 June 2005:


 The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having considered the
 request for approval by Parliament of the Statute of the Centre for
 Science and Technology of the Non-Aligned Movement and Other Developing
 Countries, referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section
 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Statute.

Request to be considered.


2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Labour on Oversight visits to
Northern Cape and North West Provinces, dated 8 February 2005:

The Portfolio Committee on Labour, having conducted oversight visits to the
Northern Cape and the North West from 4 to 8 October 2004, reports as
follows:

   A. Names of delegation

      Ms O R Kasienyane (ANC-Chairperson)
      Mr T G Anthony (ANC)
      Mr M Maduma (ANC)
      Ms L N Moss (ANC)
      Mr M J G Mzondeki (ANC)
      Ms N D Ngcengwane (ANC)
      Mr G G Oliphant (ANC)
      Mr S M Rasmeni (ANC)
      Ms B Tinto (ANC)
      Mr R K Henderson (DA)
      Prince N E Zulu (IFP)
      Mr N T Godi (PAC)
      Ms S Rajbally (MF)
      Mr W D Spies (FF Plus).
      Ms P Jayiya (Committee Secretary) and Ms C B Paulse (Committee
      Assistant) accompanied the delegation.

   B. Terms of reference

      The terms of reference of the Committee were to:


      *     Exercise oversight over the DOL’s adherence to the strategic
        objectives as set out in its strategic plan for 2004-05, and to
        assess progress made with the implementation of the set objectives.
      *     Assess the level of compliance with the existing labour
        legislation by the DOL and employers.
      *     Ascertain whether targets set in relation to employment equity,
        learnerships, occupational health and safety and job creation were
        met.
      *     Establish progress and challenges faced at provincial level by
        the DOL and other stakeholders.
      *     Conduct oversight by interacting with the DOL, labour centres,
        employers and employees (including organised labour), the
        Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA),
        Umsobomvu Youth Fund, designated groups (Women, people with
        disabilities and the youth) and other stakeholders.

   C. Itinerary

      Day one: 4 October 2004

      (1)   Briefing at Northern Cape Provincial Office in Kimberley.
      (2)   Presentation at PPC Lime Mine.
      (3)   Departure to Kuruman.

      Day two: 5 October 2004


      (1)   Presentation at Sishen Iron Ore Mine.
      (2)   Presentation by DOL and labour centre staff at Livingstone
      Lodge, Kuruman.
           End of Northern Cape programme.
           Depart for Vryburg.
      (3)   Meeting with staff from Vryburg and Taung Labour Centres

      Day three: 6 October 2004


      (1)   Visit to two farms in Vryburg - interaction with farmers and
   farm workers.
                  Depart for Mafikeng.

      Day four: 7 October 2004

      (1)   Briefing by provincial office (Mmabatho).
      (2)   Meeting with Provincial Skills Development Forum (PSDF),
           Umsobomvu Youth Fund, SANGOGO, and designated groups.
           Depart for Klerksdorp.
      (3)   Meeting with CCMA.

      Day five: 8 October 2004


      (1)   Meeting with North West Labour Market Co-ordinating Forum
      (NWLMCF).
      (2)   Media briefing.
           End of visit.


   D. Structure of the report

      The report presents the daily activities undertaken by the delegation.
      It outlines the various presentations made to the delegates by the
      various stakeholders, site visits, salient issues and problems
      identified by the Committee while on site visits, and recommendations
      put forward by the Committee for action.

   4 October 2004



      (1)   Presentation by Northern Cape DOL Provincial Office


      The Committee received a briefing from the management team comprising
      the following persons:


           i     Mr D Makhanda, Provincial Executive Manager;
           ii    Mr J Mphahlele, Head: Regional Office, Kimberley;
           iii   Ms P Ruwana, Business Unit Manager: Labour Market
           Information,
                 Statistics and Planning (LMIS&P);
           iv    Ms I Schoeman, Business Unit Manager: Management Support
                 Services
                 (MSS);
           v     Mr A K Pillay, Business Unit Manager: Beneficiary
           Services;
           vi    Ms F Camphor, Business Unit Manager: Employment and Skills


                 Development Services (ESDS);
           vii   Mr R Geswint: Inspection and Enforcement Services (IES);
           viii  Mr G Sefotlho, Communications Officer.

      The Provincial Executive Manager briefly introduced the organisational
      structure. The Business Unit Managers of the various programmes made
      presentations as follows:


      (2)   IES


           The province has a total of seven labour centres and 42
           inspectors. The labour centres are serviced by two assistant
           directors, two senior practitioners and three practitioners. The
           centres are located in Kimberley, Kuruman, Calvinia, De Aar,
           Springbok, Upington and Postmasburg.



           Constraints



                 (a)   Lack of subsidised 4x4 vehicles for areas that are
                       not reachable by any other means. Areas mentioned
                       were Noenieput, Mier, Van Zylsrus, etc. Most
                       inspectors can only afford a Toyota Tazz or a VW
                       Golf.
                 (b)         Lack of facilities in remote areas.
                 (c)   Distances traveled by inspectors within the
                       respective regions. The concern expressed is that
                       more time is spent on the road.



           Proposals



                 (a)   The introduction of 4x4 mobile units can enhance
                       service delivery in remote areas. The introduced
                       mobile units could serve as labour centres.
                 (b)   The DOL should investigate suitable affordable
                       transport for level-five and level-six inspectors.

                 Comments/Questions


                 (a)         Follow up on inspections conducted.
                 (b)         The timeframe set for filling vacancies.
                 (c)   Whether the DOL considered renting those 4x4 mobile
                       units on an ad hoc basis.
                 (d)   Whether the inspectors covered the inspection of
                       seasonal workers.
                 (e)   How does the DOL envisage servicing areas that are
                       not accessible as a result of distances to be
                       traveled?
                 (f)   What role does organised business play?
                 (g)         Progress on the integration of the inspectorate
                       and learnerships in respect of inspections.
                 (h)   Accessibility of CCMA offices.

      Responses

      (a)   There have been successes in conducting follow-up inspections.
                       Standards and timeframes have been set. Such an
                       exercise is done within a specific period.
                 (b)   All vacancies in the IES are in the process of being
                       filled. All posts in the inspectorate are regarded as
                       critical.
                 (c)   The DOL is currently engaged in a special project of
                       conducting inspections in the agricultural sector.
                       The approach of the DOL in purchasing 4x4 mobile
                       units is to assist inspectors in conducting
                       inspections in remote areas.
                 (d)   The DOL takes the issues of seasonal workers and
                       child labour seriously. For example, a two-week blitz
                       was conducted in the Kakamas area. The DOL is
                       currently consolidating a report on those
                       inspections. Provincial structures have adopted a
                       collective approach in dealing with child labour.
                 (e)   Regarding vast distances to be traveled, more
                       emphasis is put on planning so that visits are
                       conducted in almost all the regions. The DOL,
                       however, is in the process of servicing the Orange
                       Valley area to ascertain what is happening on those
                       farms. Law enforcement is exercised where incidents
                       are identified.
                 (f)   Agri SA and government departments, including NOCCI
                       from organised business, are role players who
                       constitute the stakeholders’ forum.
                 (g)   In relation to the integration of the inspectorate,
                       the national office deals with the matter.
                 (h)   Regarding learnerships and inspections, the province
                       is currently finalising the curriculum and learning
                       material for learners in each labour centre in the
                       province.
                 (i)   The offices of the CCMA are located closer to
                       transport nodes, such as taxi ranks.


           (3)   ESDS
                 This Unit is assigned the responsibility of enhancing
                 employment and skills development in the province.


                 Constraints


                 (a)   Shortage and capacity of computers;
                 (b)   Lack of space for learners;
                 (c)   Implementation of the NSFDIS;
                 (d)   Staff shortage;
                 (e)   Shortage of pool cars.


                 Remedial action


                 (a)   Write submission to the Business Unit
                       Manager/Provincial Executive Manager for new
                       computers.
                 (b)   Siemens to install new server to increase the
                       capacity and speed of old computers.
                 (c)   The management to approve the submission on the
                       allocation of office space.
                 (d)   The responsible Deputy Director-General to fast track
                       the response on the submission on the implementation
                       of the NSFDIS.
                 (e)   The filling of existing vacancies of ESPs to be
                 prioritised.
                 (f)   Feedback on applications for subsidised cars to be
                 sped up.

                 Comments/Questions


                 (a)   Is the impact of the support on social projects
                       assessed?
                 (b)   How well has the social plan been implemented?
                 (c)   What is the attitude of the community towards the
                       prison inmates who underwent training on various
                       skills?  Does the latter receive capital to pursue
                       the acquired skills. How many get jobs after
                       training?
                 (d)   What is the relationship between the DOL and the
                       SETAs?  What is the role of the latter in reaching
                       the remote areas, especially farms?
                 (e)   For how long have the noted constraints on service
                       providers been experienced?
                 (f)   How does the DOL assist the retrenchees?
                 (g)   To what extent does the DOL assist small business
                       organisations?
                 (h)   Is the training provided based on the skills required
                       in the labour market?
                 (i)   How has the consultation process progressed on the
                       new National Skills Development Strategy (NSDS)?


                 Responses


                 With respect to the consultation process on the NSDS, it
                 was mentioned that issues raised were compiled in a
                 booklet. People were also given an opportunity to submit
                 verbal inputs.



                 Finding



                 No constraints were mentioned on the targets set on skills
                 needed.


                 Recommendations


                 (a)   The DOL should provide a more comprehensive
                       presentation on how the scourge of unemployment could
                       be alleviated.
                  (b)  Bottlenecks in the upgrading of computers should be
identified.
                 (c)   The DOL’s response to questions raised on this
                       programme should be forwarded to the Committee in
                       writing.


           (4)   Beneficiary Services


                 The approved budget for Unemployment Insurance and the
                 Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases for
                 2004/05 amounted to R10 236m and R1 482 m respectively.


                 Constraints


                 (a)   Major stakeholders are experiencing problems around
                       the unemployment insurance cheque payment method and
                       the constitution of the regional appeals committee.
                 (b)   Certain enquiry screens in the province relating to
                       compensation for occupational injuries and diseases
                       were inaccessible.
                 (c)   Most staff leave the institution as a result of
                 salary levels.


                 Remedial action
                 (a)   Introduction of the TEBA Bank A-card.
                 (b)   Shorten the Compensation for Occupational Injuries
                       and Diseases Act enquiry system through the
                       implementation of the Safika Project.
                 (c)   The process of the regional committees is still at
                 NEDLAC.


                 Comments/Questions


            (a)   What mechanism does the DOL use to remedy the problem of
                       non-compliance with the Unemployment Insurance Act?
            (b)   What is the progress regarding reducing the delays in the
                       processing of claims?
      (c)   How will the introduction of the TEBA card help people in areas
                       without banking facilities?
                  (d)  How much is known about NEDLAC in the province?
                 (e)   How does the province ensure that it reaches its
                       population, especially taking into consideration that
                       the province is predominantly Afrikaans-speaking?
                 (f)   Does the farming community form part of the main
                       stakeholders covered? The delegation wanted more
                       information on the payments relating to adoption
                       benefits.


                 Responses


                 (a)   The farming community is one of the main
                 stakeholders.
                 (b)   The duration of the claim process is 18 days, and the
                       success rate of claimants is almost 98%.
                 (c)   In relation to service points, the DOL is trying to
                       reach all the areas.
                 (d)   The DOL acknowledged that NEDLAC is not well
                       understood by the communities.
                 (e)   The issue of the language policy is adhered to. Forms
                       on the Internet are also available in Afrikaans.


           (5)   MSS


                 Out of 231 existing posts, 178 are filled and 53 are
                 vacant. Of the 53 vacancies, 17 are in the process of being
                 filled.


                 Constraints


                 (a)   Staff are poached by other provinces. It is a
                       struggle to get disabled people in all levels,
                       especially at senior management levels.
                 (b)   There is lack of office accommodation.


                 Comments / Questions


                 (a)   What strategy does the DOL have to address the
                       problem of office accommodation? The Committee
                       suggested a clustered approach, which encompassed the
                       use of Multi-Purpose Community Centres (MPCCs) to
                       alleviate this problem.
                 (b)   Are there any time frames set for filling the vacant
           posts?


                 Concerns raised by the Committee


                 (a)   The absence of disabled people at senior management
                       levels in the DOL;
                 (b)   No mention was made of the relationship between the
                       DOL and the Expanded Public Works Programmes (EPWPs);


                 (c)   The under-representation of Coloureds and Whites in
                       the DOL, and the Indian representation that is not
                       gender sensitive;
                 (d)   The issue of over and under-representation.


                 Responses


                 (a)   With regard to addressing the office accommodation
                       problem, the DOL does make use of MPCCs, especially
                       for the inspectorate and the UIF. Agreements were
                       made with the Departments of Safety and Security, and
                       of Justice to make use of their offices.
                 (b)   Most disabled people in the province are at senior
                       levels. The shortage lies in middle management.
                       Communication remains a problem as a result of
                       difficulties in getting service providers.
                 (c)   With respect to equity figures, the national office
                       is over-represented by Whites. The DOL is working
                       towards getting provincial figures right.
                       Advertisements for vacancies are inclusive. There is
                       a lot of poaching of African and Coloured staff. The
                       EE Forum targets the issue of Indian females. The
                       gender representation in the Northern Cape is
                       estimated at 55% male and 45% female. In relation to
                       time frames set on filling vacant posts, the DOL has
                       two months to finalise the matter.
                 (d)   On the issue of over and under-representation, the
                       DOL has certain targets to be reached.
                 (e)   The DOL is not involved in the co-ordination of
                       EPWPs. Its role is only related to training projects
                       that are identified by the departments.


           (6)   PPC Lime Mine


                 The Committee, accompanied by officials from the DOL, met
                 with the management and worker representatives. This mine
                 has two divisions, namely, Barloworld and Portland Cement,
                 and produces both calcitic and dolomitic lime. It supplies
                 95% of South African lime. The mine provides employment to
                 350 people, who are housed in company and private
                 accommodation.


                 The presentation included the following:


                 *     The background of PPC Lime;
                 *     Kambuku process;
                  *    Employment Equity;
                 *     Skills Development;
                 *     Learnerships;
                 *     Occupational Health and Safety (OHS);
                 *     The perception of employees.

                 Concerns raised by the Committee


                 (a)   The employment equity figures reflect a need for more
                       White workers. Was the Mining Charter covered by the
                       figures? The DOL also raised a concern around the
                       employment equity categories. It expressed a need for
                       a more substantive approach and an interrogation of
                       company plans and figures provided.
                 (b)   The presentation on OHS made no mention of
                       occupational diseases.


                 Responses


                 (a)   The figures presented were derived from the Mining
                       Charter. The supply and demand of labour is an
                       agreement between the employer and the employee.
                 (b)   The incident rate only applied to the injured. On the
                       issue of occupational diseases, an annual fitness
                       test was conducted on all employees.


                 Questions


                 (a)   How organised are the workers?
                  (b)  Does the training provided extend to the community?
                  (c)  Are employees trained to reach higher levels?
                 (d)   Has the company had any retrenchments in the past? Is
                       any assistance given to the retrenchees?
                  (e)  Does the company have a health and safety committee?


                 Responses


                 (a)   In relation to training, the community benefits
                       through ABET programmes and the bursary scheme
                       provided.
                 (b)   A BEE-owned and controlled company has been
                       established. PPC has shares in the company.
                 (c)   The recent retrenchments occurred in April 2004. Each
                       of the retrenchees was offered R5 000 to register for
                       training.


                 Recommendation


                 The DOL should facilitate that the Committee is provided
                 with a comprehensive report on employment equity,
                 inspections, learnership programmes and diseases and
                 injuries at PCC Mine.


                 The Committee conducted an inspection of the invocom,
                 mining and production areas.

    5 October 2004



           (1)   Sishen Iron Ore Mine


                 The Committee met with the management and labour
                 representatives from the Solidarity Union and the National
                 Union of Mineworkers. Presentations covered labour issues,
                 wellness and HIV/AIDS programmes, and the UIF collection of
                 levies.


                 The Committee commended Khumba for its role in training the
                 unemployed. It also acknowledged the conversion of hostels
                 into family units.


                 The Committee expressed a concern that the report given
                 lacked information on how the company transforms its
                 management structure, and its progress in meeting equity
                 targets.


                 Questions


                 (a)   Does the company have a health and safety committee?
                 (b)   What is the rate of disease, its nature and the
                       number of persons discovered on a monthly basis?
                 (c)   What happens to employees who get to a stage of being
                       non-productive?
                  (d)  Was HIV/AIDS testing voluntarily or compulsory?
                  (e)  Are retrenched persons linked with community
      projects?
                 (f)   What time frames were set to meet employment equity
                       targets on the placement of disabled persons?
                 (g)   What is the percentage of TB in the area?
                  (h)  Who are the beneficiaries of procurement
      opportunities?
                 (i)   What yardstick does the company use to monitor
                       compliance with labour standards by subcontractors?
                 (j)   Are there any recreational facilities for employees
                       and their families?
                 (k)   Does the company liaise with its counterparts to find
                       alternative jobs for retrenchees?


                 Responses


                 (a)   In relation to the rate of disease, the most common
                       problems related to skin sensitivity. These problems
                       are caused by glue and dust in the mine. There are
                       regular instances of finger injuries. The company has
                       an annual routine health check of the entire body for
                       every employee, as well as a six-monthly red-card
                       testing. There is also a follow-up lung function
                       check-up every six months.
                 (b)   Identified non-productive persons are often
                       accommodated on rehabilitation projects and/or by
                       changing jobs. In instances where the latter is not
                       applicable, an employee is put on a pension scheme.
                 (c)   The time frame set for employment equity targets is
                       2008. Those targets that are not easy to meet will
                       stretch to 2009. Consultation has taken place with
                       special organisations or persons to identify all
                       positions suitable for the disabled.
                 (d)   Training programmes on entrepreneurship skills are
                       provided to retrenchees. With regard to sharing
                       information with other mines on the possible
                       placement of retrenchees, the company provides names
                       of such incumbents to its counterparts.
                 (e)   The company has a procurement policy in place. There
                       is a provincial screening committee that screens
                       people who want to be contracted. All contractors are
                       rated in terms of a Black-owned or managed company.
                       There is an ongoing process of auditing contractors,
                       and those who do not comply with labour and internal
                       laws will be dealt with accordingly.


                 Resolution


                 The Committee resolved that the DOL facilitates that the
                 company provide it with reports on nodal projects on
                 irrigation and rice, the housing plan, the follow-up
                 process of rehabilitation, and the company’s procurement
                 plan.


                 The Committee also conducted an inspection of the ABET
                 Skills Training Centre.


            (2)   Labour Centre - Kuruman


                 The delegation, accompanied by the Provincial Executive
                 Director, met with staff from Kuruman Labour Centre. The
                 City Manager of Kgasigonyane Municipality welcomed the role
                 players.


                 The DOL presented a report that covered the period 1 July
                 to 30 September 2004. The Committee noted that there were
                 only two inspectors to service the vast region.


                 The briefing covered client services, inspection and
                 enforcement, employment services, service providers and
                 problems encountered and challenges faced.


                 Client services

                 A total of 760 domestic workers were registered during the
                 period July to September 2004. An amount of 108
                 unemployment insurance claims were paid up. A total of 89
                 complaints were resolved at client services.
                 The constraints experienced are due to incomplete
                 information provided by employees about their employers.
                 Such cases are referred to IES.


            (3)  IES

                 Out of 35 inspections conducted during this period, 25 were
                 finalised. A total of 53 blitz inspections were conducted
                 in the domestic worker sector.


                 Problems encountered


                 (a)   Most employers did not conduct the risk assessment
                       and were issued with contravention notices;
                 (b)   Transport for inspectors;
                 (c)   Untraceable employers;
                 (d)   Foreign business people, especially in the wholesale
                       and retail sector.


           (4)   Employment Services

                 During the current financial year, an amount of R2 175
                 million was approved for the following projects:


                 (a)   Kgalagadi Dipudi Co-operative Enterprise
                 (b)   Livestock improvement & production projects
                 (c)   Kgalagadi integrated energy centre

           (5)   Service providers

                 Out of five service providers, only two were registered.
                 Three were in the process of registering. Most service
                 providers were in the catering and cleaning sectors.

            (6)  The Committee commended the DOL on its report.


                 It raised a concern about the number of inspectors, the
                 vastness of the area to be serviced, and the issue of
                 foreign business people who are claimed to be taking over
                 businesses in Kuruman.


                 Questions by the Committee


                 (a)   Is there an organisation that represents domestic
                       workers in the region?
                 (b)   What is the percentage of untraceable employers and
                       unemployed people?


                 Responses


                 (a)   The majority of domestic workers is not organised.
                       The DOL deals with most of their cases. CAWU
                       sometimes gets involved.
                 (b)   The unemployed in the region is estimated at 50-60%.
                       The DOL, however, is currently creating a database
                       for employers. The information captured on the
                       database would reflect the number of employed people.
                 (c)   The DOL, together with the provincial office, is
                       working on a strategy to deal with untraceable
                       employers. The DOL is embarking on the Siyaya project
                       for beneficiary services. Such a project will link
                       employers to the database and to SARS.
                 (d)   With respect to foreign business people, the concern
                       is the language barrier. This results in a
                       communication problem.
                 (e)   A number of training programmes are provided to the
                       disabled to enable them to start their projects. Most
                       disabled people in the Kgalagadi area had received
                       computer literacy and business skills training. Some
                       were absorbed into the local municipality. Others
                       relocated to regions where chances of employment were
                       good.
                 (f)   The Committee noted the problem of the shortage of
                       computers and transport. It was suggested that the
                       general lack of resources should be quantified from
                       time to time.


                 Resolution


                 The DOL should provide the Committee with reports on the
                 stakeholder profile, the cause of such high vacancy levels,
                 and how it hopes to deal with that problem, as well as a
                 report on learnerships and child labour.


           (7)   Vryburg


                 The Committee met with the Provincial Executive Manager: Mr
                 A Makaphela, managers and staff from the Vryburg and Taung
                 Labour centres.


                 Challenges raised


                 (a)   There is a need to intensify the advocacy approach in
                       farm areas as most of the people are vulnerable.
                 (b)   There is a need to enhance co-operative governance.
                 (c)   In respect of cross-border servicing, many cases that
                       come to Taung are referred to Kimberley. This
                       affected service delivery and turnaround time.


                 Questions


                 (a)   What is the level of compliance by employers?
                 (b)   Has the DOL approached the Department of Home Affairs
                       (DHA) regarding the problem of foreign business
                       people?


                 Responses


                 (a)   There is a decrease in the prosecution mechanism.
                       Reports from team leaders reflect a 50-70%
                       compliance. The situation has improved since
                       inspectors had been provided with subsidised
                       vehicles. The capacity given to inspectors has had a
                       positive impact on the operations. There are
                       employers though who do not comply. The DOL is of the
                       view that if procedural process can be reduced, the
                       situation can improve even more. There is a need to
                       get other partners on board, such as the Department
                       of Trade and Industry (DTI). The route taken to
                       prosecute foreign business people who flout the law
                       is too long. There is a need to engage DTI to check
                       the issuing of licenses. The legislative framework
                       makes it difficult for the DOL to intervene in
                       assisting local business people.
                 (b)   The DHA was contacted regarding some Pakistanis who
                       were inside the country illegally. The legislative
                       framework does not make it easy for the DOL to
                       intervene in cross-border labour migration.


                 Recommendations by the Committee


                 (a)   The focus in addressing the problem of foreign
                       business people should be on checking compliance with
                       South African laws.
                 (b)   There is a need for politicians to engage other
                       colleagues on the matter.
                 (c)   The DOL should interact with municipalities that
                       issue licences willy-nilly. A report on such
                       interactions should be made available to the
                       Committee. Parliamentary Constituency Offices should
                       also be used to circulate those reports.
                 (d)   The Committee should investigate the procedural
                       impediments in the prosecution of foreign business
                       people who do not comply with legislation.
                 (e)   The Committee should look into the issuing of
                       licences.


                 Questions


                (a)    How often does the DOL meet with worker
                       representatives?
                (b)    How does the DOL deal with closure of mines?


                 Responses


                 (a)   SACCAWU is an active union in the region. There has
                       been a concern that most of its members are losing
                       their cases.
                 (b)   The issue of rehabilitation happens as soon as the
                       Department of Minerals and Energy issues a mine
                       closure certificate.

                 Resolutions


                 (a)   The Committee feels that there is a need for the DOL
                       to ensure good relations with the Department of
                       Minerals and Energy, especially on issues such as the
                       closure of mines and mine rehabilitation.
                 (b)   The Committee requested that it be provided with what
                       was reported on in writing.


       6 October 2004

           North West Provincial Office

           The Committee met the staff in the provincial office and
           received a briefing from the five business units, namely, MSS,
           LMIS&P, BS, IES, and ESDS. Each presentation was based on
           achievements and challenges.


           (1)   MSS

                 The core business of this unit is to render support to
                 business units. It is responsible for safety and security
                 and the administration of IT services.


                 Challenges


                 (a)   Commitment of staff;
                 (b)   Lack of sense of urgency among certain staff members;
                 (c)   Getting buy-in from staff to support the DOL’s
                 initiatives;
                 (d)   Effective communication.


           (2)   Business Services


                 Challenges


                 (a)   The long turnaround time in the payment of claims;
                 (b)   Employers who change their addresses continuously;
                 (c)   Companies that have been liquidated;
                 (d)   Untraceable employers;
                 (e)   Incomplete information supplied by companies.


                 Solution


                 As a solution to the long turnaround time in the payment of
                 claims, the Province formed a team to look into its
                 processes. This resulted in the reduction in turnaround
                 time by 92%. The  is participating in Compensation
                 Commission workshops directed at the new processes that
                 will reduce backlogs.


           (3)   IES


                 The presentation covered inspections and enforcement,  and
                 compliance.


                 Challenges


                 (a)   The protocol inhibits effective inspection;
                 (b)   Access to farms, if no prior arrangements were made;
                  (c)  Delays in the processing of cases by the Labour
      Court;
                 (d)   Lack of knowledge of legislation of the DOL by the
                       Labour Court;
                 (e)   Accessibility to private household by inspectors.


                 In relation to the protocol problem, Agri SA needs to
                 provide the DOL with its members’ names and contact
                 details. It is sometimes difficult to establish where a
                 certain farm is located. Not all farmers are members of
                 Agri SA. This would make it difficult for the DOL to
                 identify farms.


                 Questions raised by the Committee


                 (a)   Was it possible for DOL to use the same inspectors to
                       fight the backlogs?
                 (b)   Does the DOL conduct inspections at employment
                       agencies to monitor compliance?
                 (c)   What are the experiences of inspectors on
                 casualisation?


                 Response


                 (a)   There has been a concern that putting too much
                       responsibility on the inspectors could compromise the
                       quality of inspections.
                 (b)   The Province has no problems although it is not
                       strong economically. Most problems related to
                       subcontracting in the mining sector.
                 (c)   Most employers use casualisation to escape their
                       social responsibility. This practice is common with
                       big enterprises, such as Pick n Pay, Checkers, etc.
                       The wholesale and retail sector remained a problem.


                 The Committee sought clarity on the commitment of the DOL
                 to ABET and raised a concern about the environment in which
                 people in the provincial office worked, as well as the
                 vacancy levels of inspectors.


            (4)  ESDS


                 The ESDS is a public employer agency and a skills
                 development facilitator and implementer in the second
                 economy.


                 The ESDS unit budgeted R27 million for training the
                 unemployed. However, 2 452 persons were trained and placed
                 in income-generating entities. Out of the trained
                 incumbents, 1% was from the disabled. There was a need to
                 increase the intake of the disabled in order to meet the 4%
                 target set.


                 Challenges


                 (a)   The cross-border labour migration in the Britz area;
                 (b)   The visibility of SETAs in the Province to escalate
                       consciousness and intake of learners into
                       learnerships. The PSDF tried to engage sectors such
                       the mining and agriculture, although they were
                       reluctant;
                 (c)   The relationship with the private sector is weak;
                 (d)   The issue of leadership and ranks remained a problem.
                       There was a need to upgrade the structure of the
                       department;
                 (e)   Changing the IT system to a secure one would ensure
                       that there was a decreased chance of fraud;
                 (f)   The challenge in assisting retrenchees according to
                       the social plan is around companies that do not
                       inform the DOL of intended retrenchments;
                 (g)   Privileged service providers were still in the
                       monopoly. The challenge is for the emerging service
                       providers to undergo training in order to be linked
                       with the SETAs;
                 (h)   There was a problem with government departments who
                       did not comply with legislation.


                 Way forward

                 (a)   A meeting with the farming community and DHA
                       officials around the Britz area should be convened.
                 (b)   An all-sector consultative meeting with business and
                       the SETAs in the Province will be convened
                 (c)   Employers were encouraged to register with SETAs in
                       order to claim grants.

                 Questions


                 (a)   What is the average period of placement after
                       completion of training?
                 (b)   How many disabled people have benefited from the
                       bursary fund and the list of projects that have been
                       funded?
                 (c)   Do foreigners benefit from the DOL’s social plan?
                 (d)   Is success achieved in the area of the social plan,
                       and the training of people who have been laid off?
                       Were various sectors of the economy engaged in this
                       endeavour?


                 Responses


                 (a)   The average period of placement could be three
                       months. Employers often come to the labour centres to
                       seek workers.
                 (b)   The bursary fund is centralised in Pretoria. The role
                       of the Province was to sensitise people with
                       disabilities to apply and to make recommendations.
                       The Committee would be provided with the statistics.
                       The Committee noted the issue of training providers
                       who do not include disabled persons in their
                       training. It suggested that the department look at
                       the matter when contracts were issued. In relation to
                       training, the Province was of the view that there was
                       a need to monitor the aftercare of people after
                       training.
                 (c)   According to its policy, the DOL does not engage in
                       the training of foreigners. It only gets involved in
                       providing services in cases of retrenchments, for
                       example through counseling. The issue is still being
                       debated within the DOL.
                 (d)   The successes in terms of the social plan depended
                       upon all departments, and the Department of
                       Provincial and Local Government should assist. In
                       addition the ESDS unit had agreed that labour centres
                       needed to identify all vulnerable sectors and be
                       encouraged to team up a structure where there was an
                       impending retrenchment.


                 Concern raised by Committee


                 The Committee was concerned about the non-visibility of
                 SETAs. However, a meeting had been organised by the DOL to
                 address the matter, including the impact of SETAs.


                 Clarity sought by Committee


                 The Committee sought clarity on whether the employment
                 equity report fell within the ESDS domain. The response
                 given was that although this is not its area of work,
                 skills development could not be divorced from employment
                 equity.


                 Questions


                 (a)   Was training provided and skills development related
                       to market demand? How did cross-border migration
                       affect the local employment?
                 (b)   Are problems experienced as result of employment
                       agencies recruiting people to work outside of
                       country?


                 Responses


                 (a)   Training was based on the demand on the ground. In
                       relation to cross-border migration, there were
                       employers, especially in the agricultural sector, who
                       were taking advantage of the legislation.
                 (b)   No problems were raised. There were 13 employment
                       agencies in the Province. This made it easy for the
                       DOL to monitor.

Visit to farms


           The Committee, accompanied by the departmental officials,
           visited two farms and interacted with farmers, farm workers and
           a domestic worker.


           (1)   Liliesfontein Farm

                  Findings


                 (a)   Workers worked for eight hours a day, and were paid
                       according to the minimum wage. Some workers worked
                       overtime.
                 (b)   The rate of illiteracy was high.
                 (c)   Workers were not aware of their rights. In most cases
                       they received information through correspondence sent
                       to the employers.
                 (d)   In cases where the employer paid for the medical
                       expenses of employees, the former reclaimed the
                       money. Dependants were not covered in such
                       arrangements.
                 (e)   Part of the deal during the start of employment was
                       that one of the benefits would be groceries and meat.
                       The current situation showed that they received
                       groceries without meat.
                 (f)   Each family had a four-roomed electrified house.
                 (g)   In the event that workers had complaints,
                       arrangements were made for the employer to meet with
                       all of them.
                 (h)   Families should report when expecting visitors.
                 (i)   Spouses of other employees got casual jobs on the
                 farm.




Recommendations by Committee



                 (a)   In relation to housing, employees should be
                       encouraged to access government grants so that they
                       could have their own houses.
                 (b)   Employees should be capacitated so that they could
                       consider having their own farms and be self-
                       sustaining.
                 (c)   Employers should do something about the level of
                       illiteracy through ABET programmes.


                 Responses and concerns from the employers


                 (a)   Workers resisted the advice given by employers.
                 (b)   Transport for school-going children was a problem.
                 (c)   The minimum wage has caused some retrenchments as
                       farmers could not afford to pay the employees at the
                       promulgated rate.
                 (d)   There were good relations between farmers and their
                       employees, except in isolated cases where employers
                       mishandled employees. Those cases were published in
                       the media, and not all of them involve farmers.

           (2)   Drassybend New York Farm



           Findings



                 (a)   Employees received a minimum wage of R770.00 per
                       month and a pay slip.
                 (b)   Workers also received a 10% annual increase, 12 days’
                       leave and a bonus of R1000.00.
                 (c)   Employees were responsible for their medical care. In
                       some cases they had to find their own way to reach
                       medical facilities.
                 (d)   Workers were not aware of their rights. In most cases
                       they received information through correspondence sent
                       to their employers. No one came to educate or inform
                       workers of things to look for.
                 (e)   The money that should be paid for overtime was not
                       reflected on the pay slip.
                 (f)   No formal disciplinary hearings took place - the
                       employer and employee resolved their problems.
                 (g)   The level of illiteracy was a cause for concern.
                 (h)   The workers were aware that the existing laws have
                       brought positive changes.
                 (i)   Ablution facilities, such as the toilet, were located
                       in an awkward position and were not in good order.
                 (j)   The Committee noted with great concern that there was
                       still a lack of advocacy among farm and domestic
                       workers. It was also concerned that facilities, such
                       as toilets, were not in good condition.



                 Recommendations



                 (a)   Employers should look into the possibility of
                       improving toilet facilities for employees.
                 (b)   Employers should address the issue of transport when
                       employees are sick, rations should include meat and
                       overtime payments should be reflected on pay slips.
                 (c)   Illiteracy should be addressed through ABET
                       programmes.


                 Responses from employers


                 (a)   Employers tried to comply with the new laws and often
                       attended training on labour issues.
                 (b)   Workers had the privilege of buying sheep at a cost
                       of R200.00.
                 (c)   The new laws make it difficult for employers to
                       institute disciplinary actions.
                 (d)   Deductions are based on the loans made to employees.
                 (e)   Landlords often exploit farm workers on rentals they
                       pay for their children who attend school away from
                       the farm.
                 (f)   Working hours differ according to seasons.
                 (g)   The inspector from the DOL alluded to the fact that
                       the minimum wage has affected seasonal workers. There
                       is a need to review and amend the legislation to
                       address this problem.


                 The Committee noted that there was a level of compliance
                 with the law by employers. An appeal was made to employers
                 to re-instate paying above the minimum wage. Workers who
                 received training on certain skills should receive more
                 than the minimum wage.

        7 October 2004


            Presentation by North West Provincial Skills Development Forum
(NWPSDF)


           The NWPSDF was a strategic forum set up to identify skill needs
           in the Province. It comprises provincial government departments,
           the  Premier’s Office, organised labour, non-governmental
           organisations (NGOs), and academic institutions.


           The Committee received briefings from the following
           stakeholders: Office of the Status of Women (OSW), SANGOGO, the
           Disability Group, Umsobomvu Youth Fund and government
           departments


           (1)   NWPSDF


                 (a)   NWPSDF members needed training on their
                 responsibilities.
                 (b)   ABET centres are flooded by matric repeaters who are
                       not where they are supposed to be. Those centres are
                       unable to offer subjects such as physics.
                 (c)   There was also a problem of mainstreaming further
                       education and training (FET) since matric repeaters
                       flooded that area.
                 (d)   There are problems that resulted from the merger of
                       academic institutions, especially that some
                       institutions had to be transformed.
                 (e)   In respect of using funds contributed by the DOL,
                       such funds were centralised, and therefore
                       institutions that were supposed to access them did
                       not.
                 (f)   Young people were still caught up in the idea of
                       being academics.


           (2)   SANGOGO


                 (a)   Most members of NGOs bear the brunt of service
                       providers who were not accredited.
                 (b)   There was no guarantee of placement after training.
                 (c)   Service providers designed training material without
                       consulting the people.
                 (d)   Most often skills acquired from training were not
                       recognised.
                 (e)   There was a gap between the curriculums provided by
                       educational institutions and the skills required by
                       the market.
                 (f)   There was a need for an integrated skills development
                       approach that would address the problem.


           (3)   COSATU


                 (a)   There was a gap between the schools and skills
                 training.
                 (b)   There was a proliferation of ABET centres throughout
                       the province.
                 (c)   Skills development initiatives did not benefit the
                       people on the ground.
                 (d)   As a result of the nature of the province, there was
                       a need to identify skills in which people should be
                       trained.
                 (e)   The vast number of people were not aware of the
                       existence of the NWPSDF, legislation, training
                       programmes, outcomes of the GDS and how to access
                       learnerships. The plea was that the information
                       should filter down to the people on the ground.

           (4)   UYF


                 (a)   The UYF had embarked on projects that involved
                       recruits from the province. Efforts should be made to
                       enhance their visibility in the province.
                    b) National organisations were mostly based in Gauteng.
                    c) The UYF was in process of appointing a provincial co-
                       ordinator to ensure sufficient integration of
                       efforts.
                    d) There has been a vacuum between national and
                       provincial levels.
                    e) The UYF was conscious that there should be an
                       equitable distribution of resources within the
                       province.
                    f) A submission on the review of the NSDS was made to
                       the DOL.
                    g) The UYF was working with the DOL through the labour
                       centres as access points for youth who wanted to
                       access its services.
                 (h)   The UYF was also working within the FET arena to
                       enable young people to acquire skills according to
                       the needs of the province. Four FET institutions were
                       due to get funding to the value of R6m in this
                       regard.


           (5)   Youth Commission


                 The Commission has participated in the process of
                 developing learnerships that would be implemented by the
                 public service.  It was concerned that the province would
                 not respond proactively to the learnerships.


                 The Commission was also concerned about the commitment from
                 government and the poor co-ordination of activities that
                 took place amongst the youth structures. Its view was that
                 the integration of various youth organisations would
                 exonerate the youth from this poor co-ordination. For the
                 Commission, the issue of public service learnership
                 programmes warranted political intervention.


           (6)   Disabled persons


                 Oral submissions were received from the North West Council
                 for the Blind, the Ikageng Self Help Project and the Deaf
                 Federation of the North West.

                 Findings



                 (a)   According to the disabled groups, statistics
                       reflected that since 2002, almost 1, 2 million
                       disabled people have been unemployed.
                 (b)   The other form of discrimination was the
                       inaccessibility to facilities.
                 (c)   Disabled people, especially from the deaf community,
                       experienced problems when accessing public facilities
                       such as hospitals. In most cases there was no
                       interpreter to assist with sign language. It was
                       suggested that support relating to sign language and
                       interpreters be strengthened.
                 (d)   Most people from the deaf and blind communities were
                       unemployed.
                 (e)   Most institutions when approached to assist the
                       disabled claimed that they did not have people to
                       assist.


                 The DOL was requested to monitor equity and affirmative
                 action when the disabled applied. There was a plea for the
                 DOL to intervene in problems raised by the disabled
                 communities.


                 There was also an appeal for government to employ sign
                 language interpreters to work in various offices.


                 The Committee wanted to know how many disabled persons were
                 employed and whether they were happy. The provincial
                 Department of Sport, Arts and Culture (DSAC) acknowledged
                 that sign language interpretation was a scarce skill. It
                 conceded that there has been a problem in training due to
                 the unavailability of necessary equipment. It was suggested
                 that SETAs ensure that service providers during the tender
                 process undertake to have the necessary resources to cater
                 for the blind.


                 The DOL alluded to the fact that the Health and Welfare
                 SETA funded registered projects to train employees from the
                 disabled sector. Five trainees from the province benefited
                 from that project. Out of the 16 disabled people trained in
                 computer skills, eight were deaf.


                 Comments/concerns by the Committee


                 The Committee noted with great concern that service
                 providers did not always have the necessary resources
                 and/or equipment to cater for the disabled. It also
                 observed that there were no funds allocated to projects for
                 the disabled. The Committee emphasised its role in
                 monitoring and ensuring that the existing laws are
                 implemented. The DOL realised that although not much had
                 been done in respect to the disabled, there was progress
                 and room for improvement.


           (7)   OSW


                 The OSW registered a concern about the institutional
                 arrangements pertaining the gender focal areas in the DOL
                 and its status in the appointment of the gender co-
                 ordinator in the province.


                 Response


                 The DOL does have gender focal people at provincial offices
                 and labour centres. The provincial office kept close
                 contact with the Gender Desk in the Office of the Premier.

           (8)   Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Tourism


                 A concern was raised that there was no SETA that catered
                 for conservation since the North West Province was a prime
                 conservation area. A request was made to the UYF to assist
                 in encouraging the youth to get into the mainstream of
                 conservation.


           (9)   Siyasa Security Industry (SSI)


                 The majority of members of this organisation are employers
                 who are in support of the skills training and empowerment.
                 SSI was of the view that the Skills Development Act needed
                 to focus on training people to be entrepreneurs, and that
                 there was a need to pilot projects that were meant to
                 empower people. SSI was concerned about SETAs that were
                 sitting with surpluses on discretionary grants.


                 Recommendations by the Committee


                 (a)   The Committee should be provided with a report on
                       projects and programmes in which stakeholders were
                       engaged.
                 (b)   A skills audit should be conducted in the province.
                 (c)   The NWPSDF should identify other stakeholders,
                       including Parliamentary Constituency Offices, to
                       assist in the dissemination of information.
                 (d)   It should be provided with the information about the
                       regularity of the meetings of the NWPSDF.
                 (e)   It was crucial for members of the NWPSDF to be
           empowered.





           (10)  CCMA



                 The Committee met with Mr Kekana, Head of the CCMA in
                 Klerksdorp.


                 One of the achievements highlighted was that the
                 organisation had since managed to stabilise the labour
                 market and had succeeded in its endeavour to make a
                 paradigm shift from the old system.

                 Challenges



                 (a)   There were limited resources and facilities. The
                       organisation cannot dictate on facilities to be
                       provided. The province was faced with the problem
                       that eight commissioners had to use five rooms in
                       Rustenburg. The CCMA was unable to address those
                       challenges as a result of resources.
                 (b)   There was a shortage of commissioners. There was a
                       need for three to five additional commissioners.
                 (c)   There was an infiltration by consultants. The
                       sophistication of parties made it impossible to
                       handle cases speedily. However, with better resources
                       people could be serviced optimally.


                 Questions/comments by the Committee


                 (a)   Was there any relationship between the CCMA and the
                       PCOs in the province?
                 (b)   Were cases brought to the CCMA by domestic workers
                       mainly as a result of victimisation, and how aware
                       are they of their jurisdiction?
                 (c)   Was there a database of people whose cases were
                       referred by CCMA to the Labour Court?
                 (d)   How frequently was the call-up process used?
                 (e)   What was the level of case reviews?
            (f)   More clarity was sought on the enforcement of awards by
                       the CCMA.
                 (g)   How did the CCMA deal with cases that took place on
                       the shop floor?
                 (h)   Was the shortage of Commissioners the result of
           poaching?
                 (i)   The Committee registered its concern over the issue
                       of vulnerable workers who were not unionised, and the
                       disability sector that was characterised by unfair
                       labour practices.


                 Responses


                 (a)   The CCMA acknowledged that it had no structured
                       relationship with PCOs. It did have a relationship
                       with the paralegals that operated through the advice
                       offices, the DOL and heads of the labour centres. It
                       has just established a relationship with the
                       Department of Land Affairs on evictions.
                       Commissioners have been capacitated to deal with such
                       cases. No relationship had been established with the
                       South African Police Service (SAPS) as yet.
                 (b)   The impact of the minimum wage resulted in the
                       dismissal of some domestic workers . However, the
                       common type of victimisation may be related to people
                       living with HIV/AIDS. The other problem was that
                       domestic workers did not become organised. This,
                       however, made it difficult to train them so that they
                       could become aware of the services rendered by the
                       CCMA.
                 (c)   There was a database of enforcements and reviews that
                       was sent to the Labour Court. However, the legal
                       officer who was dealing with a particular case did
                       not keep in contact with the worker until the CCMA
                       received an outcome from the Labour Court.
                 (d)   The call-up process was meant to assist in the
                       backlog in processing of cases.
                 (e)   Ten percent of referred cases go for review. About 80
                       to 100 cases handled monthly-required arbitration.
                 (f)   The enforcement of awards to domestic and farm
                       workers remained a problem. The difficulty lay with
                       the enforcement of a writ of execution. The CCMA felt
                       that although the amendments had assisted, the
                       issuing of the writ of execution remained a problem.


                 Recommendations by the Committee


                 (a)   The CCMA and the DOL should agree on issues that
                       required education and advocacy.
                 (b)   A follow-up report that reflected cases, their
                       profiles, for example domestic, farm and mine
                       workers, should be forwarded to the Committee.

        8 October 2004


           Meeting with Labour Market Co-ordinating Forum (LMCF)



           The Committee also met with stakeholders of the LMCF in
           Klerksdorp.


           (1)   Education and Labour Institute


                 Concerns raised


                 (a)   Not enough was done in consultation with the public
                       representative bodies on legislation. An example was
                       the consultative process during the sectoral
                       determination on the minimum wage.
                  (b)  The interpretation of legislation was not the same.
                  (c)  Cases took a long time to be processed.
                 (d)   Public hearings were not formulated in such a way
                       that the public was able to make an input.


                 Recommendation



                 The time taken to resolve cases in the Labour Court needed
                 attention.


           (2)   FEDUSA


                 FEDUSA appreciated and acknowledged that organised labour
                 had access to legislators. An appeal was made for an
                 amendment so that there could be a reason for conciliation
                 not to take place.


                 Concerns raised


                 The Labour Relations Act (LRA) did not give direction to
                 most employers on pre-arbitration. Certain sections in the
                 LRA required the CCMA to use minimal powers.



                 Recommendation



                 Access to the Labour Court should be strengthened.

           (3)   Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut (AHI)

                 Concerns raised


                 (a)   People did not receive notices on time, which
                       resulted in employers being served with execution
                       orders;
                 (b)   Access to the Skills Development Fund;
                 (c)   Client service process at the CCMA.

                 Responses by CCMA


                 (a)   The CCMA acknowledged the limitation of resources,
                       and that there is a need to look into intensifying
                       the area of learnerships. A suggestion made was that
                       the office should look into a possibility of
                       utilising the facilities of the DOL.
                 (b)   The servicing of notices differs from the High Court.
                 (c)   The execution of the writ is the same as the process
                       in the High Court.


      (4)   COSATU



                 COSATU acknowledged the role played by the DOL and the
                 CCMA.


                 Concerns raised


                 (a)   COSATU was concerned about processes relating to
                       Labour Court cases, especially farm worker cases.
                 (b)   Casual workers did not benefit from the Basic
                       Conditions of Employment Act.
                 (c)   NEDLAC did not do enough to ensure that skills
                       development was enhanced.

           (5)   Black Management Forum

                 Concerns raised


                    a) Women and the disabled were not represented well.
                    b) The South African Revenue Services did not do enough
                       to assist people in filling in the tax returns.
                 (c)         Queues in the grants payment pay points were
                 too long.

           (6)   NAFCOC

                 NAFCOC acknowledged the DOL for the legislation that was in
                 place.


                 Concern raised


                 The DOL had not done enough in driving poverty alleviation
                 programmes.

           (7)   SACWU

                 SACWU acknowledged the CCMA for empowering stakeholders
                 through user forums. It was suggested that these forums be
                 extended to other regions.


                 Concern raised


                 Only organised bodies benefited from the publicity of laws.
                 There was a need to improve the role of the public
                 broadcaster in order for the information to reach all the
                 people.



                 Recommendation



                 Legislators should monitor the implementation of
                 legislation.


           (8)   CCMA

                 Concerns raised


                 (a)   Commissioners operated on a stringent budget, while
                       having to deal with many cases.
                 (b)   Grounds for review according to the legislation was
                       very narrow, and was being widened by the Court. This
                       was an area that needed to be tightened.
                 (c)   Bogus trade unions wes a cause for concern. However,
                       the registration of employee organisations needed to
                       be looked at.

           (9)   Media briefing



                 The Committee held a media briefing with the SABC at the
                 CCMA offices in the North West Province.


            (10)  Recommendations


                 (a)   The Committee report should be sent to the DOL and to
                       the two provinces concerned.
                 (b)   The Committee should raise the concerns that arose
                       from the visits with the DOL.



3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
   Tourism on Visit to Koeberg Nuclear Power Station, dated 21 June 2005:


   1.  Background

       As  part  of  conducting  an  oversight  function,   a   multi-party
       delegation of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental  Affairs  and
       Tourism visited the Koeberg Nuclear Power Station in Western Cape on
       the 19th of January 2005.


   1.1       Objective

       The main objectives of the visit was to examine and evaluate how
       Koeberg Nuclear Power Station deals with environmental safety and
       learn about its internal business operations.






   1.2. Delegation



       A multi-party delegation from the Committee under the leadership  of
       the
       Chairperson, Ms E Thabethe (ANC) included Mr. J Combrick (ANC), Ms N
        Khunou, (ANC), Mr. J Arendse (ANC), Ms MM Ntuli (ANC), Ms R Ndzanga
       (ANC), Mr. A Mokoena (ANC), Mr. S J  Maja  (ANC),  Mr.  DAA  Olifant
       (ANC), Mr. G Morgan (DA) Ms J Semple (DA), Ms C Zikalala (IFP),  and
       Mr. LW
       Greylling (ID).


       The Committee Secretary, Mr. T Manele, Ms  S  Sixaso,  Secretary  to
       Chairperson
       and Mr. J Durand, Parliamentary Liaison Officer, from the Department
       of
       Environmental Affairs and Tourism, accompanied the delegation.


   1.3. Reporting


       Having conducted its oversight visit to Nuclear Power Station on the
       19th of February 2005, the Committee to report as follows:



   2. Arrival at Nuclear Power Station



       On arrival, the Acting General Manager Mr. P Prozesky welcomed the
       delegation and proceeded to outline the programme of  the  oversight
       visit that included the briefings on the nuclear cluster, the safety
       and performance programme, the role  and  involvement  of  Eskom  in
       Pebble Bed Modular Reactor (PBMR), and the tour around the  station.




   2.1. Nuclear Power Station Cluster



       The General Manager of Eskom Nuclear Cluster, Dr R  Pillay,  briefed
       the delegation on the cluster’s activities. The presentation focused
       on the role of Koeberg in national grid,  nuclear  fuel  cycle,  the
       life expectancy of the plant emergency planning, long-  term  health
       effects and human resource challenges.



   2.1.1. Potential Health Effect


       According to Dr R Pillay, the primary driver of any health effect is
       dose. This public  dose  is  therefore  perceived  as  an  important
       measurement  of  Koeberg  Nuclear  Power   Station’s   environmental
       management system. The examples of these doses includes  comparative
       dose such as chest X-ray, transatlantic flight, cup  of  coffee  and
       glass of beer.


   2.1.2. Emergency Planning


       Koeberg Nuclear Power Station has developed an emergency plan  whose
       objective  is  to  protect  its  staff,  general  public  and,   the
       environment from potential harmful effect of emergency situation  at
       Koeberg.


   2.1.3. Protective Actions


       The main protective actions used by Koeberg  Nuclear  Power  Station
       include,  public  notification,  evacuation,   sheltering,   thyroid
       protection, zone isolation, reallocation and, food banning.


   2.1.4. Human Resource Challenges


       As nuclear skills are very specific and its creation  and  retention
       is also vital, the organizational human  resource  challenge  facing
       them is a need to develop a national nuclear skills  programme  that
       will ensure the implementation of PBMR  and  other  related  nuclear
       matters.


   3.  Safety and Performance


       The Manager of Safety and Performance  Evaluation,  Mr  L  Tyabashe,
       briefed the delegation  on  organizational  safety  and  performance
       programme.  The  main  focus  of  the  presentation  was  on  plant,
       operation and safety, performance and waste management.


   3.1 Waste Management


       The delegation was informed that the organisation manages  different
       kinds of waste. The types of waste mentioned included the low  level
       waste such as gloves, plastic and paper, coal and, high level  waste
       such as filters, non-compactable waste, resins and concentrates that
       are all safely stored in Vaalputs Storage Facility.

   4. Eskom Role in Pebble Bed Modular Reactor


       The Senior Manager of Stakeholder Management, Mr.  T  Stott  briefed
       the
       delegation on organizational programme of  the  Pebble  Bed  Modular
       Reactor.  The  presentation  focused  on  an  overview,  client  and
       investment  roles  and  feasibility  study  on  Pebble  Bed  Modular
       Reactor.


   4.1. Client Role in Pebble Bed Modular Reactor


       The Generation Division of Eskom is responsible for client  role  in
       PBMR. In June 2000, application for Environmental Impact  Assessment
       (EIA) was submitted to the Department of Environmental  Affairs  and
       Tourism  and  subsequent  to  that  a  consortium   of   independent
       consultant  was  appointed  to  perform  an   Environmental   Impact
       Assessment.


       The  consultation  process  around  EIA  included  extensive  public
       participation, with numerous interaction and  public  meetings  and,
       extended periods for comments during scooping  and  EIA  phases.  In
       October 2002, a final report on environmental impact assessment  was
       submitted to the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism. In
       June 2003, the Director–General of the Department  of  Environmental
       Affairs and Tourism issued a positive record of decision.


   4.2. Eskom Pebble Bed Modular Reactor Process


       In  developing  its  PMBR  programme,  Eskom  invited  international
       partners to contribute funding, technical  expertise,  international
       stature and credibility. In 2001, a feasibility study was  conducted
       with 22.5% contribution of British Nuclear Fuels Industry, 12.5 % by
       Exelon, 25% by Independent Development Corporation (IDC) and 40%  by
       Eskom. In  2001,  draft  feasibility  report  on  Eskom’s  PBMR  was
       completed. Exelon has since withdrawn from the project.  PBMR  (Pty)
       Ltd is currently in negotiation with potential invertors to  replace
       Exelon.


   5. In-House Tour


       As part of developing an understanding on how Koeberg Nuclear  Power
       Station operates, the delegation conducted an in-house tour to areas
       such as the Turbine Hall, the Low Level Waste Store,  the  Emergency
       Control Centre, the Unit Control Rooms and, the Fuel Pools Unit.


   6. Conclusion and Recommendations


       Having conducted an oversight visit to Koeberg Nuclear Power Station
       on the 19th of January 2005  and  being  briefed  on  organizational
       activities related to the PBMR, waste  management,  safety  planning
       and,  human  resource  challenges,  the   Portfolio   Committee   on
       Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism  concludes  and  recommends  as
       follows:


    6.1. Noting that Koeberg Nuclear Power Station has developed  emergency
       plan to ensure  that  it  does  not  have  an  environmental  safety
       problem, it is recommended that the Portfolio Committee wishes to be
       briefed from time to time on environmental  management  polices  and
       mechanisms; and


    6.2. Also noting that Koeberg Nuclear Power  Station  has  conducted  a
       feasibility study on PBMR programme, it is further recommended  that
       the Portfolio Committee should  call  relevant  section  within  the
       Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism to brief members  on
       the findings of the feasibility study.


                            FRIDAY, 24 JUNE 2005


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson



                       THE SOUTH AFRICAN PARLIAMENTARY
                              OBSERVER MISSION
                                  REPORT ON
                  THE 2005 ZIMBABWE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS

                                31 MARCH 2005

PLEASE NOTE:

A Supplement to this Report, containing the delegation’s observation of the
Zimbabwean political background, the legislative framework and the
electoral process, is available in the Office of the Clerk of the Papers.

                                  REPORT ON
                  THE 2005 ZIMBABWE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS

                                  Contents

Introduction
      The objectives of the Report
      The nature, context and method of work of the mission

The pre-election period
      Work and deployment of observers
      Report submissions
             Events and meetings
      Political climate
      Violations of the Electoral Law
      Compliance with SADC guidelines
      The media
      Overview of the pre-election period
      Preliminary conclusion

Polling Day
      Introduction
      Voting
      Counting

Conclusion

Recommendations
INTRODUCTION

On the 31st of March 2005, the Republic of Zimbabwe held her sixth
Parliamentary General Elections since Independence on 18 April 1980.

Following an invitation to the Republic of South Africa to send observers
to witness these elections, Parliament constituted a 20-member delegation,
(hereinafter referred to as the Mission), under the leadership of the hon M
T Goniwe, with the mandate of observing the 2005 Zimbabwe Parliamentary
Elections.

The Mission was constituted for purposes of:

(a)   Assessing whether conditions in Zimbabwe allowed for the conducting
      of elections that would demonstrate the general will of the Zimbabwean
      electorate;
(b)   Assessing whether Zimbabwean voters would have sufficient freedom to
      cast their votes in secret;
(c)   Assessing whether the elections were conducted within the context of
      the Zimbabwean Constitution and the electoral legislative framework;
(d)   Assisting the people of Zimbabwe, within the context of the African
      Renaissance, the African experience and reality, to hold successful
      parliamentary elections.

In brief, Parliament tasked the Mission to, on its behalf, observe, support
and work together with the people of Zimbabwe as they prepared and
exercised their democratic right to elect parliamentary representatives of
their choice.

THE OBJECTIVES OF THE REPORT

The Report seeks to indicate:

1.    Whether the purpose of the Mission was achieved;
2.    Whether in doing so, the Constitutional and legislative framework of
      Zimbabwe was adhered to;
3.    Whether, in our view, the will of the people of Zimbabwe has been
      demonstrated through the elections; and
4.    The extent to which our conclusions are based on verifiable data that
      is presented concisely - including possible recommendations.

THE NATURE, CONTEXT AND METHOD OF WORK OF THE MISSION

1.    The Mission was a united delegation representing Parliament and the
      people of South Africa. The Mission was constituted by the Parliament
      of the Republic of South Africa in order to allow South Africans,
      through their representatives, to play a role in supporting their
      Zimbabwean neighbours to exercise freely their democratic right to
      choose their parliamentary representatives.

2.    In addition to being a Mission of the South African Parliament, the
      Mission’s outlook was also informed by the regional context in which
      both Zimbabwe and South Africa are members.

3.    More significantly, for South Africa, the parliamentary elections in
      Zimbabwe have a bearing on the continent’s political and economic
      initiatives represented by, inter alia, the African Union and its
      development programme, NEPAD.

4.    The parliamentary elections, therefore, took place at a crucial
      moment in the history of the African continent.

5.    A further circumstance characterizing the current political
      environment with regard to Zimbabwe, is the hostile international and
      regional media environment, which is grossly biased, prejudiced and
      partisan against the government. State print media is, on the other
      hand, pro-government pro-ruling party.

6.    In the execution of its mandate, the Mission recognized the
      sovereignty of the Zimbabwean state and observed the elections in an
      independent and non-partisan manner.

7.    The Mission observed all aspects of the elections, beginning with the
      pre-election period, polling day and counting, as well as the
      political mood after the elections.

8.    The Mission familiarized itself with the Zimbabwean electoral
      processes, laws, regulations and the Constitution of the land,
      obtaining relevant information from electoral bodies including the
      Electoral Supervisory Commission (ESC) and the Zimbabwe Electoral
      Commission (ZEC).

9.    The mission, through its leadership, paid a courtesy call on the
      President of the Republic of Zimbabwe, Mr Robert Mugabe. It also paid
      a courtesy call on the president of the MDC, Mr Morgan Tsvangirai.

10.   The mission, collectively or through its leadership, also interacted
      with various role players and stakeholders in the electoral process.
      There were also meetings with Zanu-PF, the MDC, the Zimbabwe Council
      of Churches, the Zimbabwe Crisis Coalition, the Electoral Supervisory
      Commission, the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission, the media, and
      candidates contesting various const ituencies.

11.   The Mission collected data through attending rallies and meetings
      called by the contesting candidates and other relevant stakeholders.

12.   The Mission travelled to various provinces of Zimbabwe during the pre-
      election observation period. On polling day, in accordance with the
      laws of the country, the Mission had access to polling stations and
      counting centres throughout the country.

13.   The Mission recorded its observations and referred concerns raised to
      appropriate authorities.

14.   The Mission issued public statements where it deemed necessary it to
      do so.

15.   The Mission interacted with representatives of other observer
      missions, including the African Union (AU) and the SADC Observer
      Mission.

16.   The Mission assessed the role of the media in the electoral pr ocess.

THE PRE-ELECTION PERIOD

Five (5) political parties and fourteen (14) independent candidates
contested the 2005 Parliamentary Elections. Zanu-PF and the MDC contested
all the constituencies.

Zanu-PF focused its campaign on the anti-colonialist political strategy
(Anti-British), the completion of the land reforms and on the successful
economic turnaround with its emphasis on the “Look East” policy.

The MDC concentrated its campaign on Zimbabwe’s economic crisis, accusing
the government of mismanagement, corruption and cronyism. It encouraged the
people of Zimbabwe to vote for the MDC and promised to deal more equitably
with the current land distribution issue.

The two main campaigns took place in a calm and peaceful political climate.
There were isolated cases where meetings were described as having been
“tense but without incident”.

Independent candidates also campaigned without hindrance, under calm and
peaceful conditions.

The Mission observers submitted daily reports of their observations and
experiences throughout the provinces.

Work and Deployment of Observers

On arrival in Harare, on 14 March 2005, the Mission immediately sat down to
work. It received its first briefing from the South African Ambassador to
Zimbabwe. The second briefing was from the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission,
and finally, the Mission was given a political overview by ambassadorial
staff.

On 15 March 2005, the Mission received briefings from the Electoral
Supervisory Commission, the Zimbabwe Council of Churches and the Zimbabwe
Crisis Coalition.

The Mission convened at the South African Embassy on the 16 March 2005 to
receive a background briefing on the security situation in the country.
After this briefing, the Mission was divided into teams and deployed to the
provinces. The following provinces were covered:
*     Harare and Chitungwiza
*     Mashonaland East
*     Mashonaland West
*     Mashonaland Central
*     Bulawayo Metro
*     Matebeleland South
*     Masvingo; and
*     Manicaland.

Report Submissions

The Mission received 135 reports from its observer teams. Of these, 91
relate to the pre-election period and 44 capture observations on polling
day.

Events and Meetings

Numerous political rallies and meetings were observed. Average attendance
at rallies ranged between 2 000 and 4 000 people. Some rallies were
attended by as many as 25 000 people.


The teams also attended and observed voter education sessions, the training
of election monitors, and party canvassing. There were also meetings with
political parties, electoral officials, civil society organisations,
security officials and other observe rs.


Among the issues discussed at these meetings were the Voters’ Roll, voter
registration, the demarcation of constituencies, the placement of polling
stations, the recruitment of electoral staff, the voting process, the
provision of electoral material, the role of observers, voter education,
the role of party agents, the candidates’ list, the political climate,
political party campaigning and dispute resolution processes.


Political Climate

In general observer teams indicated that the pre-election polit ical
climate in Zimbabwe was calm and peaceful. This observation was also
consistent with the determinations made by other observers and by civil
society, including the Zimbabwe Council of Churches.

There were, however, instances where some rallies or meetings were
described as “tense but without incident ”.

Violations of the Electoral Law

During the pre-election period no violations of the electoral law were
           observed.

Compliance with the SADC Guidelines

Generally, all teams were satisfied that the SADC Principles and Guidelines
were complied with in the period leading to polling day.

In some of the reports there were concerns raised around certain issues,
including:

    • Equal access to the media
    • Food distribution along party political lines
    • Intimidation
    • Double booking of venues
    • Removal/defacing of election posters
    • The role of traditional leaders

Observers followed up on these concerns, but no verifiable evidence was
found.

The Media

By the time the Mission started its work, regulations had already been
promulgated to ensure that the Zimbabwe Broadcasting Holdings (ZBH) gives
the contending parties equitable access.

Political parties were allocated 91 free minutes on state television and
current affairs shows, interviews, talk shows and general election news
characterized the election period.

Furthermore, provision was made for parties that received more than 5% of
the vote in the previous parliamentary elections to receive a proportional
amount of state funding. In this regard, both the Zanu-PF and MDC received
approximately R3 million each, which funds they could use to finance their
election campaigns.

Overview of the Pre-election Process

The Mission noted that:

    • The delimitation or demarcation process resulted in the reduction of
      urban constituencies by three and an increase of rural constituencies
      by the same number. The Delimitation Commission determined that
      massive urban-rural migration that had taken place in the past
      justified the adjustments.


    • Allegations were received that some people were assaulted or
      intimidated and that there was selective distribution of food parcels
      by the government. Observers followed these up. No evidence was found
      to substantiate these allegations.

    • Generally, just before the elections, polling stations were properly
      st affed, accessible, easily identifiable and the law had been
      complied with regarding the location and preparation of voting
      stations.

    • Voter education was well planned and executed.

    • The voter registration process appeared to have been accessible to all
      voters. The Voters’ Roll was accessible to the public and the parties.

    • There was satisfaction with the training of electoral staff. They were
      taken through the Electoral Act page by page and the exercise was done
      in user-friendly language. This staff component was composed of both
      young women and men.

    • Party agents were trained using practical demonstrations. This
      component also was composed of both women and men.

    • The general impression was that security in relation to the electoral
      process was well organised and that the political climate in the
      country was calm and peaceful.

    • Other observers, political parties, commentators and leaders in the
      country also expressed a view that there was peace and political
      tolerance in the country and that the people of Zimbabwe were
      demonstrating commendable levels of political maturity.


Preliminary Conclusion


Accordingly, the Mission’s pre-election conclusion was that the country,
from both logistical and political perspectives, was well prepared to hold
the 2005 Parliamentary Elections.


Based on the reports relating to the pre-election period, the Mission
concluded that the pre-election political climate in Zimbabwe was
favourable for elections to take place. All parties and candidates had
campaigned without hindrance and the parties and candidates themselves had
conducted their campaigns in a manner that demonstrated commitment to the
promotion of peace, stability and the holding of free and fair elections.

POLLING DAY


Introduction

Cognisant of the fact that an election is not a single event of casting a
ballot paper on the day of polling, the SA Parliamentary Observer Mission
adopted a comprehensive approach to observing the election process, working
to ascertain and preserve the integrity of every stage of the process, from
the pre-election phase through to counting.

March 31, 2005 presented the Mission with an opportunity to assess, in line
with its mandate, whether conditions prevailed for the Zimbabwean people to
elect, freely, their parliamentary representatives.

The observers paid particular attention to the following:

         • Efficiency and impartiality of election staff;
         • Monitoring by party agents and independent monitors and
           observers;
         • Fair access of voters to polling stations and a manageable
           number of voters per constituency;
         • Legal voting procedures, including the Voters’ Rolls, proper
           identification documents, checks and balances against fraud,
           translucent ballot boxes and the security of ballot papers; and
         • Security at the voting precincts


Voting

With regard to the voting process, the Mission noted as follows:


    • Party agents, local monitors, regional and international observers
      were present at polling stations.
    • The voting process was orderly.
    • Polling stations opened on time, staff and election materials were
      present and there were no unauthorised personnel.
    • The performance of staff at polling stations was described either as
      efficient or very efficient.
    • Election procedures were explained, identities checked and voting was
      secret.
    • Security personnel were always present at poling stations.
    • Due to certain reasons, some potential voters could not vote. These
      included cases where voters had gone to wrong constituencies - their
      names did not appear on the Voters’ Roll - or did not possess
      acceptable identification documents. Presiding Officers noted the
      reasons and personal details of those turned away.
    • Polling stations closed on time. Procedures were followed.

The general conclusion was that the polling process was well managed,
transparent for all stakeholders, monitors and observers. The conditions
under which people voted were orderly, peaceful and allowed the people to
express their democratic will freely.

Counting

With regard to counting, the Mission observed that:

    • Counting staff, party agents, local monitors and observers were
      present during the counting process.
    • There were no unauthorised personnel during counting and procedures
      were followed.
    • Security personnel were always present.
    • When disputes arose regarding the status of certain ballot papers,
      these were placed in separate envelopes.
    • The performance of counting staff is rated from satisfactory to very
      efficient.
The counting exercise went well and was strictly monitored.

CONCLUSION

Therefore, meeting on 2 April 2005, in Harare, the South African
Parliamentary Observer Mission unanimously agreed that, with regard to the
2005 Zimbabwe Parliamentary Elections;

    • The pre-election processes were well organised and executed.
    • The election campaigns were peaceful and parties and candidates had
      the political space to canvass support.
    • Parties and leaders demonstrated a commitment to peace and the
      tolerance of divergent views.
    • There were adequate and accessible polling stations.
    • Polling stations were sufficiently provided for in terms of logistics
      and security.
    • Polling stations opened and closed on time.
    • There were correct Voters’ Rolls at the stations and the layout was
      done properly.
    • Ballot boxes were empty at the start of polling, and were sealed
      correctly afterwards.
    • During voting, voters correctly identified themselves. There was no
      intimidation and voting was secret. No repeat voters were observed.
      The voting process was smooth and efficient.
    • All persons at the polling and counting stations were accredited.
    • The electoral process was, by and large, transparent and observed
      throughout by party agents, monitors and observers.

Therefore, the SA Parliamentary Observer Mission concluded that the 2005
Zimbabwe Parliamentary Elections were executed efficiently. The electoral
processes were legitimate and credible and, to the extent that it is
possible and reasonable, they allowed for the broad participation of all
stakeholders and interested parties.

The electoral processes were executed in line with the laws of the land
and, by and large, were consistent with the SADC Principles and Guidelines.

The Mission accordingly concluded that the 2005 Zimbabwe Parliamentary
Elections were free and fair.

Recommendations

The March 2005 Parliamentary Elections are critically important for the
short- and long-term future of Zimbabwe and the region. Having concluded
the electoral process, the country needs to work on rebuilding regional and
international confidence through continued focus on electoral reforms and
economic revival policies.

Among other things, attention may need to be paid to the reduction of the
number of people turned away on voting day. Political parties should also
play a role in ensuring that voters are registered correctly.

The Mission felt that it benefited from observing a meticulously planned
and executed electoral process. Among the many interesting lessons, the
door-to-door voter education programme as well, as the method of voting
whereby voters are divided into three queues in alphabetical order were of
particularly interest.


                           WEDNESDAY, 29 JUNE 2005


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Finance

    1) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Accountants' and
       Auditors' Board for 2004, including the Report of the Independent
       Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December
       2004.

    2) Report and Financial Statements of Sasria Limited for 2004,
       including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
       Statements for the year ended 31 December 2004.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    1) Draft Regulations made in terms of the Promotion of Administrative
       Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).

3.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    1) Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council of
       South Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

    2) Report and Financial Statements of Robben Island Museum for 2003-
       2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 212-2004].


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on the Armaments
      Corporation of South Africa, Limited Amendment Bill [B 14 - 2005]
      (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 21 June 2005:


          The Portfolio Committee on Defence, having considered the  subject
          of the Armaments Corporation of South  Africa,  Limited  Amendment
          Bill [B14 - 2005] (National Assembly –sec 75), referred to it  and
          classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a  section  75  Bill,
          endorses the classification of the Bill and reports the Bill  with
          an amendment [B 14A -2005].



          The Committee further reports that the current situation  is  that
          the Secretary for Defence and the  Chief  of  the  SANDF  are  ‘ex
          officio’ members of the  Board  of  Directors  of  Armscor,  South
          Africa’s armaments acquisition agency. The  Armaments  Corporation
          of South Africa, Limited Amendment Bill [B14-2005] aims to  remove
          the Chief of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) from
          the Board  of  Directors  of  Armscor.  This  is  to  address  the
          ‘conflict of interest’ of the  Chief,  who  will  be  ‘player  and
          referee’, i.e. he requests and uses the military equipment as head
          of the military establishment, but also approves  the  acquisition
          and supplier as a director of the board.


          In addition the Committee and the Department of  Defence  believed
          that the Secretary for Defence as a member of the Board is also in
          a  potential  position  where  there  would  be  a  ‘conflict   of
          interest’.  As  the  head  and  the  accounting  officer  of   the
          Department of Defence (department), he has to oversee and  account
          for  Armscor,  which  receives  a  transfer   payment   from   the
          department. If he is on the board, then he will  not  be  able  to
          objectively oversee and account for the activities of  the  Board.
          This would have adverse implications for corporate governance  and
          adherence to the  Public  Finance  Management  Act.  As  such  the
          Committee amended the bill to also remove the Secretary  from  the
          Armscor board.

      Report to be considered.


                            TUESDAY, 12 JULY 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
      (1)   Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the
         Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 1 July 2005.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs.

                            FRIDAY, 15 JULY 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


            i) Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill [B 22 – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction
               published in Government Gazette No 27782 of 12 July 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 15 July 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


                            FRIDAY, 22 JULY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

        1) Petroleum Products Amendment Bill [B 16B – 2004] – Act No 2 of
           2005 (assented to and signed by President on 18 June 2005);
        2) Sterilisation Amendment Bill  [B 12B – 2004] – Act No 3 of 2005
           (assented to and signed by President on 18 June 2005);
        3) Appropriation Bill [B 7 – 2005] – Act No 4 of 2005 (assented to
           and signed by President on 18 June 2005);
        4) Citation of Constitutional Laws Bill  [B 5B – 2005] – Act No 5
           of 2005 (assented to and signed by President on 23 June 2005);
        5) Re-determination of the Boundaries of Cross-Boundary
           Municipalities Bill  [B 12 – 2005] – Act No 6 of 2005 (assented
           to and signed by President on 23 June 2005);
        6) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill  [B 19 – 2005] – Act No 9 of 2005
           (assented to and signed by President on 14 July 2005); and
        7) Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill  [B 20 – 2005] – Act No 10
           of 2005 (assented to and signed by President on 10 July 2005).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 19 July 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     South African Abattoir Corporation Act Repeal Bill [B 21 –
              2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)

3.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      (1)   Auditing Profession Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of
         Finance on 23 June 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.

      (2)   Special Pensions Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the
         Minister of Finance on 23 June 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.

National Assembly

1.    Referral of Bills

      The Speaker
          1) The Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill [B 22 – 2005]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) was introduced in the National
             Assembly on 15 July 2005 and referred to the Joint Tagging
             Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160,
             and is now referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
             Constitutional Development for consideration and report.


             In terms of Joint Rule 147(2), the Chairperson of the National
             Council of Provinces and I, acting jointly, have decided that
             the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
             Development of the Assembly and the Select Committee on
             Security and Constitutional Affairs of the Council must confer
             on the subject of the Bill.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Draft Amendment Regulation made  in  terms  of  Public  Funding  of
        Represented Political Parties  Act,  1997  (Act  No  103  of  1997)
        submitted in Parliament in terms of section 10 of the Act.


     b) Proclamation No R 18 published in the Government Gazette  No  27468
        dated 6  April  2005:  Referral  of  matters  to  existing  Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, made in terms  of  section
        2(1) of the Special Investigating Units and Special  Tribunal  Act,
        1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

     c)
National Assembly

1. The Speaker

   a) Letter received from the President dated 12 July  2005  informing  the
      National Assembly of the  employment  of  the  South  African  Defence
      Force:


      EMPLOYMENT OF  THE  SOUTH  AFRICAN  NATIONAL  DEFENCE  FORCE  IN  COTE
      D’IVOIRE IN  FULFILLMENT  OF  THE  INTERNATIONAL  OBLIGATIONS  OF  THE
      REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS COTE D’IVOIRE


      This serves to inform the National  Assembly  that  I  authorised  the
      employment  of  the  South  African  National  Defence  Force  (SANDF)
      personnel  to  Cote  D’Ivoire  for  service  in  fulfillment  of   the
      International obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards Cote
      D’Ivoire, in the provision of assistance in the implementation of  the
      Pretoria  Agreement,  with  specific  emphasis  on  the   Disarmament,
      Demobilisation and Reintegration process.


      The employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
      section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
      1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 93 of the Defence Act,
      2002(Act No 42 of 2002).


      A total of 46 members of the SANDF will be deployed for the mission as
      from 08 July 2005 to 31 March 2006.


      The total estimated cost to be borne by South Africa for the
      deployment of personnel to the mission until 31 March 2006 will be R
      26 090 724.


      I will communicate this report to the Members of the National Council
      of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
      Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
      notice of the National Assembly.


      Regards


      TM MBEKI
      PRESIDENT


   b) Report of the Public Service Commission on Financial Misconduct for
      2002-2003 and 2003-2004 financial years [RP 41/2005].


                            FRIDAY, 29 JULY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Education


         ii) Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 23 – 2005] (National Assembly
             – sec 76 [Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 27599 of 27 May 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Education
         of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         27 July 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.



2.    Membership of Committees


          The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
                          Monitoring Committee viz:


        JMC on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth
                            and Disabled Persons:

      Appointed: Mazibuko, Ms N F
      Discharged: Madlala, Ms M M



National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees

     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of
        Standing Committees, viz:

        Public Accounts:
        Appointed: Molefe, Mr C T

     (2)    The following changes have been made to the membership of
        Portfolio Committees, viz:

        Correctional Services:
        Appointed: Khoarai, Mr L P
        Discharged: Magau, Ms K R

        Labour:
        Discharged: Oliphant, Mr G G

2.    Membership of the Assembly

      (1)   The following members will vacate their seats in the National
         Assembly with effect from 1 August 2005:

                 Mpaka, H M; Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Magazi, M N; Joemat, R
         R; Mnandi, P N; Herandien, C B.

      (2)   The following member will vacate his seat in the National
         Assembly with effect from 31 July 2005:

            Durr, K D S.

            The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr K D S Durr vacating his
         seat in the National Assembly with effect from 31 July 2005 is to
         be filled with effect from 1 August 2005 by the nomination of Mr H
         B Cupido.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
         Safety Authority (SAMSA) for 2002-2003, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003.

      b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
         Safety Authority (SAMSA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

2.    The Minister of Safety and Security

    a) Proclamation No R.18 published in Government Gazette No 27502 dated
       15 April 2005: Commencement of the Protection of Constitutional
       Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No
       33 of 2004).


    b) Proclamation No R.22 published in Government Gazette No 27598 dated
       20 May 2005: Notification by President in respect of entities
       identified by the United Nations Security Council in terms of
       section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
       Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


    c) Government Notice No R.474 published in Government Gazette No 27598
       dated 20 May 2005: Direction by the National Commissioner of the
       South African Police Service in terms of section 12(3) of the
       Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and Related
       Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      a) Government Notice No R.282 published in Government Gazette No
         27419 dated 29 March 2005: Assignment of inspection functions in
         terms of the Credit Agreements Act, 1980 (Act No 75 of 1980).

      b) Government Notice No R.283 published in Government Gazette No
         27419 dated 29 March 2005: Assignment of inspection functions in
         terms of the Sale and Service Matters Act, 1964 (Act No 25 of
         1964).

      c) Government Notice No R.293 published in Government Gazette No
         27440 dated 8 April 2005: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP) in
         terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

      d) Government Notice No R.294 published in Government Gazette No
         27440 dated 8 April 2005: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP) in
         terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

      e) Government Notice No R.295 published in Government Gazette No
         27440 dated 8 April 2005: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP) in
         terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

      f) Government Notice No R.296 published in Government Gazette No
         27440 dated 8 April 2005: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP) in
         terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

      g) Government Notice No R.358 published in Government Gazette No
         27475 dated 15 April 2005: International Trade and Administration
         Commission of South Africa: Countervailing Regulations in terms of
         the International Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of
         2002).

4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


      a) Government Notice No 513 published in Government Gazette No 27614
         dated 3 June 2005: Release of parts of a state forest which is no
         longer required for forestry in terms of sections 50(4) of the
         National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).


      b) Government Notice No 874 published in Government Gazette No 27650
         dated 3 June 2005: Prohibition on the making of fires in the open
         air, the destruction by burning of ground cover, including slash,
         the clearing or maintenance of a fire belt by burning or the
         execution of blockburns: Kwazulu-Natal Province in terms of the
         Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

      c) Government Notice No 531 published in Government Gazette No 27641
         dated 10 June 2005: Transformation of the Umlaas Irrigation Board.
         Magisterial Districts of Pietermaritzburg, Camperdown and
         Richmond, Kwazulu-Natal Province, into the Upper Mlazi Water User
         Association, Water Management Area number 11, Kwazulu-Natal
         Province in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
         1998).

      d) Government Notice No 532 published in Government Gazette No 27641
         dated 10 June 2005: Transformation of the Groenland Irrigation
         Board, Magisterial District of Caledon (Theewaterskloof
         Municipality), Western Cape Province, into the Groenland Water
         User Association, Water Management Area number 18, Western Cape
         Province in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
         1998).

      e) Government Notice No 533 published in Government Gazette No 27641
         dated 10 June 2005: Transformation of the Vanwyksdorp Irrigation
         Board, Magisterial District of Calitzdorp, Western Cape Province,
         into the Vanwyksdorp Water User Association, Water User
         Association, Water Management Area number 16, Western Cape
         Province in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
         1998).

      f) Government Notice No 534 published in Government Gazette No 27641
         dated 10 June 2005: Establishment of the Nzhelele Catchment Water
         User Association, Vhembe District Municipality, Limpopo Province,
         Water Management Area number 1 in terms of the National Water Act,
         1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

      g) Government Notice No 558 published in Government Gazette No 27674
         dated 10 June 2005: Prohibition on the making of fires in the open
         air, the destruction by burning of slash and clearing or
         maintenance of fire belts by burning and the execution of
         blockburns: Districts of Nelspruit, White River, Pilgrim’s Rest,
         Lydenburg, Belfast, Waterval-Boven, Carolina and Barberton in
         terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

      h) Government Notice No 559 published in Government Gazette No 27674
         dated 10 June 2005: Prohibition on the making of fires in the open
         air, the destruction by burning of slash and clearing or
         maintenance of fire belts by burning and the execution of
         blockburns: Districts of (A) Ermelo, Eerstehoek, Carolina and
         Waterval-Boven; (B) Piet Retief and Wakkerstroom in terms of the
         Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).


      i) Government Notice No 560 published in Government Gazette No 27674
         dated 10 June 2005: Prohibition on the making of fires in the open
         air, the destruction by burning of slash and clearing or
         maintenance of fire belts by burning and the execution of block-
         burns Vhembe District Municipality (formerly Soutpansberg areas)
         in terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

      j) Government Notice No 561 published in Government Gazette No 27674
         dated 10 June 2005: Prohibition on the making of fires in the open
         air, the destruction by burning of slash and clearing or
         maintenance of fire belts by burning and the execution of block-
         burns Mopane District Municipality (formerly Letaba and
         Pietersburg Districts) in terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No
         122 of 1984).

      k) Government Notice No 554 published in Government Gazette No 27664
         dated 10 June 2005: Release of state forest land at Sederberg,
         Grootvadersbosch, Hawequas, (Limtedberg) and Kogelberg Forest
         Reserves – Western Cape, which is no longer required for forestry
         purposes in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
         1998).

      l) Report of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry to the
         National Assembly on Write-off of Loan Guaranteed by the State
         (Kanoneiland Settlement Management Board), in terms of section
         70(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999).


National Assembly


1.    The Speaker


      Report on an Investigation by the Public Protector into an  Allegation
      of Misappropriation of Public Funds  by  the  Petroleum  Oil  and  Gas
      Corporation of South Africa, trading as PetroSA, and Matters Allegedly
      Related Thereto.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy for
      consideration.



COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
    the South African Abattoir Corporation Act Repeal Bill [B 21 – 2005],
    dated 14 June 2005:


            The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
        considered the subject of the South African Abattoir Corporation
        Act Repeal Bill [B 21 – 2005], referred to it and classified as a
        section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

                           TUESDAY, 2 AUGUST 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      Ms  P  Mlambo-Ngcuka  has  been  appointed  as  Leader  of  Government
    Business in the National Assembly with effect from  28  June  2005,  in
    terms of section 91(4) of the Constitution of  the  Republic  of  South
    Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), thereby replacing Mr C  Nqakula  who
    had been appointed on 15 June 2005.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      a) Response of National Treasury to Recommendations of the Portfolio
         Committee on Finance on Budget Vote 8 – National Treasury for 2005-
         2006 and Strategic Plan.

      b) Response of National Treasury to Recommendations of the Portfolio
         Committee on Finance on the South African Revenue Services (SARS)
         Strategic Plan for 2005 to 2008.

      c) Response of National Treasury to Recommendations of the Portfolio
         Committee on Finance on Budget Vote 13 – Statistics South Africa.

      d) Annual Report of the South African Reserve Bank - Bank Supervision
         Department for 2004 [RP 10-2005].

      e) Government Notice No 535 published in Government Gazette No 27656
         dated 6 June 2005: Notice setting out particulars of areas
         demarcated by Municipalities of Ekurhuleni, Msunduzi, Nelson
         Mandela and Polokwane in terms of section 13quat of the Income Tax
         Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962), which shall constitute urban
         development zones.

      f) Government Notice No R.25 published in Government Gazette No 27681
         dated 17 June 2005: Fixing of a date on which section 14(1)(a) of
         Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2004 (Act No 32 of 2004), shall come
         into operation.

2.    The Minister of Safety and Security

      a) Proclamation No R.31 published in Government Gazette No 27746 dated
         1 July 2005: Notification by President in respect of entities
         identified by the United Nations Security Council in terms of
         section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
         Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


      b) Proclamation No R.29 published in Government Gazette No 27713 dated
         1 July 2005: Notification by President in respect of entities
         identified by the United Nations Security Council in terms of
         section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
         Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).

3.    The Minister of Education

      a) Government Notice No R.744 published in Government Gazette No 27819
         dated 20 July 2005: National Policy regarding Further Education and
         Training Programme: Approval of the Document, the National Senior
         Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National
         Qualifications Framework (NQF), in terms of the National Education
         Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and the South African Schools
         Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Tenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Business and
    Arts South Africa, dated 8 June 2005:

1. INTRODUCTION
   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
   of the Business and Arts South Africa for the year ended 31 March 2004,
   tabled in Parliament on 03 September 2004 and referred to it, reports as
   follows:


2. AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee commends the Board and the Executive of  the  Business  and
   Arts South Africa for the unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   independent auditors,  Grant  Thornton,  and  trusts  that  future  audit
   opinions will be equally unqualified.

3. CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of  the  view  that  no  further  interaction  with  the
   accounting authority of Business and Arts South Africa is  necessary  for
   the financial year under review.

   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report.


 Report to be considered.


2.    Eleventh Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: William
    Humphreys Art Gallery, dated 8 June 2005:

 1. INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
   of the William Humphreys Art Gallery for the year ended 31 March 2004,
   tabled in Parliament on 31 August 2004 and referred to it, reports as
   follows:

 2. AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee commends the Council of the William Humphreys  Art  Gallery
   for the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the  Auditor  General  and
   trusts that future audit opinions will be equally unqualified.

 3. CONCLUSION

    The Committee is of the  view  that  no  further  interaction  with  the
    accounting authority of William Humphreys Art Gallery is  necessary  for
    the financial year under review.


    The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report  of
    the Auditor-General.


   Report to be considered.


3.    Twelfth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Council for
    Medical Schemes, dated 8 June 2005:

INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of the Council for Medical Schemes for the  year  ended  31  March  2004,
   tabled in Parliament on 29 September 2004 and referred to it, reports  as
   follows:

AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   Auditor General and trusts that future audit opinions  shall  be  equally
   unqualified.


EMPHASIS OF MATTER


   The Committee notes the incidence of non-compliance with the Public
   Finance Management Act regulations and expects the situation to be
   rectified by the next audit.


CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the Council
   of
   Medical Schemes would be necessary for the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the  Report  of
   the Auditor-General.



 Report to be considered.


4.    Thirteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
    Engelenburg House Art Collection, dated 8 June 2005:

1. INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of the Engelenburg House Art Collection for the year ended 31 March 2004,
   tabled in Parliament on 21 September 2004 and referred to it, reports  as
   follows:

2. AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   Auditor General and trusts that future audit opinions  shall  be  equally
   unqualified.


3. CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
   Engelenburg House Art Collection would be necessary for the financial
   year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the  Report  of
   the Auditor-General.


 Report to be considered.

5.    Fourteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
    Statistics South Africa, dated 8 June 2005:


A. Introduction


The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
Report and the Report of the Auditor General on the Financial Statements of
Statistics South Africa for the year ended 31 March 2004, tabled in
Parliament on 28 September 2004 and referred to it reports as follows:


Expenditure procured in contravention of tender procedures  (par  3.1,  page
96)


   The Auditor-General reported that STATS SA had once again not complied
   with procurement regulations during the year under review. State Tender
   Board regulations were not complied with in the procurement of services
   amounting to R3,3 million from the same supplier that services amounting
   to R16,1 million had been procured irregularly in the previous financial
   year (2002/03)




The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer immediately takes all
   appropriate steps to ensure that, in future –
a) all matters of  procurement  within  STATS  SA  are  compliant  with  all
   regulatory requirements, including State  Tender  Board  Regulations  and
   Regulations in terms of the Framework for Supply Chain Management; and
b) Disciplinary enquiries take place,  as  required  by  the  PFMA,  in  all
   instances where negligence or wrongdoing may have taken place in order to
   cultivate  a  culture  of  compliance  and  discipline   in   line   with
   Government’s Batho Pele concept.

Regarding the three amounts of  irregular  expenditure  in  question  (R16,1
million; R3.3 million, and R9 million)[1], the Committee further  recommends
that the Accounting Officer reports –

   c) whether investigations in terms of sections 84 and 44 of the Public
      Finance Management Act had taken place, and if not, why not; and if
      so, what the outcomes of the investigations were, and
   d) why the notes to the financial statements did not disclose, as
      required, detail regarding disciplinary actions taken in the case of
      irregular expenditure, or in the case of fruitless and wasteful
      expenditure.[2]

Unreconciled advances written off  (par 3.2, page 96)

The Auditor General reported that an amount of R1.3m was written off
without any steps first having been taken to recover it.

The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures
that:

    a) At all times, he carries out his responsibility of ensuring that
       before any debt is written off, he ensures that evidence exists that
       all reasonable steps have been taken to recover the debt in question,
       and that is it in fact irrecoverable;
        b) Finalise the investigation on the reasons for R1.3m and report
           to Parliament, sixty days after this report has been adopted by
           Parliament; and
        c) Take disciplinary action against officials responsible for poor
           control and financial administration.

Asset Registers  (par. 3.3, page 97)

Auditor General  reported  that  separate  registers  are  kept  for  office
equipment, computers and related equipment. The computer assets and  related
equipment of R13.1m could not be verified.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer urgently ensures that:

a) Responsibility for a complete and accurate asset register is vested in  a
   single senior manager at STATS SA who can be  held  responsible  for  the
   asset register in future;
b) Appropriate  measures  are  taken  to  ensure  that  the  head  of  asset
   management will receive the support from all division heads to  ensure  a
   speedy and effective rectification of the weaknesses, e.g.  including  in
   the performance contracts of all line managers  asset  management  as  an
   area of responsibility; and that the R13.1m computer assets are verified;
   and
c) A proper plan with clear target dates is provided  to  the  Minister,  in
   terms of which the Accounting Officer can be  held  accountable  for  the
   rectification of this matter.

Tax Payments  (par 5.1, page 97)

The Committee is concerned that the Auditor-General  could  not  verify  the
validity and accuracy of payments to enumerators and related tax and  levies
due to late submission of the reconciliations and supporting documents.

The Committee recommends that in future the Accounting Officer ensures  that
the  necessary  reconciliations  are  done,  and  supporting  documents  are
submitted timeously.

5     Delegation of Authority  (par 5.2.1, page 97)

The  Auditor-General  reported  that  delegation  of  authority  to   budget
managers was inadequate and very broad.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer:

a) Comply with Treasury Regulation 15.12.1 and assign authority  in  writing
   to approve warrant vouchers, cheques or electronic payments;
b)  Delegates authority in terms of other best  practices,  e.g.  specifying
   the levels of approval per post  and  correct  rank,  indicating  whether
   authority  can  be  delegated  further,  and  regularly   reviewing   the
   delegations.

Internal Audit recommendations

The Committee is not satisfied with the delay in the implementation of
internal audit recommendations.


The Committee therefore  recommends  that  the  Accounting  Officer  ensures
that:

a) All outstanding internal  audit  recommendations  are  implemented  as  a
   matter of urgency; and
b) Quarterly reports are submitted to the Minister on  progress  being  made
   by management  in  response  to  internal  and  external  audit  findings
   (including a report by the Audit Committee on the adequacy of  the  focus
   areas of internal audit).

The  Committee  further  recommends  that  the  required   risk   management
strategy[3] – not available during the year under review  –  is  immediately
finalised and submitted to the Auditor-General for auditing purposes.

Vacancies

The  Accounting  Officer  confirmed   that   the   Deputy   Director-General
(Population Statistics) has been suspended for a period  of  two  years  and
that other critical positions are  still  not  filled  due  to  scarcity  of
skills.
The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that he -

a) Takes all the necessary steps to ensure that STATS SA  has  the  required
   senior management capacity in order to deliver on its important mandate;
b) Reports progress regarding the filling of  all  critical  top  management
   positions to the Minister on a regular basis; and
(c)   The suspension of the DDG is addressed and finalised as  a  matter  of
   urgency.

General

The Committee recommends that all  issues  raised  above  are  addressed  in
future strategic and business planning of STATS SA.

The  Committee  further  recommends  that  Parliament  be  provided  with  a
progress report made on the matters raised above.

Report to be considered.



6.    Fifteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Municipal
    Demarcation Board, dated 8 June 2005:




Introduction


The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
Report and the Report of the Auditor General on the Financial Statements of
the Municipal Demarcation Board for the year ended 31 March 2004, tabled in
Parliament on 29 September 2004 and referred to it reports as follows:


FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT (page 103, 4.1, 2003/04 annual report)


The Auditor General reported that policies and procedures as implemented  by
management were not fully adhered to.

The Committee recommends that:

  a) The Audit Committee should review whether  the  implementation  of  the
     control measures has occurred.

  b) The MDB should report to this committee that all deficiencies have been
     resolved.

  c) MDB should acknowledge non-compliance and deal with the root causes  of
     weak  financial  management  and  compliance   with   regulations   and
     procedures.

  d) MDB should ensure that there are compensating controls to take care  of
     operational segregation, e.g public participation and maps.


DONOR FUNDING (page 103, 4.3, 2003/04 annual report)


It was reported that MDB did not keep accurate records of  the  spending  of
the Danish donor funds received as required by the Donor Funding  Agreement.


The Committee recommends that:

  a) The MDB implements control measures to ensure that  the  terms  of  the
     donor funding agreement are complied with.

  b) The Audit Committee should review the compliance with the donor funding
     agreement.

BUDGET PROCESS / GOING CONCERN (page 103, 4.4, 2003/04 annual report)

It was reported that the following factors indicate that the  going  concern
ability of the MDB appears to be at risk:

a) The accumulated surpluses at  the  end  of  2003/04  are  not  considered
   sufficient to address the going concern problem faced by the MDB.

The Committee recommends that:

      i) The MDB and National Treasury should resolve  the  funding  issues,
         and progress on this should be reported to this Committee.

b) The MDB does not have an effective system of monitoring  its  expenditure
   against the allocated budget.
The Committee recommends that:

      i) The MDB should implement adequate measures to monitor  the  budget,
         the implementation of which will be followed up by the AG’s Office;

     ii) MDB should ensure that they put in place sustainable measures  with
         regard to their budgeting processes; and

    iii) MDB to write to SCOPA  with  regard  to  when  sustainable  control
         measures will be put in place.

COMPUTERISED GENERAL CONTROLS (page 103, 4.1, 2003/04)

The Auditor-General identified that there was a lack  of  password  controls
at the Board.

The Committee recommends that:

(a)   The MDB should satisfy the Committee that it will ensure that all  its
     policies and procedures in regard to its computerised system have  been
     implemented, especially with  regards  to  implementing  the  necessary
     password controls to safeguard IT system.

GENERAL

(a)    The  Committee  recommends  that  the  Portfolio  Committee  on   the
   Department of Provincial and Local Government should  follow  up  on  the
   role of DPLG in supporting the MDB; and
(b)   Within 60 days after this report has been adopted by  Parliament,  MDB
   should supply  the  Committee  with  actual  amounts  and  rates  of  the
   consultants.

Report to be considered.

7.    Sixteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: National
    Housing Finance Corporation Limited, dated 8 June 2005:

   1. INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the  Financial
   Statements of the National Housing Finance Corporation for the year ended
   31 March 2004, tabled in Parliament on 30 September 2004 and referred  to
   it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed  by  Ernst  &
   Young and trusts that future audit opinions shall be equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further  interaction  with  National
   Housing Finance Corporation Limited would be necessary for the  financial
   year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report.


 Report to be considered.


8.    Seventeenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: National
    Urban Reconstruction and Housing Agency, dated 8 June 2005:

   1. INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of the National Urban Reconstruction and  Housing  Agency  for  the  year
   ended 31 March 2004,  tabled  in  Parliament  on  30  September 2004  and
   referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   independent auditors Fisher Hoffman and trusts that future audit opinions
   shall be equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
   National Urban Reconstruction and Housing Agency would be necessary for
   the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report.



 Report to be considered.


 9.   Eighteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Public
    Service Commission, dated 8 June 2005:

   1. INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of the Public Service Commission for the year ended 31 March 2004, tabled
   in Parliament  on  21 September 2004  and  referred  to  it,  reports  as
   follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions shall  be  equally
   unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the  Public
   Service Commission would  be  necessary  for  the  financial  year  under
   review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the  Report  of
   the Auditor-General.


 Report to be considered.



10.   Nineteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: The
    Social Housing Foundation, dated 8 June 2005:

 1.   INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
   of The Social Housing Foundation for the year ended 31 March 2004, tabled
   in Parliament on 30 September 2004 and referred to it, reports as
   follows:

 2. AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted the unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  Price
   WaterHouseCoopers and trusts that future audit opinions shall be  equally
   unqualified.


 3. CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with The  Social
   Housing Foundation would  be  necessary  for  the  financial  year  under
   review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report.


   Report to be considered.


11.   Twentieth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Special
    Investigating Unit , dated 8 June 2005:

1.   I NTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of the Special Investigating Unit for  the  year  ended  31  March  2004,
   tabled in Parliament on 30 September 2004 and referred to it, reports  as
   follows:

2.   AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted the unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  Price
   WaterHouseCoopers and trusts that future audit opinion shall  be  equally
   unqualified.


3.   CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with  Special
   Investigating Unit would  be  necessary  for  the  financial  year  under
   review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report.


 Report to be considered.


12.   Twenty-First Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
    Thubelisha Homes, dated 8 June 2005:

 1. INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of Thubelisha  Homes  for  the  year  ended  31  March  2004,  tabled  in
   Parliament on 30 September 2004 and referred to it, reports as follows:

 2.   AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by Deloitte &
   Touché  and  trusts  that  future  audit  opinions   shall   be   equally
   unqualified.


 3.   CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with  Thubelisha
   Homes would be necessary for the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report.


 Report to be considered.

13.   Twenty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
    Parliament of the Republic of South Africa, dated 8 June 2005:

A. Introduction



The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
report and the Report of the Auditor General on the Financial Statements of
Parliament for the ended 31 March 2004, tabled in Parliament on 4 November
2005 and referred to it, reports as follows:



   1. Expenditure (par 3.2, page 71)

During the  period  under  review  there  were  insufficient  controls  over
payment  vouchers.  The  Auditor-General  had  found  that   no   supporting
documentation for payments amounting to R3 050 068 could  be  submitted  for
auditing purposes.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer urgently ensures  that:


(a)   All procedure manuals are updated  to  ensure  clarity  regarding  the
   supporting documentation required for all items of expenditure, and  that
   staff who do not comply with the requirements be dealt with in  terms  of
   the applicable disciplinary code;
(b)   Managers authorising payments do so only in cases where  the  required
   supporting documentation exists; and
(c)   The inadequacies regarding the filing  system  are  addressed  without
   delay.

   2. Receivables and Payables (par 3.5 & 3.6, page 72)

The Auditor General reported that a complete debtors age analysis could  not
be submitted for audit purposes and the recoverability of the debtors  could
thus not be determined.  An approved  debt  control  policy  did  not  exist
during  the  period  under  review.   Also,  the  creditor's  reconciliation
revealed an overstatement of R6 726 706; and proof of the  validity  of,  or
services rendered in respect of payments amounting to R4 624 213  could  not
be  submitted  for  auditing  purposes.  The  Committee  found  this  to  be
unacceptable and  recommend  that  Parliament  should  submit  documentation
timeously.

The Committee therefore  recommends  that  the  Accounting  Officer  ensures
that:

(a)   Debtors are properly administered and managed in  accordance  with  an
     approved debt control policy, including ensuring  that  a  debtors  age
     analysis is available as required, and that all  irrecoverable  debtors
     are written off in terms of the applicable policies and procedures;
(b)   Payables are disclosed in the financial statements  in  terms  of  the
     applicable accounting policy;
(c)   Creditors' reconciliations are reviewed and authorised;
(d)   Use of suspense account is discouraged; and
(e)     The   financial   management   skills   audit   is   finalised   and
     recommendations implemented as a matter of urgency.

   3. Internal Control (par 5.4, page 75)

The Auditor General reported that various internal and external audit
findings in respect of previous audits had not received the necessary
attention from management.  There was also no policy or system in place to
follow-up internal and external audit findings to ensure that corrective
steps are taken, with the result that weaknesses are not rectified
timeously or not at all.

The Committee therefore recommends that the Accounting Officer:

(a)   Urgently implement an effective system in terms of which all internal
   and external audit findings and recommendations are responded to by
   management and corrective actions assessed.

   4. Third party payments and employee benefits and compensation  (par 3.3,
      page 71;par 3.8, page 73 and par 5.2, page 74)


   The Auditor-General reported concern regarding the following aspects:


    ▪ The occurrence of third party payments that could not be traced;
    ▪ Leave entitlement of employees and leave paid out on resignation;
      ▪ The correctness of medical aid allowances paid to various staff
        members since no proof was submitted that the employees belong to a
        medical aid scheme as well as tarriffs in respect of employer and
        employees' contribution; and
       ▪ General problems regarding the implementation of the Manqoba
         management information system.




      The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:-


   a)  A proper audit trail exists for  all  payments  in  order  to  verify
      payments  to  the  cash  book  and  relevant  bank   statements;   and
      furthermore, the Committee finds  it  unacceptable  that  third  party
      payments amounting to  "R7m"  could  not  be  supplied  timeously  for
      auditing.
   b) All the necessary steps are taken to  ensure  that  leave  is  managed
      properly, inter alia ensuring that –
      ▪ the backlog of leave forms should be captured on books  of  account
        as a matter of urgency;
      ▪ monthly verification  of  leave  taken  versus  leave  captured  be
        completed by the division managers; and
   c) Records are updated in respect of medical allowances according to  the
      employee contracts,
   d) Correct contributions are paid by employer and employee; and
   (e)      Urgently rectify mistakes flowing from the implemenation of  the
      Manqoba system.

   5. Loans granted to former members of Parliament (note 11, page 89)
In the notes to the annual financial statements on page 89, an amount of
R87 000 is disclosed as loans to former Members of Parliament for the
purposes of acquiring motor vehicles.

(a)    The  Committee  therefore  recommends  that  the  accounting  officer
   ensures that an investigation is done to  determine  the  possibility  of
   recovering the loans to the former Members of Parliament and a report, in
   this regard, is submitted to Parliament sixty days after this  report  is
   adopted by Parliament.

   6. Donor funding (par 3.1, page 71)

The Committee is concerned that the Auditor General could  not  confirm  the
validity and completeness of  donor  funding  received  by  Parliament  from
various local and foreign donors during the year under review.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:

(a)    The  financial  statements  of  Parliament  disclose  all   donations
   received;
(b)   A proper audit trail exist  for  the  purposes  of  the  internal  and
   external auditors;
(c)    A  formal  policy  that   governs   donor   funding   and   financial
   accountability is implemented as a matter of urgency;
(d)   All donations received are  approved  by  the  Presiding  Officers  of
   Parliament in  terms  of  their  controlling  and  supervisory  functions
   provided for in section 3 of the Public Finance Management Act and  other
   applicable legislation.

Inventories and Parliamentary Shop  (par. 3.7, page 72; 5.1, page 73 )

Notwithstanding various shortcomings reported on by the  Auditor-General  in
the previous management letters, these were again noted in  the  year  under
review.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:

(a)   Issues raised  by  the  Auditor  General  in  management  letters  are
   addressed;
(b)   The necessary financial management policies and  procedures,  as  well
   as a proper system, are implemented to control inventories; and
(c)   Stock-taking and the financial progress  of  the  shop  are  monitored
   and, in regard to the above, a report is submitted  to  Parliament  sixty
   days after this report is adopted by Parliament.

Report to be considered.

14.   Twenty-Third Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
    National Department of Health, dated 8 June 2005:

1. Introduction

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor General on the Financial  Statements
   of the National Department of Health for the year ended  31  March  2004,
   tabled in Parliament on 6 October 2004 and referred  to  it,  reports  as
   follows:

A.    MAIN VOTE

Transfer payments and Conditional Grants to provinces (par 3, page 61-62)


    During the year under review, transfer payments to various provincial
       departments constituted 91.4% (approximately R7 billion) of the
   Department of Health' expenditure.  The report of the  Auditor General
  revealed fundamental deficiencies and non-compliance with the provisions
     of the Division of Revenue Act, as well as instances of inadequate
                      monitoring of conditional grants.





   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer immediately:


   (a)      Takes all appropriate steps to comply with the  requirements  of
      the  Division  of  Revenue  Act  relating  to  transfer  payments   in
      particular those  sections  that  deal  with  underspending  and  non-
      achievement of objectives;
   (b)      Ensures the development and implementation of a policy framework
      and clear guidelines for grant utilisation and accountability  in  the
      provinces;
   (c)       Carry  out  ongoing  financial  and   operational   monitoring,
      especially on-site monitoring; and
   (d)      Implements effective project management  systems  and  processes
      within the Department for general monitoring, as well as to ensure  an
      early warning system to timeously identify and address problem areas.

Inadequate monitoring of conditional grants (par. 5.1, page 62)

   It was reported that no distinction  was  made  between  equitable  share
   funding and conditional grant funding in the financial management systems
   of the benefiting provinces.


   The  Committee  recommends  that  the  Accounting   Officer   immediately
   facilitate the implementation of effective management systems  that  will
   clearly separate grant funds from equitable share funds, so as to  ensure
   that funds are utilised for the purposes defined in  the  business  plans
   and the DORA framework.


Transfer payments to Non-Governmental Organisations (NGO's) (par  5.3,  page
   62)

   The  Auditor-General  reported  that  an  amount  of  R110  million   was
   transferred  to  NGO's.   However,  there  was  non-compliance  with  the
   provisions of the PFMA and  the  Treasury  Regulations  as  well  as  the
   conditions of funding agreements with  the  department.   The  Department
   transferred funds without obtaining assurance from the NGOs that they had
   implemented effective, efficient  and  transparent  financial  management
   systems.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer:


    (a)     Complies with his legal obligation regarding transfer of  funds
        by obtaining the assurances required by the PFMA in  all  instances
        where funds are transferred, or run the risk of being found  guilty
        of financial misconduct;
    (b)     Immediately takes  all  appropriate  steps  in  monitoring  the
        performance and compliance with the grant conditions of NGOs;
    (c)     Facilitates a process to ensure  that  the  Financial  Year  of
        NGO's coincide with the Department's financial year.

 Fixed Assets  (par 5.2, page 62)

The fixed asset register maintained on the logistical system is not
integrated with the accounting system of the Department.  Controls over the
movement of assets were also reported to be inadequate.

The Committee therefore, recommends that the Accounting Officer urgently
ensure that:

(a)   A complete asset and inventory register is maintained in terms of
   best practice, and that it be verified and reviewed by a senior official
   on a regular basis; and

(b)   Financial management policies and procedures are established or
   refined in order to enhance the custody and safekeeping of assets and
   inventory.

Vacancies and personnel turnover

The Committee recommends that the Portfolio Committee on Health:

(a)   Monitors the progress with the filling of  all  vacancies,  especially
   critical top management positions;
(b)   Ensures that, overall, the issues raised  by  the  Committee  in  this
   Report, are addressed in the Department’s next strategic  plan,  and  are
   monitored for implementation.

South African National Aids Trust (SANAT)

In 2002 SANAT was established with a donation of R20 million.  The  Auditor-
General reported that  inadequate  progress  has  been  made  regarding  the
objectives of the Trust as set out in the Deed of Trust, and that  fruitless
and wasteful expenditure of R571 114 had been incurred.
The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:

(a)   Proper planning is done in order to  achieve  the  objectives  of  the
   Trust, including the preparation of a budget as required by the PFMA  six
   month prior to the year end.
(b)   The membership to the Board of Trustees  is  finalised  and  that  the
   Board is functional as a matter of urgency, and progress in  this  regard
   be provided to Parliament sixty days after this report has  been  adopted
   by Parliament; and
(c)   Meeting of the Trustees three times a year is facilitated as  required
   by par. 10.3 of the Deed of Trust.

Report to be considered.

15.   Twenty-Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
    National Home Builders Registration Council, dated 8 June 2005:

1.    INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of the National Home Builders Registration Council for the year ended  31
   March 2004, tabled in Parliament on 29 October 2004 and referred  to  it,
   reports as follows:

2.    AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   Auditor General and trusts that future audit opinions  shall  be  equally
   unqualified.


3.    EMPHASIS OF MATTER

   The Committee notes that the NHBRC has not adopted a formal guide and
   policy on the accounting methods and standards for the recognition of
   premium income and insurance/warrant liabilities and expect this
   situation to be rectified in accordance with South African Statements of
   Generally Accepted Accounting Practice, by the following audit.


   The Committee further notes that the new Council was not yet appointed by
   31 March 2004 in accordance with Section 4(1) of the Housing Consumers
   Protection Measures Act, 1998 and will monitor the situation in the
   following audit report.


4.    CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
   National Home Builders Registration Council would be necessary for the
   financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the  Report  of
   the Auditor-General.


Report to be considered.


16.   Twenty-Fifth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
    National Prosecuting Authority, dated 8 June 2005:

1.    INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of the National Prosecuting Authority for the year ended 31  March  2004,
   tabled in Parliament on 14 September 2004 and referred to it, reports  as
   follows:

2.    AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by  Auditor
   General  and  trusts  that  future  audit  opinion   shall   be   equally
   unqualified.


3.    CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further  interaction  with  National
   Prosecuting Authority would be necessary for  the  financial  year  under
   review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the  Report  of
   the Auditor-General.

Report to be considered.

17.   Twenty-Sixth Report of Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  The
      Presidency, dated 8 June 2005:

1.    INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of the Presidency for the year ended 31 March 2004, tabled in  Parliament
   on 30 September 2004 and referred to it, reports as follows:

2.    AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   Auditor General and trusts that future audit opinions  shall  be  equally
   unqualified.


3.    EMPHASIS OF MATTER

   The Committee notes the weakness identified by the Auditor-General with
   regard to inadequate policies to govern procedures relating to asset
   management. The Committee notes the progress made to bar code individual
   assets but urges the Department to reconcile the register by the
   following audit. The Committee expects the Department to comply with the
   provisions of the PFMA in this regard.


   The Committee notes the weaknesses identified in the Information System
   audit and the indication that management is addressing the situation and
   will monitor the situation in the following audit.


4.    CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
   Presidency would be necessary for the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the  Report  of
   the Auditor-General.


 Report to be considered.


18.   Twenty-Seventh Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Rural
    Housing Loan Fund, dated 8 June 2005:

1.    INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of the Rural Housing Loan Fund for the year ended 31 March  2004,  tabled
   in Parliament  on  30 September 2004  and  referred  to  it,  reports  as
   follows:

2.    AUDIT OPINION

   The  Committee  noted  the  unqualified  audit   opinion   expressed   by
   independent auditors  Ernst  and  Young  and  trusts  that  future  audit
   opinions shall be equally unqualified.


3.    CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with  the  Rural
   Housing Loan Fund would be necessary for the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report.


 Report to be considered.


19.   Twenty-Eight Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: South
    African Council for Educators, dated 8 June 2005:

1.    INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of the South African Council for Educators for the year  ended  31  March
   2004, tabled in Parliament on 30 August 2004 and referred to it,  reports
   as follows:

2.    AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   independent auditors PriceWaterhouseCoopers and trusts that future  audit
   opinions shall be equally unqualified.


3.    CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the South
   African Council for Educators would be necessary for the financial year
   under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report.


Report to be considered.


20.   Twenty-Ninth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Sport
    and Recreation South Africa, dated 8 June 2005:

1.    INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of Sport and Recreation South Africa for the year ended  31  March  2004,
   tabled in Parliament on 30 September 2004 and referred to it, reports  as
   follows:

2.    AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions shall  be  equally
   unqualified.


3.    CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with  Sport  and
   Recreation South Africa would be necessary for the financial  year  under
   review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the  Report  of
   the Auditor-General.


 Report to be considered.





21.   Thirtieth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
    Unemployment Insurance Fund, dated 8 June 2005:

Introduction

 The  Standing Committee on  Public  Accounts  (SCOPA),  having  heard  and
 considered evidence on the Annual Report and the Report  of  the  Auditor-
 General on the financial statements of  the  Unemployment  Insurance  Fund
 (UIF) for the year ended 31 March 2004, reports as follows:


Structure and Governance

The  Committee  is  very  concerned  about  the  fact  that  although   the
Unemployment Insurance Fund (Fund) is being listed as a Schedule 3A  public
entity in terms of the PFMA, the Accounting Officer  of  the  Fund  is  the
Director-General of the Department of Labour.  The  Fund  has  an  Advisory
Board with one of the Deputy Director-Generals being the Chairperson .


There is currently an arrangement between the Department  of  Labour  (DoL)
and the Fund where staff of the DoL provide services to the Fund  in  order
to assist the Fund to carry out its functions. The DoL  then  invoices  the
Fund for the services that have been rendered by DoL staff.


The matter has been  raised  during  previous  hearings  with  no  solution
forthcoming from the Fund.


The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority should ensure that:

(a)   the reporting structures of the fund  is  reviewed  and  if  necessary
  ammended to ensure unambiguous accountability of the Fund;
(b)   a decision is reviewed whether  the  Fund  should  be  a  schedule  3A
  public entity or a division of the DoL; and
(c)   SCOPA  is  updated  with  quarterly  progess  reports  and  timeframes
  (starting sixty days after the adoption of  this  report  by  Parliament)
  indicating the improvements on the  structure of the Fund.


Debtors

The Committee took note of:

(a)   the fact that there is no proper debtor system in place which  ensures
  that the fund collects all  revenue  due  from  both  SARS  and  non-SARS
  employers
(b)   the Committee is also not satisfied with the progress of  the  project
  Siyaya.

The Committee therefore recommends that:
(a)   an adequate debtor system be put in place to control revenue; and
(b)   SCOPA be provided with time frames, sixty days after the  adoption  of
  this report by Parliament, for the  full  implementation  of  the  debtor
  system, as well as the key milestones of project Siyaya.

Material breakdown in internal control


3.1   Bank reconciliation

The Committee  noted  that  bank  reconciliations  were  not  performed  and
reviewed on a weekly basis and that  there  were  inadequate  controls  over
paid cheques during the audit period.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority should ensure that:
(a)    bank  reconciliation  should  be  prepared  in  terms   of   Treasury
   Regulation 31.1.2(j);
(b)   all reconciling items on the  reconciliation  should  be  followed  up
   timeously; and
(c)   systems, procedures, processes, training and awareness programmes  are
   established  to  ensure  efficient  and  effective   banking   and   cash
   management.

3.2   Fixed assets

The Auditor-General was unable to verify  the  existence  of  movable  fixed
assets due to an incomplete and inaccurate fixed asset register.

The Committee finds the situation  unacceptable  as  this  matter  has  been
reported for three successive years and to date the Fund has  not  rectified
the position.
The Committee was informed during the hearing that the Fund  has  contracted
the services from Siemens Business  Services,  which  is  a  Public  Private
Partnership. The Committee is concerned that this contract  does  not  cover
all fixed assets.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures:
(a)   the existence and maintenance  of a complete and accurate fixed  asset
   register;
(b)   that proper controls over the  management  of  all  fixed  assets  are
   immediately implemented, monitored and that discrepancies identified  are
   followed up timeously;
(c)   that a progress report be submitted to  the  Committee  by  July  2005
   with regards to the full implementation of  the  integrated  fixed  asset
   register; and
(d)   that the Fund should implement mechanisms to monitor the adherence  to
   internal controls and procedures.


3.3   General computer controls

Significant weaknesses in the general  computer  control  environment  were
highlighted in the audit report with regard to  programme  change  control,
security administration and monitoring, and logical access  security.   The
Committee further noted that  the  proposed  action  plan  to  address  the
weaknesses identified has not been implemented.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures:
(a)   the implementation of an action plan with immediate effect;
(b)   time frames for the implementation process are set and forwarded to
   SCOPA, sixty days after the adoption of this Report by Parliament;
(c)   proper management and compliance monitoring take place with respect
   to contracts and service level agreements of all service providers; and
(d)   an information system environment that complies with required
   standards is available.

Non-compliance with laws and regulations

The  Committee  is  concerned  about  various  issues   of   non-compliance
highlighted in  the  audit  report  with  regards  to  the  PFMA,  Treasury
Regulations, the UIF Act and the Unemployment Insurance Contributions  Act.
However, it has not been informed of  any  disciplinary  actions  taken  to
address non-compliance issues.


The Committee recommends that the  Accounting  Authority  urgently  ensures
that:


a) measures are implemented immediately to  monitor  the  Fund’s  compliance
   with all applicable laws and regulations;
b) corrective actions are taken where the fund has not fully  complied  with
   applicable laws and regulations;
c) a designated official is tasked to  take  responsibility  for  compliance
   and to facilitate effective corporate governance; and
d) SCOPA be informed forthwith of any disciplinary actions taken to  address
   non-compliance issues.

Responses to previous hearing



The Committee noted that although improvements were made since the previous
hearing in 2002, some significant issues  were not addressed.  This
raises  doubts/  concern  as  to  whether   management  is   proactive   and
strategically focused to address the problems that resulted in the  material
break down in internal control.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority should provide  SCOPA
and the Auditor-General, sixty days after the adoption  of  this  Report  by
Parliament, with timeframes  for  the  harmonisation  of  the  database  for
Department of Labour, UIF and the Compensation Fund.

      General: Departure from GAAP

It was noted that non-SARS contributions  are  accounted  for  on  the  cash
basis.

The Committee recommends that  a  database  of  contributors  and  employers
should be updated and maintained to ensure full compliance with GAAP.

Having considered the evidence and the opinion  expressed  by  the  Auditor-
General in previous years reports; the Committee is of  the  view  that  the
Minister should investigate the possibility  of  negligence  and  misconduct
with a view of conducting disciplinary action if  necessary.  The  committee
further requests that the outcome of this investigation be reported back  to
SCOPA within 60 days of the adoption of the report by Parliament.

Report to be considered.

22.   Thirty-First Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
    Department of Defence, dated 8 June 2005:

   1. Introduction


   The  Standing Committee on Public  Accounts  (SCOPA),  having  heard  and
   considered evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of  the  Auditor-
   General on the financial statements of the Department  of  Defence  (DoD)
   for the year ended 31 March 2004, reports as follows:

2. Contingent liabilities and leave - page 143, paragraph 3.1


   The audit report highligted unavailability of detailed supporting reports
   for  leave  credits  relating  to  a  contingent   leave   liability   of
   approximately R1,064 billion as well as inadequate internal  controls  in
   respect of  the  leave  administration  system.  The  Committee  is  very
   concerned as the matter was raised several times during previous hearings
   with no solution forthcoming from the DoD.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting  Officer  ensures  that  the
   following are in place:
     a) A reliable system that gives the monetary value, correct  amount  of
        leave credits for each member in the SANDF and  generates  accurate,
        detailed management information;
     b)  Leave  credits  are  disclosed  in  the  financial  statements   as
        prescribed including the directive on leave of absence;
     c) Proper adherence to all relevant rules, regulations and instructions
        of the internal control system.
     d)  Proper  management  controls,  which  include  regular  independent
        checking and reviewing of attendance and leave registers.


3.    Physical and intangible asset movement schedules - page 144,
      paragraph 3.2

      The audit report reflected that due to un-integrated systems  existing
      at the DoD,  no  amounts  could  be  disclosed  in  the  physical  and
      intangible asset movement schedules  as  prescribed  by  the  Treasury
      Regulation.


      It was further noted that the DoD is not in a position to  move  to  a
      modified accrual  accounting system any time soon.


      The Committee notes  that  notwithstanding  the  recurrance  of  these
      system  failures,  the  DoD  has  yet  to  implement   the   necessary
      corrections.

      The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer:


     a) Establishes a single logistical system that  ensures  accurate  and
        complete disclosure; or
     b) Upgrades the present  logistical  systems  to  make  provision  for
        accrual accounting; and
     c) Indicates to the Committee time  frames  for  implementation  of  a
        system  that  is  integrated  and  able  to  report  the  financial
        information required.

4.    Management of inventory, machinery  and equipment page 144-
       146, paragraph 5.1


   1.   The audit conducted on the management of inventory, machinery and
    equipment revealed that the same weaknesses  in  internal  controls  as
    reported on in prior years still existed in all main processes of asset
    management. This matter could mainly  be  ascribed  to  the  fact  that
    management policies and procedures were not adequately followed.

      The Committee finds it unacceptable that  matters  reported  in  prior
      years still remain unresolved.


      The Committee recommends that:
     a)  Internal  control  procedures  be  revised  and   improved   where
        necessary;


     b) Vacancies should be filled with  skilled  personnel   and  relevant
        training should be given and the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Defence
        should monitor progress;


     c)  Disciplinary  action  be  implemented  where  non-compliance  with
        prescribed policies/ regulations occurred;


     d) Storage facilities be upgraded;


     e) The reporting  structure  within  a  general  support  basis,  army
        support basis and joint support basis should be investigated and  a
        practical/workable structure  be  considered  that  will  give  the
        officer commanding full responsibility over all the offices  within
        his/her unit; and
     f) Logistic systems be integrated.

4.2   The Committee further noted that the DoD  made  commitments  to  SCOPA
      during  previous  hearing  regarding  implementation   of   corrective
      measures in respect of excessive stock levels. These  include  amongst
      other things disposal plans to be put in place for each service.

      The Committee recommends that disposal plans be finalised on time  and
      that SCOPA be provided with the progress  report  within  60  days  of
      adoption of the report by Parliament.

5.    Purchases and payables (accruals) - page 144, paragraph 3.4

      The audit report reflected an instance where information could not  be
      generated from the accounting systems of  the  DoD  resulting  in  the
      amount disclosed as accruals understated by an unknown amount.


      The Committee is concerned about the DoD's slow progress in addressing
      the issue.


      The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
     a) An integrated system that will comply with the  accrual  accounting
        principles and disclosures is implemented; and
      (b)   The current systems are upgraded/replaced or  National  Treasury
      has to revisit its requirements on disclosure within  the  limitations
      placed by the existing information systems.

6.     Departmental income - page 144, paragraph 3.3

      The committee is concerned about the completeness of income  amounting
      to  R266,342  million   that  could  not  be  verified  due   to   the
      inconsistent  application  of  the  internal  controls  applicable  to
      income.


      This has been a serious concern to  the  Committee  as  the  situation
      worsened and the DoD implemented controls  that  are  not  functioning
      properly. The Committee is of the view  that  the  DoD  is  not  in  a
      position to satisfy SCOPA that the matter will be corrected during the
      next financial year.


      The Committee therefore recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures
      that:
     a) Steps are taken  to  ensure  that  monies  received  are  regularly
        reconciled and checked by senior personnel at unit level; and
     b) Systems are reconfigured to ensure that income can be  managed  and
        controlled at unit level.

7.    Irregularities and losses - page 144, paragraph 3.5


      The Committee noted inconsistent application of policies and
      procedures resulting in losses and damages not reported to the finance
      division and that damage and loss registers at unit level were not
      updated regularly.

      The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
   a) Losses are reported and the loss register is updated and reviewed on a
      regular basis;
        (b)      Reconciliation is performed on a regular basis; and
        (c)      Training in financial management for senior  personnel  at
           unit level is implemented.


8.    Land and buildings - page 146, paragraph 5.2

      The  Committee  is  concerned  about  various  instances  that  caused
      uncertainity over the completeness and accuracy of the DoD's  facility
      register system. Reconciliations could not be  performed  with  Public
      Works' asset register due to the incompatibility of the  two  systems.
      This matter was raised in the previous report.

      The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that :
     a) A complete and accurate facility register is kept;
       b) Proper maintenance of buildings are carried out by the Department
          of Public Works, over and above innovative  ways  of  maintaining
          buildings by the Department itself;
       c)  Timeous investigations are carried out  regarding  the  economic
          viability to either restore or demolish  uninhabitable  buildings
          and houses to reduce  third  party  liability  to  an  acceptable
          level;
       d) The current land and buildings register inventory be submitted to
          SCOPA  within  30  days  of  the  adoption  of  this  report   by
          Parliament.
       e) Provide SCOPA with a plan of action on how  the  Department  will
          minimise possible health and safety risk which  could  result  in
          the DoD becoming liable to third parties due to the uninhabitable
          status of buildings and houses


      The Committee further recommends that:
     a)  a  completed  integrated  land   inventory   be   established   in
        consultation with the Department of Public Works and Department  of
        Land   Affairs   addressing   problems    causing    the    current
        incompatibilities between the registers of the various departments;
        and
     b) the Committee be supplied with a progress report, within 90 days of
        the adoption of  this  Report  by  Parliament,  on  how  the  above
        problems are being addressed, and thereafter with  a  copy  of  the
        full reconciliation register.

9.    Gifts, donations and sponsorships - page146, paragraph 5.3

      The  Committee  noted  with  concern  shortcomings  with  regards   to
      validity, accuracy and completeness of gifts received,  donations  and
      sponsorships made and received in kind.


      The Committee recommends that  internal  control  measures  should  be
      revised to ensure that  all  gifts,  donations  and  sponsorships  are
      reported  and  ultimately  reflected  correctly   in   the   financial
      statements.

10.   Personnel expenditure: Commuted overtime - page 146, paragraph 5.4

      The Committee noted that internal controls with  regards  to  overtime
      were not followed. In certain cases, the policies and  procedures  did
      not seem to be adequate to address all weaknesses in the system.


      The Committee was also informed about the investigation that  the  DoD
      instituted with regards to issues raised in the audit report.


      The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures:
     a) Improved management  of  commuted  overtime  in  order  to  achieve
        acceptable levels;
     b) Updated  implementation  instructions  and  revised  contracts  for
        commuted overtime; and
     c) Adherence by all managers and  supervisors  to  the  implementation
        manual to monitor commuted overtime  constantly  to  prevent  over-
        underpayments.

11. Information systems - page 147, paragraph 5.7

      The Committee noted that the Auditor-General could not place  reliance
      on the general controls surrounding Computer Aided Logistic Management
      Information Systems  (CALMIS)  this  resulted  in  the  activities  of
      database administrators not being logged and monitored.


      The Committee recommends that security management be improved by means
      of baseline security standards based on the security policy. It should
      be enforced through detailed, documented and monitored  processes  and
      procedures and must be reported  back  to  SCOPA  within  60  days  of
      adoption of this report by Parliament.


  12. Revenue and receivables (foreign aid in kind) - page 146,  n
      paragraph 5.5


      The Committee is concerned that nothing has been done in the  previous
      financial  years  to  address  the  shortcomings  in  the  system  for
      recording and collation of foreign aid assistance received in kind.
      The Committee finds the situation unacceptable, as the matter has been
      recurring for three consecutive years.


      The Committee recommends that a progress report be submitted to  SCOPA
      within 30 days of the adoption of this report by Parliament.

   13.  Rooivalk - page 49 & 81

   The committee noted the time spent and cost  thereof  together  with  the
   number of Rooivalk aircraft manufactured  and  recommend  that  SCOPA  be
   supplied with a cost benefit analysis of  this  project  and  how  future
   operational cost been funded.

14.  General

The Auditor-General should follow up on  the  following  issues  during  the
financial year ending 2004/05 audit and provide feedback to SCOPA:
a)  All   the   aspects   highlighted   above   including   previous   SCOPA
   recommendations on the DoD and SDA; and
b) Findings on the statutory mandate of National Conventional  Arms  Control
   Committee (NCACC) as reported on pages 146 -147,  paragraph  5.6  of  the
   audit report.

The Committee is of the view that the Department  should  adapt  to  systems
that satisfy the Department’s needs in consultation with National Treasury.

Report to be considered.

                          WEDNESDAY, 3 AUGUST 2005

ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    DECISION BY THE SPEAKER AND THE CHAIRPERSON OF  THE  NATIONAL  COUNCIL
    OF PROVINCES TO ESTABLISH  AN  AD  HOC  JOINT  COMMITTEE  ON  AMENDMENT
    REGULATIONS TO PUBLIC FUNDING OF  REPRESENTED  POLITICAL  PARTIES  ACT,
    1997 (ACT NO 103 OF 1997) IN TERMS OF JOINT RULE 138(1)(b).

The Speaker of the National Assembly and the  Chairperson  of  the  National
Council of Provinces, acting jointly, have decided in terms  of  Joint  Rule
138(1)(b)  to  establish  an  Ad  Hoc  Joint  Committee  to  consider  draft
amendment regulations tabled by the Minister for Justice and  Constitutional
Development (on behalf of the President of the Republic) on  22  July  2005,
the Committee to -

      a) consist of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development of the Assembly and the Select Committee on Security
         and Constitutional Affairs of the Council;
      b) make recommendations to the President, in terms of section 10(1) of
         the Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act, on the
         draft amendment regulations;
      c) inform the Assembly and the Council of its recommendations to the
         President;
      d) complete its task by not later than 19 August 2005; and
      e) exercise those powers in Joint Rule 32 that may assist it in
         carrying out its task.



     SPEAKER                                  CHAIRPERSON


    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY  NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES


National Assembly

1.    Membership of the Assembly

      Mr E M  Dipico  resigned  as  Member  of  the  National  Assembly  and
    Parliamentary Counsellor to the President with  effect  from  1  August
    2005.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

   1,Government Notice No 636 published in Government Gazette No 27748 dated
   30 June 2005: Exemptions from section 117, in terms of the Local
   Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

   2. Government Notice No 637 published in Government Gazette No 27748
      dated 30 June 2005: Revocation of Government Notice No 1404 of 1
      December 2004 and Exemption from certain Supply Chain Management
      Provisions and Regulations Promulgated under section 168 of the Local
      Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
      2003).


3.Government Notice No 638 published in Government Gazette No 27748 dated
30 June 2005: Repeal of the Municipal Accountants Act, 1998 (Act No 21 of
1998).

4.Government Notice No 639 published in Government Gazette No 27748 dated
30 June 2005: Exemptions from section 16(2) of the Municipal Finance
Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).
5. Government Notice No 622 published in Government Gazette No 27729 dated
1 July 2005: Amendment of the Rules of the Government Employees Pension
Fund in terms of the Government Employees Pension Law (Proclamation No 21
of 1996).

   6.Response of South African Revenue Services (SARS) to Recommendations of
   the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Strategic Plan of the South
   African Revenue Services (SARS) for 2005 to 2008.

   7. Response of Statistics South Africa to Recommendations of the
      Portfolio Committee on Finance on Budget Vote 13 – Statistics South
      Africa.

   8. Proclamation No R.25 published in Government Gazette No 27681 dated 17
      June 2005: Fixing of a date on which section 14(1)(a) of Revenue Laws
      Amendment Act, 2004 (Act No 32 of 2004), shall come into operation.

      Please Note: Numbers (f), (g) and (h) above replaces (b), (c) and (f)
      respectively tabled in the Minister of Finance’s name on
      Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports (ATC) of 2 August 2005,
      Page No. 1401.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the  Joint  Budget  Committee  on  National  and  Provincial
    Expenditure from April 2004 to March 2005:

A.    NATIONAL EXPENDITURE

1.    Introduction
Departmental  expenditure  has  been  fairly   consistent   throughout   the
financial year.  However, it is evident  that  Departments  increased  their
expenditure in the last quarter, as was  the  case  in  the  last  financial
year.  The Department of Communications, in particular, always  spends  more
than half of its budget in the last month of the financial year.  These  two
departments,  together  with  the  Department  of  Sports  and   Recreation,
increased their expenditure significantly in March 2004.

The Department of Communications had only spent 41.29% of its budget at  the
end of the third quarter, leaving it  with  58.71%  to  spend  in  the  last
quarter.  However, in a period of one  month  (March  2005)  the  Department
managed to spend 50.09% of its budget, bringing  its  total  expenditure  to
98.22% by the end of  the  financial  year.   Likewise,  the  Department  of
Foreign Affairs had spent 47.48%  by  the  end  of  the  third  quarter  and
increased its expenditure significantly towards the  end  of  the  financial
year.

It is worth mentioning that the same trend was evident  in  the  expenditure
of the Department of Communications for  the  past  three  financial  years.
For example, in February 2003, the Department had only spent 45.75%  of  its
budget, and then  managed  to  spend  49.72%  in  the  last  month  of  that
financial year (March 2003).  Similarly, in February  2004,  the  Department
had spent 45.67% of its budget, and then spent 50.75% in the last  month  of
the financial year.

Table 5  (Appendix  1)  indicates  that  Departments  underspent  by  R  6.3
Billion, which is lower  than  the  R8  Billion  underexpenditure  from  the
2003/04 financial year. In addition, Figure 1  indicates  that  Departmental
spending has been gradually decreasing over the past three financial years.

Figure 1: Average departmental Spending trends
[pic]
2.    Analysis Of Expenditure Per Quarter

2.1.  First Quarter

In  the  first  quarter  of  the  financial  year,  some  departments   were
disbursing  funds  to  institutions  and  their  budgets   reflected   these
transfers.  Most notable was the Department of Education, which spends  most
of its budget during the first and second quarters.  Another example is  the
Department of Social Development.

The  First  quarter  expenditure  report  showed  a   gradual   decline   in
expenditure  from  April  to  June  2004.   Average   expenditure   declined
gradually  from  9.84%,  7.80%  to  6.75%  in  April,  May  and  June   2004
respectively.

The Department of Education  was  the  highest  spender  in  the  first  two
quarters and the Departments of  Foreign  Affairs  and  Communications  were
already lagging behind with their spending.

2.2.  Second and Third Quarters

The second quarter indicated some  fluctuation  of  expenditure  in  certain
departments,  notably  the  Departments  of   Social   Development,   Public
Enterprises, as well as Provincial and Local Government.  These  Departments
transfer a large portion of their funds in certain months and  thus  present
highly fluctuating expenditure from  month  to  month.   The  Department  of
Social Development, for example, spent 24.43% of its budget in October  2004
and only 0.56% in November 2004.   In  addition,  while  the  Department  of
Provincial and Local Government spent only 2.42% of its budget  in  October,
it spent 18% of its budget in November.

The Department of Minerals and Energy was the highest  spender  in  December
2004,  spending  27.92%  of  its  budget  in  this  month.   The  department
explained that the increase in expenditure was attributed to a huge  payment
of  R447.688  million  made  to  ESKOM  for  the  National   Electrification
Programme.

The Departments of Communications and Foreign Affairs had spent only  41.29%
and 47.48%  of  their  budgets  at  the  end  of  the  third  quarter.   The
Department of Communications was still a cause for concern  at  the  end  of
the third quarter, as had been the  case  in  the  preceding  two  financial
years.  The Department however, had  increased  its  expenditure  marginally
from 32.52% in the third quarter of the 2003/04 financial  year,  to  41.29%
at the end of  the  third  quarter  of  the  2004/05  financial  year.   The
Department of Communications’ expenditure has continuously been a cause  for
concern for the Committee due to the department’s trend  of  under  spending
on its budget and then spending a huge chuck  of  the  budget  in  the  last
month of the year.   The  Committee  has  previously  recommended  that  the
Department appear before it.

The  Departments  that  had  spent  highest  on  their  budget   were:   the
Departments of Education (91.19%),  Defence  (79.36%),  Parliament  (76.56%)
and GCIS (74.87%).   The  expenditure  of  Departments  was  consistent  and
fairly predictable throughout the first  three  quarters;  with  Departments
spending slightly lower than they did in the same periods  of  the  previous
financial years.

The ratio in spending  between  current  and  capital  expenditure  remained
unchanged in the second and third quarters.  Although some  Departments  had
increased their capital expenditure, the average  remained  the  same,  with
Departments spending 72.76% on current expenditure, 71.39% on Transfers  and
65.82% on capital expenditure.

The social services sector was the highest spending sector with  an  average
expenditure of 77.52%.  Departmental expenditure had dropped  slightly  from
the 2003/04 financial year from 71.67% in the third quarter of  the  2003/04
financial year to 69.71% in the  third  quarter  of  the  2004/05  financial
year.  In addition, Departments are consistent in terms  of  their  spending
trends, and there are no major changes from the last financial year.

2.3.  Fourth Quarter

During the last quarter of the financial year, departments  increased  their
expenditure tremendously, most notably  the  Department  of  Communications.
Similar to the last financial year,  the  Department  had  spent  lowest  by
February 2005, and then spent a huge chunk of its budget in the  last  month
of the financial year.
Departments increased their average expenditure from 10.14%  in  January  to
11.65% in March 2005.   Tables 1  and  table  2  indicate  the  highest  and
lowest spenders at the end of the financial year.  Although  the  Department
of Communications does not  appear  on  these  tables,  it  was  the  lowest
spender for the first three quarters of the financial year, but  then  spent
50.09% of its budget in the last month of the financial year  (March  2005).
The same trend had been evident in the preceding two financial years.

3. Analysis of Average Expenditure as at 31 March 2005

3.1. Highest spending Departments

Table 1
|R'000       |Total   |Expenditu|%       |Total   |%       |Underspendi|
|            |Budget  |re for   |Expendit|expendit|Expendit|ng         |
|            |        |the Month|ure for |ure to  |ure to  |           |
|            |        |         |the     |date    |date    |           |
|            |        |         |month   |        |        |           |
|Voted       |15353163|17891904 |11.65%  |14992264|97.65%  |3608991    |
|Amounts     |7       |         |        |6       |        |           |
|            |        |         |        |        |        |0          |
|Central     |24327550|2874461  |11.82%  |23467110|96.46%  |860440     |
|Government  |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Administrati|        |         |        |        |        |           |
|on          |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|The         |175852  |22327    |12.70%  |167729  |95.38%  |8123       |
|Presidency  |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Parliament  |576 144 |37 018   |6.43%   |576 144 |100.00% |           |
|Foreign     |2546649 |570394   |22.40%  |2307698 |90.62%  |238951     |
|Affairs     |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Home Affairs|2377615 |343972   |14.47%  |1987006 |83.57%  |390609     |
|Provincial  |13137381|1146557  |8.73%   |13121073|99.88%  |16308      |
|and Local   |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Government  |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Public Works|5513909 |754193   |13.68%  |5307460 |96.26%  |206449     |
|            |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Financial   |15060896|1588422  |10.55%  |14351960|95.29%  |708936     |
|and         |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Administrati|        |         |        |        |        |           |
|ve Services |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Government  |203149  |18294    |9.01%   |202844  |99.85%  |305        |
|Communicatio|        |         |        |        |        |           |
|ns and      |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Information |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Services    |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|National    |14021916|1449526  |10.34%  |13489905|96.21%  |532011     |
|Treasury    |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Public      |77377   |8272     |10.69%  |75668   |97.79%  |1709       |
|Enterprises |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Public      |144296  |32805    |22.73%  |127318  |88.23%  |16978      |
|Service and |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Administrati|        |         |        |        |        |           |
|on          |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Public      |73081   |8366     |11.45%  |71129   |97.33%  |1952       |
|Service     |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Commission  |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|S A         |40887   |13418    |32.82%  |34361   |84.04%  |6526       |
|Management  |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Development |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Institute   |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Statistics  |500190  |57741    |11.54%  |350735  |70.12%  |149455     |
|South Africa|        |         |        |        |        |           |
|            |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Social      |28803489|1794952  |6.23%   |27945256|97.02%  |858233     |
|Services    |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Arts and    |1176097 |218578   |18.59%  |1091665 |92.82%  |84432      |
|Culture,    |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Education   |11405095|488976   |4.29%   |11293774|99.02%  |111321     |
|Health      |8818400 |676375   |7.67%   |8387748 |95.12%  |430652     |
|Labour      |1228697 |128376   |10.45%  |1098646 |89.42%  |130051     |
|Science and |1 282   |121 114  |9.44%   |1 281   |99.97%  |441        |
|Technology  |412     |         |        |971     |        |           |
|Social      |4598575 |68698    |1.49%   |4509964 |98.07%  |88611      |
|Development |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Sport and   |294213  |92835    |31.55%  |281487  |95.67%  |12726      |
|Recreation  |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|South Africa|        |         |        |        |        |           |
|            |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Justice and |57538746|7315806  |12.71%  |56945869|98.97%  |592877     |
|Protection  |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Services    |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Correctional|8457492 |1059541  |12.53%  |8026420 |94.90%  |431072     |
|Services    |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Defence     |19 411  |3 233 272|16.66%  |19 396  |99.92%  |15 637     |
|            |819     |         |        |182     |        |           |
|Independent |42 114  |6 586    |15.64%  |42 547  |101.03% |-433       |
|Complaints  |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Directorate |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Justice and |5054417 |585404   |11.58%  |4907815 |97.10%  |146602     |
|Constitution|        |         |        |        |        |           |
|al          |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Development |        |         |        |        |        |           |
|Safety and  |24 572  |2 431 003|9.89%   |24 572  |100.00% |-1         |
|Security    |904     |         |        |905     |        |           |

Table 1 indicates that Parliament and the Department of Safety and  Security
have spent their total budget, as was the case  in  the  previous  financial
year.  The only Department that overspent on its budget is  the  Independent
Complaints Directorate (ICD), which overspent by 1.03%.  Expenditure  trends
indicate  that  Departments  have  generally  decreased  their  expenditure,
particularly the lowest spending Departments.

Figure 2: Average Expenditure of highest spending Departments
[pic]

3.2. Lowest spending departments

Table 2: Lowest Spenders
|R'000         |Total |Expend|%         |Total  |%    |Underspendin|
|              |Budget|iture |Expenditur|expendi|Expen|g           |
|              |      |for   |e for the |ture to|ditur|            |
|              |      |the   |month     |date   |e to |            |
|              |      |Month |          |       |date |            |
|Voted Amounts |153531|178919|11.65%    |1499226|97.65|36089910    |
|              |637   |04    |          |46     |%    |            |
|              |      |      |          |       |     |            |
|Central       |243275|287446|11.82%    |2346711|96.46|860440      |
|Government    |50    |1     |          |0      |%    |            |
|Administration|      |      |          |       |     |            |
|The Presidency|175852|22327 |12.70%    |167729 |95.38|8123        |
|              |      |      |          |       |%    |            |
|Parliament    |576144|37018 |6.43%     |576144 |100.0|            |
|              |      |      |          |       |0%   |            |
|Foreign       |254664|570394|22.40%    |2307698|90.62|238951      |
|Affairs       |9     |      |          |       |%    |            |
|Home Affairs  |2377  |343   |14.47%    |1 987  |83.57|390 609     |
|              |615   |972   |          |006    |%    |            |
|Provincial and|131373|114655|8.73%     |1312107|99.88|16308       |
|Local         |81    |7     |          |3      |%    |            |
|Government    |      |      |          |       |     |            |
|Public Works  |551390|754193|13.68%    |5307460|96.26|206449      |
|              |9     |      |          |       |%    |            |
|              |      |      |          |       |     |            |
|Financial and |150608|158842|10.55%    |1435196|95.29|708936      |
|Administrative|96    |2     |          |0      |%    |            |
|Services      |      |      |          |       |     |            |
|Government    |203149|18294 |9.01%     |202844 |99.85|305         |
|Communications|      |      |          |       |%    |            |
|and           |      |      |          |       |     |            |
|Information   |      |      |          |       |     |            |
|Services      |      |      |          |       |     |            |
|National      |140219|144952|10.34%    |1348990|96.21|532011      |
|Treasury      |16    |6     |          |5      |%    |            |
|Public        |77377 |8272  |10.69%    |75668  |97.79|1709        |
|Enterprises   |      |      |          |       |%    |            |
|Public Service|144   |32 805|22.73%    |127 318|88.23|16 978      |
|and           |296   |      |          |       |%    |            |
|Administration|      |      |          |       |     |            |
|Public Service|73081 |8366  |11.45%    |71129  |97.33|1952        |
|Commission    |      |      |          |       |%    |            |
|SA Management |40 887|13 418|32.82%    |34 361 |84.04|6 526       |
|Development   |      |      |          |       |%    |            |
|Institute     |      |      |          |       |     |            |
|Statistics    |500   |57 741|11.54%    |350 735|70.12|149 455     |
|South Africa  |190   |      |          |       |%    |            |
|              |      |      |          |       |     |            |
|Social        |288034|179495|6.23%     |2794525|97.02|858233      |
|Services      |89    |2     |          |6      |%    |            |
|Arts and      |117609|218578|18.59%    |1091665|92.82|84432       |
|Culture,      |7     |      |          |       |%    |            |
|Education     |114050|488976|4.29%     |1129377|99.02|111321      |
|              |95    |      |          |4      |%    |            |
|Health        |881840|676375|7.67%     |8387748|95.12|430652      |
|              |0     |      |          |       |%    |            |
|Labour        |1228  |128   |10.45%    |1 098  |89.42|130 051     |
|              |697   |376   |          |646    |%    |            |

Only three Departments spent their total budgets, as opposed to five in  the
last financial year.   In  addition,  more  departments  underspent  with  a
higher margin in the last financial year and Departments such as  the  South
African Management Development  Institute  (SAMDI)  and  the  Department  of
Public Service and Administration spend a large amount of their  budgets  in
the last month of the financial year.

The Departments of Home Affairs and Public Service and  Administration  have
been among the lowest spenders for three consecutive  financial  years,  and
SAMDI for two consecutive financial years.


        Figure 3: Average expenditure of lowest spending departments

[pic]
4. National Current, Transfer and Capital Expenditure

Departments spent most in capital expenditure rather than transfer or
current expenditure.  This is a huge shift as it is the opposite trend to
the last two financial years, wherein Departments have been spending most
on their current and less on their capital budgets.  In the 2004/05
financial year, Departments exceeded the average capital expenditure,
spending an average of 106.33%, 98.28% and 96.11% in Capital, Transfer and
Current Expenditure respectively.

This represents a decrease in current and an increase in capital
expenditure from the last two financial years.
4.1 Current Expenditure

The lowest spenders of current expenditure are the Departments of
Provincial and Local Government (59.03%), Sports and Recreation South
Africa (66.49%), Stats SA (72.21%), SAMDI (72.38%) and education (73.14%).


The highest spenders of current expenditure are the Departments of Public
Enterprises, which overspent by 4.52%, Defence overspent by 3.76%, Public
Works by 3.28%.   Parliament reported an expenditure of 100% on current
expenditure.

4.2 Transfers

The lowest spenders of transfer expenditure are the Public Service
Commission (0%), the Departments of Public Enterprises (29.82%), Public
Works (73.48%), Sport and Recreation South Africa (79.87%), Foreign Affairs
(88.52%).

Several Departments overspent tremendously on their transfer expenditure.
These are the Departments of Correctional Services, which spent five times
more than its original transfer budget1, the ICD, which spent more than
double its allocated transfer budget2.  In addition, Statistics South
Africa overspent on its transfer budget by 12.12%, Public Service and
Administration by 5.63% and Justice and Constitutional Services by 3.28%.

4.3 Capital Expenditure

The lowest spenders of capital expenditure are Arts and Culture (3.35%),
National Treasury (29.33%), Home Affairs (39.17%) and Stats SA (40.53%).

Several Departments overspent tremendously on their capital expenditure.
Departments which underspent most on capital expenditure are the
Departments of Sport and Recreation, which spent R56.9 Million from a
budget of R2.6 Million.   The Department of Science and Technology
(521.88%) spent five times more than its original budget3.  Other
Departments that spent more than double their allocated capital funds are
the Independent Complaints Directorate, SAMDI and the Department of
Housing.

         Figure 4: Average current, transfer and capital expenditure
                                    [pic]

 The graph below indicates that while current expenditure has decreased from
      the previous financial year, capital expenditure has increased4.


3 Provincial Expenditure


OVERALL PROVINCIAL EXPENDITURE

Most  provinces  underspent  marginally  on   their   budgets.    Provincial
expenditure increased from an average of 98.72% in  2002/03,  to  99.47%  in
2003/04, and again decreased to 96.94% in the 2004/05 financial  year.   The
trend is illustrated in figure 5.


      Figure 5: Provincial Expenditure trends over the last three years

[pic]
Table 3 indicates the expenditure of provinces at the end of  the  financial
year.   The  North  West  Province  was  the   lowest   spending   province,
underspending by 5.22%.  Other provinces that underspent  on  their  budgets
are Mpumalanga  (4.7%),  Free  State  (4.55%),  Northern  Cape  (3.99%)  and
Gauteng  (3.09%).   These  are  the  lowest   spending   provinces.    These
provinces, with the exception of the Northern Cape province, were  also  the
lowest spenders in the 2003/04 financial year.

                                   Table 3
|R'000           |Total     |Total         |% Expenditure|2003/04      |
|                |Budget    |Expenditure   |as at 31     |Expenditure  |
|                |          |              |March 2005   |             |
|Eastern Cape    |31 273 372|30 974 745    |99.05%       |102.08%      |
|Free State      |13 489 087|12 875 741    |95.45%       |98.87%       |
|Gauteng         |31 206 772|30 243 249    |96.91%       |99.73%       |
|Kwazulu-Natal   |38 994 044|38 849 053    |99.63%       |100.65%      |
|Limpopo         |25 616 015|24 994 842    |97.58%       |97.51%       |
|Mpumalanga      |13 787 688|13 140 204    |95.30%       |97.52%       |
|Northern Cape   |4 641 768 |4 456 699     |96.01%       |101.51%      |
|North West      |15 881 229|15 051 807    |94.78%       |97.69%       |
|Western Cape    |18 670 995|18 250 348    |97.75%       |97.49%       |

            Figure 6: Provincial Expenditure: 2003/04 and 2004/05
                                    [pic]
            Current, Transfer and Capital Provincial Expenditure
                                   Table 4
|R'000                        |Current Budget     |Current exp. to   |
|                             |                   |date              |
|African National Congress                                           |
|Asiya, Mr S E  (NA)          |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Baloyi, Mr M R *  (NA)       |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Botha, Mr D J  (NCOP)        |30/09/2004         |                  |
|Cwele, Dr S C  (NA)          |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Davies, Dr R H *  (NA)       |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Goeieman, Mr M C  (NCOP)     |30/09/2004         |                  |
|Hogan, Ms B A  (NA)          |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Kannemeyer, Mr B W  (NA)     |26/08/2004         |01/11/2004        |
|Kolweni, Mr Z S  (NCOP)      |30/09/2004         |                  |
|Mabe, Ms L L  (NA)           |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Manyosi, Mr A T  (NCOP)      |30/09/2004         |                  |
|Mashiane, Ms L M   (NA)      |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Mkhaliphi, Mr B J  (NCOP)    |30/09/2004         |                  |
|Moloto, Mr K A*  (NA)        |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Nene, Mr N M  (NA)           |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Ntwanambi, Ms N D  (NCOP)    |30/09/2004         |                  |
|Nyanda, Ms F  (NCOP)         |30/09/2004         |22/02/2005        |
|Ralane, Mr T  (NCOP)         |30/09/2004         |                  |
|Robertson,                   |22/02/2005         |                  |
|Schneemann, Mr G D  (NA)     |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Sikakane, Mr M R  (NA)       |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Sithole, Mr D J *  (NA)      |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Zita, Mr L  (NA)             |26/08/2004         |                  |
|                             |                   |                  |
|Democratic Alliance                                                 |
|Rabie, Dr P J  (NA)          |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Taljaard, Ms R  (NA)         |26/08/2004         |01/01/2005        |
|                             |                   |                  |
|Inkatha Freedom Party                                               |
|Raju, Mr N M  (NCOP)         |30/09/2004         |Passed away on    |
|                             |                   |27/10/2004        |
|Smith, Mr P F *  (NA)        |26/08/2004         |                  |
|Woods, Dr G G  (NA)          |26/08/2004         |                  |
|                             |                   |                  |
|United Democratic Movement                                          |
|Stephens, Mr M  (NA)         |26/08/2004         |                  |
|                             |                   |                  |
|African Christian Democratic Party                                  |
|Durr, Mr K D S  (NA)         |26/08/2004         |                  |
|                             |                   |                  |
|Independent Democrats                                               |
|Burgess, Mr C  (NA)          |13/10/2004         |                  |
|                             |                   |                  |
|New National Party                                                  |
|Sinclair, Mr K *  (NCOP)     |30/09/2004         |                  |
|                             |                   |                  |

  • indicates an alternate member

3.    Report of the Joint Budget Committee on Departmental Hearings on the
Appropriation Bill [B7-2005], dated 22 June 2005:


1.    Department of Public Works



    Building Classrooms and Hospital Revitalization Project



Summary


The Director-General of Public Works, Mr.  James  Maseko,  presented  before
the Joint Budget Committee that his department has no funding  role  in  the
building of schools infrastructure and  Hospital  Revitalisation  Programme.
Funding is provided directly to provinces through the  provincial  equitable
shares and directly to provinces through conditional grants or  through  the
national Departments of Health  and  Education.  The  Department  of  Public
Works’ role is to implement projects budgeted  for  by  sector  departments,
the department only acts as an agency.  He  highlighted  that  planning  and
delivery of  classrooms  has  been  complicated  by  migration  of  learners
between provinces and schools within provinces. The national Departments  of
Public Works and Education, however,  are  now  working  together  and  have
established the Infrastructure Delivery  Improvement  Programme  to  improve
provincial education infrastructure delivery.


Institutional Arrangement and funding


The Department of Public Works does not budget or  is  allocated  funds  for
building schools or hospital  revitalisation.  Sector  departments  such  as
Education and Health budget and plan for infrastructure expenditure and  the
Department  of  Public  Works  only  implements  these  plans  by   building
classroom or hospital buildings.

Currently, in some provinces Service Level Agreements are in  place  between
the  various  provincial   departments.   Gauteng   Province   utilises   an
independent agency for this  function  and  not  the  Department  of  Public
Works. However,  the  Department  has  opted  to  resume  working  with  the
Department of Public Works for the following reasons:

   1. To ensure improved integration and coordination on the planning and
      delivery of infrastructure projects.
   2. To ensure a coordinated  effort  in  enabling  BEE  and  target  group
      inclusion  and  development,  resulting  in  greater  impact  in   the
      development of contractor and professional development.
 
In some provinces, such as Limpopo and  the  Eastern  Cape,  the  provincial
departments of Education and Health use other implementation agents such  as
the Independent Development Trust (IDT) as a  way  of  expediting  delivery.
The result of these varied arrangements is that there is  a  lot  of  finger
pointing when problems emerge.

The current funding arrangement between  the  Department  of  Public  Works,
Education and Health is that of transfer of budgets or cost  recovery  where
the Department of Public Works uses its own resources to deliver and  claims
back from the client department.
Concerns were raised  regarding  the  complex  and  confusing  institutional
(constitutional)  arrangements,  particularly  relating  to  the  roles   of
national and provincial departments.


Expenditure trends


National Treasury  has  released  figures  indicating  under-expenditure  on
provincial capital  budgets  for  the  2004/2005  financial  year.  National
Treasury  still  has  to  release  the   final   provincial   infrastructure
expenditure figures for 2004/2005.

For education, in the past two financial years, the trend has  been  a  slow
expenditure of the budget for education infrastructure at the  beginning  of
the financial year, but a marked increase of the  expenditure  in  the  last
quarter of the financial year. Similar trends are experienced in health.

Although there are major issues that need to be resolved,  under-expenditure
in the past  financial  years  has  not  been  the  most  important  problem
affecting delivery.


Programme to improve delivery


A joint task team has been established between the national  Departments  of
Education and Public Works to improve  provincial  education  infrastructure
delivery. This has led to the establishment of the  Infrastructure  Delivery
Improvement Programme (      IDIP).  The  programme  will  address  problems
affecting delivery at the provincial  level.  The  IDIP  is  coordinated  by
National Treasury and is being rolled out to all provincial  Departments  of
Education, Health and Public Works.

A similar approach is being envisaged between the  national  Departments  of
Health and Public Works.


Planning and delivery


Planning for classrooms has been complicated by the  migration  of  learners
between provinces and schools within provinces, which has resulted  in  some
schools being under-utilised and others overpopulated.  It  was  highlighted
that problems and  solutions  are  not  always  infrastructure  related  but
rather social

Delivery of classrooms has further been  hampered  by  late  submissions  of
plans by provincial Departments of Education to the  provincial  Departments
of  Public  Works.  This  has  resulted  in  further  delays  in   tendering
processes, which takes long  and  is  a  tedious  process.  Another  problem
include late payments of contractors by both Departments  of  Education  and
Public Works, as well as the inadequate management of contractors.

The national Department of  Public  Works  pointed  out  that  projects  are
handed out to provincial Departments of  Public  Works  for  implementation;
the role of the national department is to ensure that  national  plans  were
properly  implemented  at  the  provincial  level.  The  problem  of  paying
contractors was recognised as  a  national  one,  affecting  all  government
departments.

Other problems identified include:

    • Lack of skills in all three departments
    • Lack of communication between departments at provincial level
    • Insufficient joint planning
    •  Lack  of  clear  Sector  Level  Agreements  that  define  roles   and
      responsibilities
    • Inadequate business processes at all stages of the supply chain cycle

It is hoped that the  Infrastructure  Delivery  Improvement  Programme  will
address these problems.

The following concerns were raised: concern regarding  the  proper  planning
for projects, whether sufficient information  was  made  available  for  the
proper planning. A question was raised whether the  national  Department  of
Public Works was supposed to  have  set  standards  for  other  departments,
especially  provincial  departments.  Furthermore,  concerns   were   raised
regarding the  late  payments  and  late  submission  of  plans,  which  has
affected  service  delivery.  The  issue  of  migration  and  long  distance
travelled by schoolchildren was highlighted.


2.Department of Land Affairs


Summary

The Chief Financial Officer, Ms C Choane, Department of Land Affairs,
provided an overview of the department’s strategy and budget for 2005/06.
The bulk of the 2005/06 budget would be channelled to the Land Restitution
Programme.  This comprises 69% of the budget over the Medium Term
Expenditure Framework. This is in line with policy directives according to
the MTBPS toward the finalisation of land restitution within three years.


To provide more substance to the  above  comments,  the  Chief  Land  Claims
Commissioner,  Mr  T  Gwanaya,  described  the   progress   made   in   land
restitution, the measures to speed up the process and  challenges  faced  by
the Department.

Some  of  the  issues  that  were  raised  by  the  Committee  included  the
following:

    • Land occupied by the South African National Defence Force (SANDF).
    • Mechanisms to protect farm-dwellers.
    • High land prices.
    • Ensuring that communities were not exploited by housing developers.

Department of Land Affairs Briefing

In expanding on strategies to be utilised for 2005/06 within  the  framework
for implementing land and agrarian reform, the following was noted:

    • The land reform budget had increased substantially and the bulk of the
      budget would go on the land restitution programme.
    • The government  had  set  itself  the  target  of  delivering  30%  of
      commercial agricultural land (approximately 22  million  hectares)  by
      2014 to black citizens.
    • About 20.6 million hectares should still be delivered at 1.87  million
      hectares per year to meet the target.
    • The total amount of land delivered since 1994 was 3.5 hectares.   More
      than a million people had benefited from land reform.

In  focusing  specifically  on   land   restitution,   the   following   was
highlighted:

    • 59 345 restitution claims had been settled from 1999 to 31 March 2005,
      benefiting 172 769 households and delivering 887 093 hectares.
    • A total of 28 087 claims still had to be settled by 2008/09.
    • The Land Claims Commission had developed an implementation  plan  that
      indicated how the process was to be finalised.
    • The Minister announced  a  R6  billion  increase  in  the  budget  for
      restitution over the next three years, and 280 posts were  created  to
      increase capacity for the processing of claims.
    • New strategies have been developed to fast  track  the  processing  of
      claims, such as the grouping of claims,  standard  settlement  offers,
      outsourcing and the use of interns and seconded officials.
    • Furthermore, the Belgian government had approved 6 million  Euros  for
      fast tracking the settlement of claims, and a further 6 million  Euros
      for post-settlement support.

In terms of the 2005/06 budget for restitution, the following was detailed:

    • The Commission spent their budget of R1.18  million  during  the  past
      financial year.
    • The original allocation had been depleted in  October  2004,  and  the
      National Treasury  had  advanced  an  additional  allocation  of  R200
      million in January 2005.
    • For the new financial year,  the  commission  was  allocated  a  total
      budget of R2.7 billion.

The challenges, noted by the department comprised the following:

    • High land prices.
    • Uncooperative sellers.
    • The shortage of state land for redistribution or restitution.
    • Organised agriculture should demonstrate more concrete  commitment  to
      land reform.
    • The culture of respect for the land rights of vulnerable groups should
      be increased.
    • Technical support and skills development for land reform beneficiaries
      were critical for sustainable land reform.

In conclusion, Mr Gwanya maintained that  whilst  significant  progress  has
been made towards the implementation of the land  policy  in  South  Africa,
the following issues needed to be prioritised:

    • Additional resources were required to meet the 30% target for 2014.
    • The Land Summit (in its planning stages) will  assist  in  identifying
      areas for policy reviews,  such  as  the  willing-buyer-willing-seller
      policy.
    • More research is needed from international experiences in land  reform
      and the financing of land reform.
    •  The  role  of  provincial  departments  of   agriculture,   organised
      agriculture, the  non-governmental  sector  (NGOs),  and  the  private
      sectors, is  critical  for  post-settlement  support  to  land  reform
      beneficiaries.

Issues Highlighted by Committee Members:

    • On the issue of whether the matter of  land  occupied  by  the  SANDF,
      specifically the Lohatla military base had been resolved, it was noted
      that 30 000 hectares lf the required 62 000 hectares had been provided
      to the community.  Although in this instance, the court had  ruled  in
      favour of the SANDF, the Commission was still trying to  consult  with
      the SANDF, or alternatively, find land outside Lohatla.   Madimbo  was
      an example of where the SANDF had made land available.
    • A major concern also arose on the issue of developers buying up  large
      tracts of land.  In many instances, the communities did not  have  the
      skills to evaluate properties and were convinced  of  accepting  deals
      from which they  would  not  really  benefit.   This  issue  had  been
      discussed with the Department of Finance and a  committee  to  address
      this had been set up.  If a particular community wanted to sell  their
      land, they should consult with the Department.
    • A question was raised as to the rationale of the  Department  of  Land
      Affairs preference of acquiring privately owned land.  It  was  argued
      that in many instances, owners were  not  cooperating,  demanded  high
      prices and private land was being left fallow.   In  response  it  was
      noted that high land prices were  a  serious  problem  but  that  land
      subsidies received from government were subtracted from the historical
      cost of land and the improvements  made.   Furthermore,  some  farmers
      were demanding prices higher than  market  value  but  the  Commission
      insisted on the market prices and refused to pay higher  as  they  had
      the right to expropriate.  The problem was that they could end up with
      high prices, as the Expropriation Act required all the  costs  of  the
      farmer to be included.
    • Land owned  by  absentee  landlords  was  also  a  challenge  and  the
      Commission had given a report to the Minister to consider.
    • There was a need to compile a register of land  ownership,  indicating
      the race and nationality of the owners, but this  plan  had  met  with
      resistance  by  the  media  who  argued  that  it  would  bring   back
      apartheid’s racial classification.  However, the  Commission  stressed
      that this would not  be  the  case  as  such  data  was  required  for
      transformation purposes.
    • A concern was raised on the issue of a  lack  of  proper  consultation
      with  communities  regarding   land   prices   and   conflict   within
      communities.  In response, the  Commission  maintained  that  conflict
      could  be  resolved  through   consultation   with   communities   and
      municipalities.
    • The verification of claims and boundaries was  also  raised,  and  the
      Commission noted that the issue of boundaries did not affect  people’s
      right of ownership of land.
    • The issue of mechanisms to assist farm-dwellers who were  increasingly
      evicted from farms was raised.  It  was  stressed  that  this  was  of
      particular concern in Limpopo and Mpumlanaga.  It was noted  that  the
      Land Reform (Labour Tenants) Act, 3 of 1996 should have been  tied  to
      the Restitution of Land Rights Act, 22 of 1994,  as  amended,  as  the
      legislation (Labour Tenants Act) protected the rights of farm dwellers
      and farm-workers.
    • 20 000 tenancy claims in Kwazulu-Natal had been received.  There  were
      problems  between  farm  owners,  labour  tenants  and  farm  workers,
      especially when farmers “loaded” payslips for commodities  like  water
      and electricity.  The South African Police (SAPS)  had  not  responded
      adequately to complaints from communities.
    • In terms of the implementation of  the  department’s  budget,  it  was
      noted that a strategy and implementation plan had been  devise,  which
      went into details of the projects.  The department was looking at  the
      milestones and aligned these with the claims they were settling.  This
      information would be provided to the Committee as soon as possible.


3.Department of Health


Hospital Revitalization Project

The presentation by  the  Department  of  Health  focused  on  the  Hospital
Revitalization Grant, which is intended  to  provide  strategic  funding  to
enable provinces to plan, manage, modernize, rationalize and  transform  the
infrastructure,   health   technology,   organizational    management    and
evaluations of hospitals so as to bring  hospitals  in  line  with  national
policy objectives. The Hospital Revitalization Programme did not entail  the
building of new hospitals but instead revitalized existing ones.

Expenditure


The  total  medium-term  expenditure  framework  for  the   nine   provinces
increases from approximately R1 billion in 2005/ 2006 to R  1,2  billion  in
2007/ 2008. Provinces are required to submit business  cases  so  as  to  be
included in the project. The National Department  of  Health  appraises  all
business cases so as to ensure that  the  Strategic  Plan  of  provinces  is
adhered to and size, location, cost, sustainability  and  level  of  service
adheres to National Guidelines. The methodology of allocation was  based  on
needs and  the  capacity  of  provinces  to  spend  their  allocations.  The
allocations  are  heavily  dependent  on  the  quality  of  information  and
prioritisation received from provinces.

Challenges


Three hospitals have been completed to date, 5 to be completed in the  2005/
2006 period and 4 hospitals to be completed in the 2006/  2007  period.  The
programme has faced with many challenges including:

    • Delays in appointing contractors on site
    • Department of Public Works and contractors
    • Provincial capacity including technical staff
    • Reporting/ communication to and from  provinces  are  ineffective  and
      unreliable
    • Hospitals in rural areas

Regarding the expenditure on the grant, KwaZulu-Natal requested  that  their
allocation be taken back due to a problem with the provincial Department  of
Public Works. This challenge has been  corrected.  Extensive  rollovers  had
affected the allocation for  the  next  year.  The  Committee  focused  some
attention on the oversight role of the National Department  of  Health.  The
National Department also acted as  the  source  of  funding.  The  committee
called for budgetary control systems that measure  delivery  and  quality  –
value for money.

The Department of health has created  extensive  capacity  through  the  new
Project Management Unit to deal with the  Hospital  Revitalization  Project.
It was reported that the completion of the Hospital  Revitalization  Project
would take approximately ten to twenty years for completion.


4.    Report of the  Joint  Budget  Committee  on  National  and  Provincial
 Expenditure from 1 October to 31 December 2004, dated 22 June 2005:




1.    INTRODUCTION


The report analyses expenditure trends for the third quarter of the  2004/05
financial year.   Part  A  of  the  document  analyses  the  expenditure  of
National Departments, while part B analyses the  expenditure  of  Provincial
Departments.


A.    THE NATIONAL SPHERE OF GOVERNMENT


The Third Quarter Expenditure Report indicates that  Departments  that  were
under spending in the second quarter continue to  be  the  lowest  spenders.
These include the Departments of Communication, Foreign Affairs,  Sport  and
Recreation, Public Service and Administration, SAMDI  and  Statistics  South
Africa.  The Departments of Communications and  Foreign  Affairs  were  also
the lowest spenders in the third quarters  of  the  previous  two  financial
years.

The Department of Foreign Affairs, which has been the second-lowest  spender
for two consecutive financial years, has provided  an  explanation  for  its
low expenditure in previous reports5.  By the  third  quarter  of  the  last
financial year, the Department had only spent 44.34% of its budget  compared
to 47.48% in the current financial year.  The Department  of  Communication,
which was the lowest spender at 32.52% by the  third  quarter  of  the  last
financial year, is still the lowest spender for three consecutive  financial
years with an expenditure of 41.29%.

It can thus be observed that the same Departments  who  were  struggling  to
spend their budgets  in  the  last  two  financial  years  are  still  under
spending in this  financial  year.   However,  all  Departments  have  spent
marginally less than they had in the third quarter  of  the  last  financial
year.  Average expenditure has decreased from 71.67% in  the  third  quarter
of the last financial year to 69.91%  in  this  quarter.   The  decrease  in
expenditure was evident from the beginning of the financial year.

2.    MONTHLY EXPENDITURE

The months under review are October, November and December 2004.

2.1.   DEPARTMENTAL EXPENDITURE TRENDS IN OCTOBER 2004

Average expenditure in October 2004 was 8.01%.   Table  1  illustrates  that
the Department of Social Development was the highest spending department  in
October 2004, which was also  the  case  in  the  previous  financial  year.
Other  departments  have  also  followed  similar  spending  trends  as   in
preceding financial years, e.g.  the  Department  of  Provincial  and  Local
Government is still the lowest spender in this financial year.   The  reason
for the fluctuating  expenditure  of  this  Department,  as  well  as  other
departments that make large transfers periodically like  the  Department  of
Social Development is due to the fact that the  department  makes  transfers
during certain months.  Although the  Department  of  Provincial  and  Local
Government is the lowest spender, its expenditure is higher than it  was  in
the same month of the last financial year when it spent only  1.96%  of  its
budget in October 2003.

      2.1.1       Highest Spending departments in October

The social services sector is still the  highest  spending  sector  and  the
central government administration sector is the lowest spending sector.

Table1: Highest spending departments in October
|                                |            |Total        |%Expenditure  |
|R’000                           |Total Budget|Expenditure  |for the month |
|Social Development              |4598575     |1123278      |24.43%        |
|Water Affairs and Forestry      |3823112     |406411       |10.63%        |
|Environmental Affairs and       |1652268     |173195       |10.48%        |
|Tourism                         |            |             |              |
|Government Communications and   |203149      |20057        |9.87%         |
|Information Services            |            |             |              |
|Foreign Affairs                 |2546649     |250558       |9.84%         |
|The Presidency                  |175852      |17196        |9.78%         |
|Housing                         |4826781     |468158       |9.70%         |

      2.1.2.      Lowest Spending departments in October

Table2: Lowest spending departments in October
|                                |            |Total        |%Expenditure  |
|R’000                           |Total Budget|Expenditure  |for the month |
|Provincial and Local Government |13137381    |318564       |2.42%         |
|Agriculture                     |1449391     |41030        |2.83%         |
|Mineral and Energy              |1945143     |64786        |3.33%         |
|SA Management Development       |40887       |1764         |4.31%         |
|Institute                       |            |             |              |
|Sport and Recreation South      |294213      |14076        |4.78%         |
|Africa                          |            |             |              |

2.2   DEPARTMENT EXPENDITURE TRENDS IN NOVEMBER 2004

Average Expenditure in November 2004 rose slightly to 8.23%.  Tables  3  and
4 indicate that the Department of Provincial and Local  Government  was  the
highest spender in November 2004, and the lowest spender was the  Department
of Social Development.

      2.2.1.       Highest Spending departments in November

Table 3: Highest spending departments in November
|                                    |            |Total        |%Total     |
|R’000                               |Total Budget|Expenditure  |Expenditure|
|Provincial and Local Government     |13137381    |2364852      |18.00%     |
|Science and Technology              |1282412     |158214       |12.34%     |
|National Treasury                   |14021916    |1628285      |11.61%     |
|Transport                           |6769171     |720636       |10.65%     |
|Foreign Affairs                     |2546649     |263675       |10.35%     |
|Independent Complaints Directorate  |42114       |4353         |10.34%     |

      2.2.2.       Lowest Spending departments in November

Table 4: Lowest spending departments in November
|                                    |            |Total        |%Total     |
|R’000                               |Total Budget|Expenditure  |Expenditure|
|Social Development                  |4598575     |25556        |0.56%      |
|Public Service and Administration   |144296      |6261         |4.34%      |
|Sport and Recreation South Africa   |294213      |13598        |4.62%      |
|Statistics South Africa             |500190      |23817        |4.76%      |
|SA Management Development Institute |40887       |1972         |4.82%      |
|Minerals and Energy                 |1945143     |95491        |4.91%      |
|Agriculture                         |1449391     |72091        |4.97%      |

2.3.  DEPARTMENTAL EXPENDITURE IN DECEMBER 2004

Average expenditure in December 2004 dropped to 7.03%.   The  Department  of
Minerals and Energy was the highest spender in December, spending 27.92%  of
its budget in this month.  The department has explained  that  the  increase
in expenditure was attributed to a huge payment of R447.688 Million made  to
ESKOM for the National Electrification Programme.

      2.3.1.       Highest Spending departments in December

Table 5: Highest spending departments in December
|                                    |            |            |%           |
|                                    |            |Expenditure |Expenditure |
|R’000                               |Total Budget|for the     |of the month|
|                                    |            |month       |            |
|Minerals and Energy                 |1945143     |543157      |27.92%      |
|Agriculture                         |1449391     |154604      |10.67%      |
|Housing                             |4826781     |498336      |10.32%      |
|Foreign Affairs                     |2546649     |237348      |9.32%       |
|Independent Complaints Directorate  |42114       |3841        |9.12%       |

      2.3.2.      Lowest Spender in December

Table 6: Lowest spending Departments in December
|                                   |             |           |% Total      |
|                                   |             |Total      |Expenditure  |
|R’000                              |Total Budget |Expenditure|for the Month|
|Education                          |11405095     |154603     |1.36%        |
|SA Management Development Institute|40887        |593        |1.45%        |
|Social Development                 |4598575      |119015     |2.59%        |
|Communication                      |1679917      |61074      |3.64%        |

2.4.   OVERALL EXPENDITURE AT THE END OF THE THIRD QUARTER
The Social services sector is the highest spending sector  with  an  average
expenditure of 77.52%.  Departmental expenditure has dropped  slightly  from
the previous financial  year  from  71.67%  in  the  third  quarter  of  the
previous financial year to 69.71% in this quarter.  It can also be  observed
that departments are consistent in terms of their spending trends  and  that
there are no major changes from the last financial year.

The Department of Communication is still cause for concern, as has been  the
case in the previous two  financial  years.   The  Department  however,  has
increased its expenditure marginally from 32.52% in  the  third  quarter  of
the 2003/04 financial year, to 41.29% at the end of  the  third  quarter  of
the 2004/05 financial year.  The Department of  Communication’s  expenditure
has continuously been a cause for concern  for  the  Committee  due  to  the
department’s trend of under spending on its budget and then spending a  huge
chuck of the budget in the last month of the  year  (approximately  half  of
the department’s budget is usually spent in the last month of the  financial
year)[4].  The Committee has  previously  recommended  that  the  department
appear before it.

           2.4.1.      Highest spending Department for the quarter ending
           31 December 2004

Table 7: highest spending departments as at 31 December 2004
|                    |       |Expenditur|            |Total     |            |
|                    |Total  |e for the |%Expenditure|Expenditur|%           |
|R’000               |Budget |Month     |for the     |e to date |Expenditure |
|                    |       |          |Month       |          |to date     |
|Housing             |4826781|498336    |10.32%      |3838498   |79.53%      |
|Parliament          |576144 |49011     |8.51%       |441104    |76.56%      |
|GCSI                |203149 |11228     |5.53%       |152100    |74.87%      |
|Transport           |6769171|604006    |8.92%       |5051498   |74.63%      |

      2.4.2.      Lowest Spending Departments  for  the  quarter  ending  31
           December 2004

Table 8: Lowest spending departments as a 31 December 2004
|                    |       |Expenditur|            |Total     |            |
|                    |Total  |e for the |%           |Expenditur|%Expenditure|
|R’000               |Budget |Month     |Expenditure |e to date |To date     |
|                    |       |          |for the     |          |            |
|                    |       |          |month       |          |            |
|SA Management       |40887  |593       |1.45%       |18589     |45.46%      |
|Development         |       |          |            |          |            |
|Institute           |       |          |            |          |            |
|Foreign Affairs     |2546649|237348    |9.32%       |1209208   |47.48%      |
|Statistics South    |500190 |27076     |5.41%       |245661    |49.11%      |
|Africa              |       |          |            |          |            |



Chart 1: Lowest Spending Departments at the end of third quarter 2004/05


                                  Chart 1:
[pic]

Chart 2: Lowest Spending Departments (Financial year 2003/04)
[pic]

Chart 3: Highest spending Department at end of the third quarter 2004/05
[pic]

           Chart 4: Highest Spending Departments (END of 2003/04)

[pic]


    2.5.    CURRENT, TRANSFER AND CAPITAL EXPENDITURE OF NATIONAL
    DEPARTMENTS

National Departments have increased their Capital expenditure  tremendously.
 Average Current expenditure is 68.47%; transfers  are  71.39%  and  Capital
expenditure at 64.23%.  In this regard,  the  highest  spenders  of  Current
expenditure are Parliament (76.94%), Public Enterprises (76.47%) and  Public
Works (75.58%).  In Contrast, the lowest  spenders  of  Current  expenditure
are SAMDI (36.28%), Sport  and  Recreation  South  Africa  (41.51%),  Social
Development (41.70%) and Education (48.18%).

In this financial year, the National Treasury  added  another  dimension  to
its reporting.  Previously,  the  Treasury  only  reported  on  Current  and
Capital Expenditure.  The Treasury has now added transfers and subsidies  to
its report.  In this regard it is now possible to clearly monitor  transfers
to subsidiaries and provinces by departments.  As is  to  be  expected,  the
Social Services sector makes the most transfers and subsidies.  The  highest
transfers were made by the Department of  Correctional  Services  (349.08%),
Government Communications and Information Services  (99.93%)  and  Education
(93.13%).

Departments have decreased their capital expenditure  slightly  from  65.82%
in the third quarter of the 2003/04 financial year to 64.23%  of  the  third
quarter of the 2004/05 financial year.  However,  the  gap  between  current
and capital expenditure has decreased.  Table 9 and 10  indicate  trends  in
capital expenditure in Departments.

Highest Capital Expenditure

Table 9
|R'000                      |Capita|Capital  |% Capital  |Capital  |% Capital |
|                           |l     |Expenditu|Expenditure|Expenditu|expenditur|
|                           |Budget|re for   |for the    |re to    |e to date |
|                           |      |December |month      |date     |          |
|Voted Amounts              |540011|418403   |7.75%      |3468281  |64.23%    |
|                           |8     |         |           |         |          |
|                           |      |         |           |         |          |
|Central Government         |161227|98852    |6.13%      |838088   |51.98%    |
|Administration             |9     |         |           |         |          |
|The Presidency             |3668  |14       |0.38%      |1963     |53.52%    |
|Parliament                 |33436 |2786     |8.33%      |25078    |75.00%    |
|Foreign Affairs            |200547|12683    |6.32%      |54353    |27.10%    |
|Home Affairs               |602352|2823     |0.47%      |43203    |7.17%     |
|Provincial and Local       |5407  |846      |15.65%     |2989     |55.28%    |
|Government                 |      |         |           |         |          |
|Public Works               |766869|79700    |10.39%     |710502   |92.65%    |
|                           |      |         |           |         |          |
|Financial and              |78206 |2998     |3.83%      |25861    |33.07%    |
|Administrative Services    |      |         |           |         |          |
|Government Communications  |4350  |1517     |34.87%     |4610     |105.98%   |
|and Information Services   |      |         |           |         |          |
|National Treasury          |33364 |118      |0.35%      |6084     |18.24%    |
|Public Enterprises         |2247  |-196     |-8.72%     |1559     |69.38%    |
|Public Service and         |2027  |407      |20.08%     |900      |44.40%    |
|Administration             |      |         |           |         |          |
|Public Service Commission  |1182  |165      |13.96%     |653      |55.25%    |
|S A Management Development |995   |33       |3.32%      |137      |13.77%    |
|Institute                  |      |         |           |         |          |
|Statistics South Africa    |34041 |954      |2.80%      |11919    |35.01%    |
|                           |      |         |           |         |          |
|Social Services            |164773|15436    |9.37%      |99386    |60.32%    |
|Arts and Culture,          |3697  |1        |0.03%      |233      |6.30%     |
|Education                  |10682 |1304     |12.21%     |4989     |46.70%    |
|Health                     |38433 |1914     |4.98%      |13101    |34.09%    |
|Labour                     |102224|4298     |4.20%      |30344    |29.68%    |
|Sport and Recreation South |2616  |7746     |296.10%    |42812    |1636.54%  |
|Africa                     |      |         |           |         |          |
|Science and Technology     |1015  |0        |0.00%      |4098     |403.74%   |
|Social Development         |6106  |173      |2.83%      |3809     |62.38%    |
|Housing                    |3922  |515      |13.13%     |6680     |170.32%   |
|                           |      |         |           |         |          |
|Justice and Protection     |295121|210911   |7.15%      |1860342  |63.04%    |
|Services                   |3     |         |           |         |          |
|Correctional Services      |127663|21155    |1.66%      |705248   |55.24%    |
|                           |2     |         |           |         |          |
|Defence                    |71613 |         |0.00%      |         |0.00%     |
|Independent Complaints     |1336  |839      |62.80%     |1609     |120.43%   |
|Directorate                |      |         |           |         |          |
|Justice and Constitutional |430865|35686    |8.28%      |193525   |44.92%    |
|Development                |      |         |           |         |          |
|Safety and Security        |117076|153231   |13.09%     |959959   |81.99%    |
|                           |7     |         |           |         |          |
|                           |      |         |           |         |          |
|Economic Services and      |593647|90206    |15.20%     |644604   |108.58%   |
|Infrastructure Development |      |         |           |         |          |
|Agriculture                |47076 |15092    |32.06%     |50961    |108.25%   |
|Communications             |7013  |67       |0.96%      |2081     |29.67%    |
|Environmental Affairs and  |74418 |5875     |7.89%      |41685    |56.01%    |
|Tourism                    |      |         |           |         |          |
|Land Affairs               |36653 |4983     |13.60%     |19977    |54.50%    |
|Minerals and Energy        |5897  |-137     |-2.32%     |1675     |28.40%    |
|Trade and Industry         |10937 |1259     |11.51%     |4826     |44.13%    |
|Transport                  |22453 |389      |1.73%      |3769     |16.79%    |
|Water Affairs and Forestry |385278|62163    |16.13%     |512949   |133.14%   |

The Department of Sport and Recreation South Africa has indicated that its
records do not indicate an overexpenditure on its capital budget.  However,
the Department indicated that it needs to investigate the matter further
and provide a response to the Committee.

Lowest Capital Expenditure

Table 10
|R'000                      |Capital  |Capital  |% Capital|Capital  |%       |
|                           |Budget   |Expenditu|Expenditu|Expenditu|Capital |
|                           |         |re       |re for   |re to    |expendit|
|                           |         |         |the month|date     |ure to  |
|                           |         |         |         |         |date    |
|Voted Amounts              |5400118  |418403   |7.75%    |3468281  |64.23%  |
|                           |         |         |         |         |        |
|Central Government         |1612279  |98852    |6.13%    |838088   |51.98%  |
|Administration             |         |         |         |         |        |
|The Presidency             |3668     |14       |0.38%    |1963     |53.52%  |
|Parliament                 |33436    |2786     |8.33%    |25078    |75.00%  |
|Foreign Affairs            |200547   |12683    |6.32%    |54353    |27.10%  |
|Home Affairs               |602352   |2823     |0.47%    |43203    |7.17%   |
|Provincial and Local       |5407     |846      |15.65%   |2989     |55.28%  |
|Government                 |         |         |         |         |        |
|Public Works               |766869   |79700    |10.39%   |710502   |92.65%  |
|                           |         |         |         |         |        |
|Financial and              |78206    |2998     |3.83%    |25861    |33.07%  |
|Administrative Services    |         |         |         |         |        |
|Government Communications  |4350     |1517     |34.87%   |4610     |105.98% |
|and Information Services   |         |         |         |         |        |
|National Treasury          |33364    |118      |0.35%    |6084     |18.24%  |
|Public Enterprises         |2247     |-196     |-8.72%   |1559     |69.38%  |
|Public Service and         |2027     |407      |20.08%   |900      |44.40%  |
|Administration             |         |         |         |         |        |
|Public Service Commission  |1182     |165      |13.96%   |653      |55.25%  |
|S A Management Development |995      |33       |3.32%    |137      |13.77%  |
|Institute                  |         |         |         |         |        |
|Statistics South Africa    |34041    |954      |2.80%    |11919    |35.01%  |
|                           |         |         |         |         |        |
|Social Services            |164773   |15436    |9.37%    |99386    |60.32%  |
|Arts and Culture,          |3697     |1        |0.03%    |233      |6.30%   |
|Education                  |10682    |1304     |12.21%   |4989     |46.70%  |
|Health                     |38433    |1914     |4.98%    |13101    |34.09%  |
|Labour                     |102224   |4298     |4.20%    |30344    |29.68%  |
|Science and Technology     |1015     |         |0.00%    |4098     |403.74% |
|Social Development         |6106     |173      |2.83%    |3809     |62.38%  |
|Sport and Recreation South |2616     |7746     |296.10%  |42812    |1636.54%|
|Africa                     |         |         |         |         |        |
|                           |         |         |         |         |        |
|Justice and Protection     |2951213  |210911   |7.15%    |1860342  |63.04%  |
|Services                   |         |         |         |         |        |
|Correctional Services      |1276632  |21155    |1.66%    |705248   |55.24%  |
|Defence7                   |71613    |0        |0.00%    |0        |0.00%   |
|Independent Complaints     |1336     |839      |62.80%   |1609     |120.43% |
|Directorate                |         |         |         |         |        |
|Justice and Constitutional |430865   |35686    |8.28%    |193525   |44.92%  |
|Development                |         |         |         |         |        |
|Safety and Security        |1170767  |153231   |13.09%   |959959   |81.99%  |
|                           |         |         |         |         |        |
|Economic Services and      |593647   |90206    |15.20%   |644604   |108.58% |
|Infrastructure Development |         |         |         |         |        |
|Agriculture                |47076    |15092    |32.06%   |50961    |108.25% |
|Communications             |7013     |67       |0.96%    |2081     |29.67%  |
|Environmental Affairs and  |74418    |5875     |7.89%    |41685    |56.01%  |
|Tourism                    |         |         |         |         |        |
|Housing                    |3922     |515      |13.13%   |6680     |170.32% |
|Land Affairs               |36653    |4983     |13.60%   |19977    |54.50%  |
|Minerals and Energy        |5897     |-137     |-2.32%   |1675     |28.40%  |
|Trade and Industry         |10937    |1259     |11.51%   |4826     |44.13%  |
|Transport                  |22453    |389      |1.73%    |3769     |16.79%  |


B.    THE PROVINCIAL SPHERE OF GOVERNMENT


Part B of the report analyses the expenditure trends  of  provinces  by  the
end of the third quarter of the 2004/05 financial year.  The figures in  the
third quarter report include the additional funds  totaling  R4,  3  billion
allocated to provinces on 26 October 2004 through  the  adjustments  budget.
Provinces have spent 70.6% of  their  adjusted  budget  in  the  first  nine
months of the financial year8.

Most spending pressure facing provinces is  in  the  Departments  of  Social
Development.  Provinces received an  increase  of  R3,  3  billion  in  this
regard through the adjustments budget,  and  have  spent  73.4%  or  R37,  2
billion of  their  R50,  7  billion  adjusted  budget.  This  represents  an
increase of R6, 4 billion or 20.9% over the same period last year.

The National Treasury, in a report on the state of provincial expenditure,
indicated that some provinces also face some risks from their personnel
expenditure, i.e. in the Departments of Education and Health. The total
personnel expenditure in all nine provinces is R65, 7 billion or 73.6% of
the R89, 3 billion personnel budget.

This fact is clearly indicated by the imbalance between current and capital
expenditure in this report.  The biggest underspending problem in provinces
continues to be the slow rate of spending on capital expenditure, as
provinces spent 46.4% or R5, 6 billion of their combined R12 billion
adjusted capital budgets. This is significantly lower than the 64.23% spent
by national departments9.
Fact sheet on Provincial Spending10.

The highest share (39.3%) of  provincial  capital  budgets  was  for  roads,
transport and public works departments, which spent R2.6  billion  or  54.3%
against the total R4.7 billion adjusted budget.

Education spending totalled R47.8 billion or  72.6%  of  the  R65.7  billion
total adjusted budget for education. The spending pattern reflected  a  R4.3
billion or 9.9 percent increase  compared  with  spending  during  the  same
period in 2003/04. Capital spending in  education  was  relatively  slow  at
42.9 percent or R1.3 billion up to  the  end  of  December  2004.  Personnel
expenditure was high at 74.5 percent.

Health spending totalled  R28.7-billion  (70.2%),  which  was  R2.5  billion
higher compared with the same period last year. Capital spending  in  health
was also relatively slow at 45.4% or R1.3-billion.

3.    PROVINCIAL ANALYSIS

The expenditure pattern of provinces in the third  quarter  of  the  current
financial year is as follows:


3.1.  EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE


 Table 11 illustrates that the Eastern Cape Province had spent an average of
    72.24% of its budget by the end of the third quarter.  The Province’s
  Departments have spent their budgets satisfactorily, with the Provincial
                Treasury being the lowest spender at 57.48%.


Table 11: Total Expenditure of Departments in the Eastern Cape Province

|R’000                |Total   |Total   |Percentage |Total   |Percentage |
|                     |Budget  |Expendit|Expenditure|Expendit|Total      |
|                     |        |ure for |for the    |ure to  |Expenditure|
|                     |        |the     |Quarter    |date    |to date    |
|                     |        |Quarter |           |        |           |
|2.Health             |5221266 |1373348 |26.30%     |3963872 |75.92%     |
|3.Social Development |9687860 |1749765 |18.06%     |6660730 |68.75%     |
|4.Office of the      |225967  |48390   |21.41%     |138604  |61.34%     |
|Premier              |        |        |           |        |           |
|5.Provincial         |95549   |23676   |24.78%     |68949   |72.16%     |
|Legislature          |        |        |           |        |           |
|6.Roads & Public     |1821793 |553773  |30.40%     |1509375 |82.85%     |
|Works                |        |        |           |        |           |
|7.Housing, Local     |1039212 |233758  |22.49%     |758145  |72.95%     |
|Government &         |        |        |           |        |           |
|Traditional Affairs  |        |        |           |        |           |
|8.Agriculture        |882143  |255277  |28.94%     |585672  |66.39%     |
|9.Economic Affairs,  |799624  |226796  |28.36%     |489081  |61.16%     |
|Environment &Tourism |        |        |           |        |           |
|10.Transport         |302586  |80016   |26.44%     |219658  |72.59%     |
|11.Provincial        |155030  |33329   |21.50%     |89114   |57.48%     |
|Treasury             |        |        |           |        |           |
|12.Sport, Recreation,|239883  |50329   |20.98%     |154805  |64.53%     |
|Arts & Culture       |        |        |           |        |           |
|13.Safety & Liaison  |11322   |3271    |28.89%     |8573    |75.72%     |
|Total               |31277501    |7596875  |24.29%       |22593529|72.24%    |
|2.Health            |2757267     |730151   |26.48%       |2024257 |73.42%    |
|3.Social Development|3632596     |995305   |27.40%       |2637104 |72.60%    |
|4.Department of the |85380       |17920    |20.99%       |54924   |64.33%    |
|Premier             |            |         |             |        |          |
|5.Free State        |61964       |16848    |27.19%       |45337   |73.17%    |
|Legislature         |            |         |             |        |          |
|6.Tourism,          |249050      |39073    |15.69%       |161576  |64.88%    |
|Environmental &     |            |         |             |        |          |
|Economic Affairs    |            |         |             |        |          |
|7.Free State        |134022      |29907    |22.31%       |78351   |58.46%    |
|Provincial Treasury |            |         |             |        |          |
|8.Local Government &|763490      |177506   |23.25%       |445140  |58.30%    |
|Housing             |            |         |             |        |          |
|9.Public Works,     |808983      |267248   |33.04%       |548716  |67.83%    |
|Roads & Transport   |            |         |             |        |          |
|10.Public Safety,   |27140       |5376     |19.81%       |16198   |59.68%    |
|Security & Liaison  |            |         |             |        |          |
|11.Agriculture      |257283      |45938    |17.86%       |122304  |47.54%    |
|12.Sport, Arts,     |94262       |20418    |21.66%       |55774   |59.17%    |
|Culture, Science &  |            |         |             |        |          |
|Technology          |            |         |             |        |          |
|Total          |1348908|3518096      |26.08%    |9351976   |69.33%       |
|               |7      |             |          |          |             |
|2.Health       |8943840|2206943      |24.68%    |5856157   |65.48%       |
|3.Social       |6342534|1800729      |28.39%    |4675026   |73.71%       |
|Development    |       |             |          |          |             |
|4.Office of the|101402 |25657        |25.30%    |66505     |65.59%       |
|Premier        |       |             |          |          |             |
|5.Gauteng      |98695  |22137        |22.43%    |63574     |64.41%       |
|Provincial     |       |             |          |          |             |
|Legislature    |       |             |          |          |             |
|6.Finance &    |1207232|131587       |10.90%    |601332    |49.81%       |
|Economic       |       |             |          |          |             |
|Affairs        |       |             |          |          |             |
|7.Housing      |1440226|371209       |25.77%    |1011733   |70.25%       |
|8.Local        |237367 |95371        |40.18%    |138174    |58.21%       |
|Government     |       |             |          |          |             |
|9.Public       |1787446|411952       |23.05%    |1138334   |63.68%       |
|Transport,     |       |             |          |          |             |
|Roads & Works  |       |             |          |          |             |
|10.Community   |162669 |30396        |18.69%    |49211     |30.25%       |
|Safety         |       |             |          |          |             |
|11.Agriculture,|206579 |43008        |20.82%    |114971    |55.65%       |
|Conservation & |       |             |          |          |             |
|Environment    |       |             |          |          |             |
|12.Sport,      |142252 |39702        |27.91%    |89427     |62.87%       |
|Recreation,    |       |             |          |          |             |
|Arts and       |       |             |          |          |             |
|Culture        |       |             |          |          |             |
|13.Gauteng     |509181 |129373       |25.41%    |310075    |60.90%       |
|Shared Services|       |             |          |          |             |
|Center         |       |             |          |          |             |
|Total          |31206772 |8193373     |26.26%      |21619254    |69.28%      |
|2.Health       |8875985  |2349877     |26.47%      |6435717     |72.51%      |
|3.Social       |10950554 |2988392     |27.29%      |8617471     |78.69%      |
|Welfare &      |         |            |            |            |            |
|Population     |         |            |            |            |            |
|Development    |         |            |            |            |            |
|4.Office of the|201884   |38006       |18.83%      |98609       |48.84%      |
|Premier        |         |            |            |            |            |
|5.Provincial   |130792   |23349       |17.85%      |70869       |54.18%      |
|Parliament     |         |            |            |            |            |
|6.Agriculture &|963846   |253774      |26.33%      |648687      |67.30%      |
|Environmental  |         |            |            |            |            |
|Affairs        |         |            |            |            |            |
|7.Economic     |146897   |46487       |31.65%      |127597      |86.86%      |
|Development    |         |            |            |            |            |
|8.Provincial   |694021   |34754       |5.01%       |115666      |16.67%      |
|Treasury       |         |            |            |            |            |
|9.Housing      |975915   |203188      |20.82%      |684709      |70.16%      |
|10Community    |17127    |4461        |26.05%      |9927        |57.96%      |
|Safety &       |         |            |            |            |            |
|Liaison        |         |            |            |            |            |
|11.The Royal   |25212    |6854        |27.19%      |18299       |72.58%      |
|Household      |         |            |            |            |            |
|12.Traditional |487186   |115898      |23.79%      |275982      |56.65%      |
|& Local        |         |            |            |            |            |
|Government     |         |            |            |            |            |
|Affairs        |         |            |            |            |            |
|13Transport    |1809647  |497656      |27.50%      |1405631     |77.67%      |
|14.Works       |402004   |92841       |23.09%      |244964      |60.94%      |
|15.Arts,       |200608   |14695       |7.33%       |24095       |12.01%      |
|Culture &      |         |            |            |            |            |
|Tourism        |         |            |            |            |            |
|16.Sport &     |43652    |5768        |13.21%      |11915       |27.30%      |
|Recreation     |         |            |            |            |            |
|17.Reconstructi|-        |-           |-           |-           |-           |
|on &           |         |            |            |            |            |
|Development    |         |            |            |            |            |
|Total                   |3899404|10045447     |25.76%   |28308435 |72.60%   |
|                        |4      |             |         |         |         |
|1.Education             |9689857|2537041      |26.18%   |7013229  |72.38%   |
|2.Health                |4239622|1047859      |24.72%   |2959007  |69.79%   |
|3.Welfare               |6712055|1675453      |24.96%   |4749914  |70.77%   |
|4.Sport, Arts & Culture |78788  |18686        |23.72%   |52664    |66.84%   |
|5.Safety, Security &    |20883  |4416         |21.15%   |12626    |60.46%   |
|Liaison                 |       |             |         |         |         |
|6.Office of the Premier |261144 |64139        |24.56%   |134027   |51.32%   |
|7.Local Government &    |857720 |168477       |19.64%   |517674   |60.35%   |
|Housing                 |       |             |         |         |         |
|8.Provincial Legislature|103167 |19051        |18.47%   |57480    |55.72%   |
|9.Public Works          |1518006|328028       |21.61%   |1026010  |67.59%   |
|10.Finance & Economic   |852250 |205179       |24.07%   |560722   |65.79%   |
|Development             |       |             |         |         |         |
|11.Agriculture          |795233 |184359       |23.18%   |514477   |64.70%   |
|12.Transport            |487290 |142859       |29.32%   |358630   |73.60%   |
|Total                   |2561601|6395547   |24.97%    |17956460    |70.10%    |
|                        |5      |          |          |            |          |
|1.Education             |5206947|1300949   |24.98%    |3595256     |69.05%    |
|2.Health                |2393885|587868    |24.56%    |1560220     |65.18%    |
|3.Social Development    |3368928|1029686   |30.56%    |2580891     |76.61%    |
|4.Office of the Premier |111780 |27027     |24.18%    |77319       |69.17%    |
|5.Finance               |192162 |53150     |27.66%    |113433      |59.03%    |
|6.Agriculture & Land    |500735 |122207    |24.41%    |323703      |64.65%    |
|Administration          |       |          |          |            |          |
|7.Roads & Transport     |834874 |211900    |25.38%    |505737      |60.58%    |
|8.Safety & Security     |36268  |8926      |24.61%    |25079       |69.15%    |
|9.Local Government &    |551394 |170718    |30.96%    |434059      |78.72%    |
|Housing                 |       |          |          |            |          |
|10.Provincial           |51984  |13396     |25.77%    |37201       |71.56%    |
|Legislature             |       |          |          |            |          |
|11.Culture, Sport &     |72826  |16803     |23.07%    |50449       |69.27%    |
|Recreation              |       |          |          |            |          |
|12.Economic Development |175236 |67503     |38.52%    |135531      |77.34%    |
|& Planning              |       |          |          |            |          |
|13.Public Works         |290669 |80224     |27.60%    |190348      |65.49%    |
|Total Payments                 |137876|3690357 |26.77%  |9629226 |69.84%       |
|                               |88    |        |        |        |             |
|2.Health                       |266437|655000  |24.58%  |1830426 |68.70%       |
|                               |0     |        |        |        |             |
|3.Social Development           |431345|994612  |23.06%  |3201225 |74.21%       |
|                               |8     |        |        |        |             |
|4.Office of the Premier        |153270|33134   |21.62%  |98357   |64.17%       |
|5.Provincial Legislature       |77463 |13921   |17.97%  |47104   |60.81%       |
|6.Safety & Liaison             |20679 |5576    |26.96%  |14313   |69.22%       |
|7.Finance & Economic           |311877|59492   |19.08%  |173281  |55.56%       |
|Development                    |      |        |        |        |             |
|8.Local government & Housing   |688775|129571  |18.81%  |290824  |42.22%       |
|9.Transport & Roads            |114504|308369  |26.93%  |756451  |66.06%       |
|                               |7     |        |        |        |             |
|10.Public Works                |367939|89264   |24.26%  |228910  |62.21%       |
|11.Agriculture, Conservation,  |512733|121683  |23.73%  |338517  |66.02%       |
|Environment & Tourism          |      |        |        |        |             |
|12.Sport, Arts & Culture       |170383|37892   |22.24%  |102584  |60.21%       |
|13.Contingency Reserve         |30627 |-       |0.00%   |-       |0.00%        |
|Total                      |15881229 |3914358   |24.65%    |10978400  |69.13%   |
|1.Education                |1398132  |389641    |27.87%    |1083601   |77.50%   |
|2.Health                   |874839   |216125    |24.70%    |602021    |68.82%   |
|3.Social Services &        |1317875  |296402    |22.49%    |935085    |70.95%   |
|Population Development     |         |          |          |          |         |
|4.Office of the Premier    |67781    |12606     |18.60%    |46034     |67.92%   |
|5.Legislature              |46226    |10085     |21.82%    |31660     |68.49%   |
|6.Provincial Safety &      |12143    |2673      |22.01%    |7989      |65.79%   |
|Liaison                    |         |          |          |          |         |
|7.Transport, Roads & Public|373975   |97074     |25.96%    |234920    |62.82%   |
|Works                      |         |          |          |          |         |
|8.Economic Affairs &       |48049    |9898      |20.60%    |22870     |47.60%   |
|Tourism                    |         |          |          |          |         |
|9.Sport, Arts & Culture    |53014    |9953      |18.77%    |38715     |73.03%   |
|10.Finance                 |68288    |12365     |18.11%    |35121     |51.43%   |
|11.Housing & Local         |251492   |49236     |19.58%    |198591    |78.97%   |
|Government                 |         |          |          |          |         |
|12.Agriculture, Land       |129954   |25513     |19.63%    |72497     |55.79%   |
|Reform, Environment &      |         |          |          |          |         |
|Conservation               |         |          |          |          |         |
|Total                     |4641768|1131571   |24.38%      |3309104   |71.29%      |
|1.Education               |5516384|1541706   |27.95%      |4040551   |73.25%      |
|2.Health                  |4878343|1256807   |25.76%      |3463187   |70.99%      |
|3.Social Services &       |4326504|1099111   |25.40%      |3110194   |71.89%      |
|Poverty Alleviation       |       |          |            |          |            |
|4.Provincial              |297241 |64256     |21.62%      |177084    |59.58%      |
|Administration            |       |          |            |          |            |
|5.Provincial Parliament   |46861  |10974     |23.42%      |34110     |72.79%      |
|6.Provincial Treasury     |108980 |23370     |21.44%      |68069     |62.46%      |
|7.Community Safety        |161627 |48430     |29.96%      |116222    |71.91%      |
|8.Housing                 |712881 |174597    |24.49%      |371929    |52.17%      |
|9.Environmental Affairs & |137417 |31314     |22.79%      |94753     |68.95%      |
|Development Planning      |       |          |            |          |            |
|10.Transport & Public     |1882316|399152    |21.21%      |1066682   |56.67%      |
|Works                     |       |          |            |          |            |
|11.Agriculture            |230644 |60393     |26.18%      |135522    |58.76%      |
|12.Local Government       |89022  |13059     |14.67%      |36685     |41.21%      |
|13.Economic Development & |126536 |66971     |52.93%      |97223     |76.83%      |
|Tourism                   |       |          |            |          |            |
|14.Cultural Affairs &     |156239 |36043     |23.07%      |102713    |65.74%      |
|Sport                     |       |          |            |          |            |
|Total                      |18670995 |4826183   |25.85%         |12914924        |
|                           |         |          |               |                |
|Central Government         |24327550 |1258559   |5.17%          |5.29%           |
|Administration             |         |          |               |                |
|Parliament                 |576144   |49011     |8.51%          |7.68%           |
|Foreign Affairs            |2546649  |250558    |9.84%          |6.05%           |
|Home Affairs               |2377615  |151053    |6.35%          |10.35%          |
|Provincial and Local       |13137381 |318564    |2.42%          |1.96%           |
|Government                 |         |          |               |                |
|Public Works               |5513909  |472177    |8.56%          |9.07%           |
|Financial and              |15060896 |874190    |5.80%          |9.92%           |
|Administrative Services    |         |          |               |                |
|National Treasury          |14021916 |800462    |5.71%          |10.05%          |
|Public Enterprises         |77377    |4992      |6.45%          |6.25%           |
|Public Service and         |144296   |11372     |7.88%          |6.74%           |
|Administration             |         |          |               |                |
|Public Service Commission  |73081    |5948      |8.14%          |7.87%           |
|S A Management Development |40887    |1764      |4.31%          |8.69%           |
|Institute                  |         |          |               |                |
|Statistics South Africa    |500190   |29595     |5.92%          |10.55%          |
|Social Services            |28803489 |3208057   |11.14%         |9.48%           |
|Education                  |11405095 |1028339   |9.02%          |7.81%           |
|Health                     |8818400  |764299    |8.67%          |11.29%          |
|Labour                     |1228697  |78888     |6.42%          |9.25%           |
|Science and Technology     |1282412  |111675    |8.71%          |5.24%           |
|Social Development         |4598575  |1123278   |24.43%         |13.87%          |
|Sport and Recreation South |294213   |14076     |4.78%          |9.10%           |
|Africa                     |         |          |               |                |
|Justice and Protection     |57538746 |4846459   |8.42%          |9.06%           |
|Services                   |         |          |               |                |
|Defence                    |19411819 |1535182   |7.91%          |10.56%          |
|Independent Complaints     |42114    |3390      |8.05%          |6.64%           |
|Directorate                |         |          |               |                |
|Justice and Constitutional |5054417  |417003    |8.25%          |7.76%           |
|Development                |         |          |               |                |
|Safety and Security        |24572904 |2163719   |8.81%          |8.48%           |
|Economic Services and      |27800956 |2103395   |7.57%          |                |
|Infrastructure Development |         |          |               |8.61%           |
|Communications             |1679917  |103299    |6.15%          |4.99%           |
|Environmental Affairs and  |1652268  |173195    |10.48%         |8.44%           |
|Tourism                    |         |          |               |                |
|Housing                    |4826781  |468158    |9.70%          |9.99%           |
|Land Affairs               |2031882  |178616    |8.79%          |7.85%           |
|Minerals and Energy        |1945143  |64786     |3.33%          |9.21%           |
|Trade and Industry         |3623291  |277725    |7.66%          |7.67%           |
|Transport                  |6769171  |390175    |5.76%          |8.64%           |
|Water Affairs and Forestry |3823112  |406411    |10.63%         |7.64%           |

Appendix 2: November Expenditure in National Departments

|R'000                     |Total Budget |Total       |% expenditure|% Expenditure in|
|                          |             |Expenditure |in November  |November 2003   |
|                          |             |            |2004         |                |
|                          |             |            |             |                |
|Central Government        |24327550     |3243210     |13.33%       |12.53%          |
|Administration            |             |            |             |                |
|Parliament                |576144       |49011       |8.51%        |6.23%           |
|Foreign Affairs           |2546649      |263675      |10.35%       |5.45%           |
|Home Affairs              |2377615      |146401      |6.16%        |7.21%           |
|Provincial and Local      |13137381     |2364852     |18.00%       |18.34%          |
|Government                |             |            |             |                |
|Public Works              |5513909      |407723      |7.39%        |7.48%           |
|Financial and             |15060896     |1683448     |11.18%       |                |
|Administrative Services   |             |            |             |5.54%           |
|National Treasury         |14021916     |1628285     |11.61%       |5.33%           |
|Public Enterprises        |77377        |5759        |7.44%        |7.04%           |
|Public Service and        |144296       |6261        |4.34%        |9.54%           |
|Administration            |             |            |             |                |
|Public Service Commission |73081        |6326        |8.66%        |6.99%           |
|S A Management Development|40887        |1972        |4.82%        |8.22%           |
|Institute                 |             |            |             |                |
|Statistics South Africa   |500190       |23817       |4.76%        |6.87%           |
|Social Services           |28803489     |1940534     |6.74%        |7.22%           |
|Education                 |11405095     |835165      |7.32%        |8.29%           |
|Health                    |8818400      |724720      |8.22%        |5.86%           |
|Labour                    |1228697      |123912      |10.08%       |5.86%           |
|Science and Technology    |1282412      |158214      |12.34%       |12.84%          |
|Social Development        |4598575      |25556       |0.56%        |6.47%           |
|Sport and Recreation South|294213       |13598       |4.62%        |9.75%           |
|Africa                    |             |            |             |                |
|Justice and Protection    |57538746     |4418486     |7.68%        |7.41%           |
|Services                  |             |            |             |                |
|Defence                   |19411819     |1107190     |5.70%        |5.96%           |
|Independent Complaints    |42114        |4353        |10.34%       |6.24%           |
|Directorate               |             |            |             |                |
|Justice and Constitutional|5054417      |418538      |8.28%        |8.40%           |
|Development               |             |            |             |                |
|Safety and Security       |24572904     |2154776     |8.77%        |8.71%           |
|Economic Services and     |27800956     |2279078     |8.20%        |                |
|Infrastructure Development|             |            |             |7.81%           |
|Communications            |1679917      |136227      |8.11%        |2.25%           |
|Environmental Affairs and |1652268      |109604      |6.63%        |2.32%           |
|Tourism                   |             |            |             |                |
|Housing                   |4826781      |480263      |9.95%        |10.92%          |
|Land Affairs              |2031882      |148862      |7.33%        |15.31%          |
|Minerals and Energy       |1945143      |95491       |4.91%        |8.72%           |
|Trade and Industry        |3623291      |215665      |5.95%        |6.59%           |
|Transport                 |6769171      |720636      |10.65%       |5.83%           |
|Water Affairs and Forestry|3823112      |300239      |7.85%        |9.24%           |

Appendix 3: December 2004 Expenditure

|R'000                               |Total    |Expendi|%        |Total  |%        |
|                                    |Budget   |ture   |Expenditu|expendi|Expenditu|
|                                    |         |for the|re for   |ture to|re as at |
|                                    |         |Month  |the month|date   |31       |
|                                    |         |       |         |       |December |
|                                    |         |       |         |       |2004     |
|Voted Amounts                       |83526916 |5036221|6.03%    |5962828|71.39%   |
|                                    |         |       |         |4      |         |
|                                    |         |       |         |       |         |
|Central Government Administration   |15311946 |972357 |6.35%    |9472422|61.86%   |
|The Presidency                      |16650    |22     |0.13%    |11999  |72.07%   |
|Parliament                          |78371    |6530   |8.33%    |58781  |75.00%   |
|Foreign Affairs                     |299409   |7480   |2.50%    |102796 |34.33%   |
|Home Affairs                        |537666   |44579  |8.29%    |477214 |88.76%   |
|Provincial and Local Government     |12902923 |820320 |6.36%    |8210970|63.64%   |
|Public Works                        |1476927  |93426  |6.33%    |610662 |41.35%   |
|                                    |         |       |         |       |         |
|Financial and Administrative        |11999524 |689261 |5.74%    |8248829|68.74%   |
|Services                            |         |       |         |       |         |
|Government Communications and       |73124    |12296  |16.82%   |73071  |99.93%   |
|Information Services                |         |       |         |       |         |
|National Treasury                   |11907993 |676154 |5.68%    |8167166|68.59%   |
|Public Enterprises                  |7065     |-92    |-1.30%   |75     |1.06%    |
|Public Service and Administration   |320      |18     |5.63%    |234    |73.13%   |
|Public Service Commission           |137      |       |0.00%    |       |0.00%    |
|S A Management Development Institute|10101    |839    |8.31%    |7644   |75.68%   |
|Statistics South Africa             |784      |46     |5.87%    |638    |81.38%   |
|                                    |         |       |         |       |         |
|Social Services                     |25884159 |1037856|4.01%    |2056241|79.44%   |
|                                    |         |       |         |7      |         |
|Arts and Culture,                   |955863   |70376  |7.36%    |470798 |49.25%   |
|Education                           |10913490 |129769 |1.19%    |1016398|93.13%   |
|                                    |         |       |         |6      |         |
|Health                              |8058600  |653693 |8.11%    |5982271|74.23%   |
|Labour                              |337636   |2081   |0.62%    |221506 |65.60%   |
|Science and Technology              |1147127  |71238  |6.21%    |745307 |64.97%   |
|Social Development                  |4241973  |100778 |2.38%    |2903838|68.45%   |
|Sport and Recreation South Africa   |229470   |9921   |4.32%    |74711  |32.56%   |
|                                    |         |       |         |       |         |
|Justice and Protection Services     |8416372  |177923 |2.11%    |6060033|72.00%   |
|Correctional Services               |42330    |20216  |47.76%   |147767 |349.08%  |
|Defence                             |7354033  |73013  |0.99%    |5118526|69.60%   |
|Independent Complaints Directorate  |89       |38     |42.70%   |186    |208.99%  |
|Justice and Constitutional          |617261   |44291  |7.18%    |483470 |78.33%   |
|Development                         |         |       |         |       |         |
|Safety and Security                 |402659   |40365  |10.02%   |310084 |77.01%   |
|                                    |         |       |         |       |         |
|Economic Services and Infrastructure|21914915 |2158824|9.85%    |1528458|69.75%   |
|Development                         |         |       |         |3      |         |
|Agriculture                         |756959   |65571  |8.66%    |458220 |60.53%   |
|Communications                      |1402104  |40166  |2.86%    |527520 |37.62%   |
|Environmental Affairs and Tourism   |1200491  |100345 |8.36%    |932178 |77.65%   |
|Housing                             |4651928  |484309 |10.41%   |3743290|80.47%   |
|Land Affairs                        |1329980  |49828  |3.75%    |1007274|75.74%   |
|Minerals and Energy                 |1533588  |517583 |33.75%   |1197243|78.07%   |
|Trade and Industry                  |2957815  |236486 |8.00%    |1601229|54.14%   |
|Transport                           |6231395  |542942 |8.71%    |4733098|75.96%   |
|Water Affairs and Forestry          |1850655  |121594 |6.57%    |1084531|58.60%   |


Appendix 6: Capital expenditure of National Departments as  at  31  December
2004

|R'000                            |Capita|Capital |% Capital   |Capital|% Capital|
|                                 |l     |Expendit|Expenditure |Expendi|expenditu|
|                                 |Budget|ure     |for the     |ture to|re at at |
|                                 |      |        |month       |date   |31       |
|                                 |      |        |            |       |December |
|                                 |      |        |            |       |2004     |
|Health                           |422469|1125280 |26.64%      |3283349|77.72%   |
|                                 |8     |        |            |       |         |
|Social Development               |777130|217455  |27.98%      |563925 |72.57%   |
|Office of the Premier            |168659|41369   |24.53%      |113433 |67.26%   |
|Provincial Legislature           |88264 |21756   |24.65%      |64172  |72.70%   |
|Roads & Public Works             |934852|226945  |24.28%      |701582 |75.05%   |
|Housing, Local Government &      |287040|75722   |26.38%      |183506 |63.93%   |
|Traditional Affairs              |      |        |            |       |         |
|Agriculture                      |681278|149183  |21.90%      |454742 |66.75%   |
|Economic Affairs, Environment    |135183|29897   |22.12%      |82288  |60.87%   |
|&Tourism                         |      |        |            |       |         |
|Transport                        |197030|59324   |30.11%      |158356 |80.37%   |
|Provincial Treasury              |148684|32403   |21.79%      |88002  |59.19%   |
|Sport, Recreation, Arts & Culture|195457|46480   |23.78%      |134173 |68.65%   |
|Safety & Liaison                 |10988 |3265    |29.71%      |8561   |77.91%   |
|Total                            |18051283|4831627 |26.77%  |13294259|73.65%     |
|Health                           |551985  |132213  |23.95%  |365455  |66.21%     |
|Social Development               |8888806 |1530295 |17.22%  |6094602 |68.56%     |
|Office of the Premier            |41555   |4448    |10.70%  |19414   |46.72%     |
|Provincial Legislature           |5675    |1793    |31.59%  |4264    |75.14%     |
|Roads & Public Works             |7438    |12720   |171.01% |44827   |602.68%    |
|Housing, Local Government &      |737681  |152878  |20.72%  |567401  |76.92%     |
|Traditional Affairs              |        |        |        |        |           |
|Agriculture                      |190916  |105493  |55.26%  |124267  |65.09%     |
|Economic Affairs, Environment    |661170  |196224  |29.68%  |405895  |61.39%     |
|&Tourism                         |        |        |        |        |           |
|Transport                        |55743   |17242   |30.93%  |36627   |65.71%     |
|Provincial Treasury              |2112    |185     |8.76%   |279     |13.21%     |
|Sport, Recreation, Arts & Culture|30195   |1579    |5.23%   |18375   |60.85%     |
|Safety & Liaison                 |        |6       |        |12      |           |
|Total                            |1146502|2239702  |19.54%   |7939356  |69.25%   |
|                                 |0      |         |         |         |         |
|Health                           |444583 |115855   |26.06%   |315068   |70.87%   |
|Social Development               |21924  |2015     |9.19%    |2203     |10.05%   |
|Office of the Premier            |15753  |2573     |16.33%   |5757     |36.55%   |
|Provincial Legislature           |1610   |127      |7.89%    |513      |31.86%   |
|Roads & Public Works             |879503 |314108   |35.71%   |762966   |86.75%   |
|Housing, Local Government &      |14491  |5158     |35.59%   |7238     |49.95%   |
|Traditional Affairs              |       |         |         |         |         |
|Agriculture                      |9949   |601      |6.04%    |6663     |66.97%   |
|Economic Affairs, Environment    |3271   |675      |20.64%   |898      |27.45%   |
|&Tourism                         |       |         |         |         |         |
|Transport                        |49813  |3450     |6.93%    |24675    |49.54%   |
|Provincial Treasury              |4234   |741      |17.50%   |833      |19.67%   |
|Sport, Recreation, Arts & Culture|14231  |2270     |15.95%   |2257     |15.86%   |
|Safety & Liaison                 |334    |-3       |-0.90%   |         |0.00%    |
|Total                            |176119|525546   |29.84%   |1359914  |77.22%    |
|                                 |8     |         |         |         |          |
|Health                           |245713|654081   |26.62%   |1807866  |73.58%    |
|                                 |5     |         |         |         |          |
|Social Development               |356113|119165   |33.46%   |225400   |63.29%    |
|Department of the Premier        |74152 |15102    |20.37%   |46207    |62.31%    |
|Free State Legislature           |50804 |12619    |24.84%   |36840    |72.51%    |
|Tourism, Environmental & Economic|134395|33475    |24.91%   |96159    |71.55%    |
|Affairs                          |      |         |         |         |          |
|Free State Provincial Treasury   |126053|28284    |22.44%   |74714    |59.27%    |
|Local Government & Housing       |141802|29615    |20.88%   |73361    |51.73%    |
|Public Works, Roads & Transport  |644043|226894   |35.23%   |498183   |77.35%    |
|Public Safety, Security & Liaison|25850 |4594     |17.77%   |15357    |59.41%    |
|Agriculture                      |182703|44677    |24.45%   |119272   |65.28%    |
|Sport, Arts, Culture, Science &  |65354 |16046    |24.55%   |43822    |67.05%    |
|Technology                       |      |         |         |         |          |
|Total                            |838543|2248964  |26.82%   |5911811  |70.50%    |
|                                 |3     |         |         |         |          |
|Health                           |92936 |37948    |40.83%   |93167    |100.25%   |
|Social Development               |324636|871331   |26.84%   |2405426  |74.10%    |
|                                 |1     |         |         |         |          |
|Department of the Premier        |10452 |2670     |25.55%   |8372     |80.10%    |
|Free State Legislature           |8088  |3190     |39.44%   |5497     |67.96%    |
|Tourism, Environmental & Economic|102777|3325     |3.24%    |57209    |55.66%    |
|Affairs                          |      |         |         |         |          |
|Free State Provincial Treasury   |441   |53       |12.02%   |197      |44.67%    |
|Local Government & Housing       |616379|147567   |23.94%   |370409   |60.09%    |
|Public Works, Roads & Transport  |3363  |1074     |31.94%   |3714     |110.44%   |
|Public Safety, Security & Liaison|547   |28       |5.12%    |87       |15.90%    |
|Agriculture                      |31086 |154      |0.50%    |709      |2.28%     |
|Sport, Arts, Culture, Science &  |5019  |915      |18.23%   |3752     |74.76%    |
|Technology                       |      |         |         |         |          |
|Total                          |4444107|1158786  |26.07%   |3163327   |71.18%   |
|Health                         |207196 |38122    |18.40%   |123224    |59.47%   |
|Social Development             |21122  |4809     |22.77%   |6278      |29.72%   |
|Department of the Premier      |776    |148      |19.07%   |345       |44.46%   |
|Free State Legislature         |3072   |1039     |33.82%   |3000      |97.66%   |
|Tourism, Environmental &       |11878  |2273     |19.14%   |8208      |69.10%   |
|Economic Affairs               |       |         |         |          |         |
|Free State Provincial Treasury |7528   |1570     |20.86%   |3440      |45.70%   |
|Local Government & Housing     |5309   |324      |6.10%    |1370      |25.81%   |
|Public Works, Roads & Transport|161577 |39280    |24.31%   |46819     |28.98%   |
|Public Safety, Security &      |743    |753      |101.35%  |753       |101.35%  |
|Liaison                        |       |         |         |          |         |
|Agriculture                    |43494  |1107     |2.55%    |2323      |5.34%    |
|Sport, Arts, Culture, Science &|23889  |3457     |14.47%   |8200      |34.33%   |
|Technology                     |       |         |         |          |         |
|Total                        |659547 |110345   |16.73%  |276837      |41.97%    |
|Health                       |7700578|1964004  |25.50%  |5293596     |68.74%    |
|Social Development           |561312 |149416   |26.62%  |401283      |71.49%    |
|Office of the Premier        |97050  |24887    |25.64%  |63576       |65.51%    |
|Gauteng Provincial           |87300  |20609    |23.61%  |55766       |63.88%    |
|Legislature                  |       |         |        |            |          |
|Finance & Economic Affairs   |139749 |73107    |52.31%  |188267      |134.72%   |
|Housing                      |131237 |39442    |30.05%  |112901      |86.03%    |
|Local Government             |96982  |24027    |24.77%  |62176       |64.11%    |
|Public Transport, Roads &    |1088746|352010   |32.33%  |950510      |87.30%    |
|Works                        |       |         |        |            |          |
|Community Safety             |151678 |29991    |19.77%  |43153       |28.45%    |
|Agriculture, Conservation &  |195073 |41997    |21.53%  |110949      |56.88%    |
|Environment                  |       |         |        |            |          |
|Sport, Recreation, Arts and  |84689  |22049    |26.04%  |56911       |67.20%    |
|Culture                      |       |         |        |            |          |
|Gauteng Shared Services      |4755520|127583   |2.68%   |302600      |6.36%     |
|Center                       |       |         |        |            |          |
|Total                        |1929868|5324955  |27.59%    |1424652|73.82%        |
|                             |9      |         |          |3      |              |
|Health                       |747322 |206415   |27.62%    |490942 |65.69%        |
|Social Development           |5769575|1650302  |28.60%    |4270951|74.03%        |
|Office of the Premier        |113    |38       |33.63%    |91     |80.53%        |
|Gauteng Provincial           |       |         |          |       |              |
|Legislature                  |       |         |          |       |              |
|Finance & Economic Affairs   |1008326|57178    |5.67%     |409847 |40.65%        |
|Housing                      |1294066|331084   |25.58%    |894459 |69.12%        |
|Local Government             |138950 |71166    |51.22%    |75783  |54.54%        |
|Public Transport, Roads &    |60     |58116    |96860.00% |181127 |301878.33%    |
|Works                        |       |         |          |       |              |
|Community Safety             |1109   |128      |11.54%    |465    |41.93%        |
|Agriculture, Conservation &  |2866   |         |0.00%     |92     |3.21%         |
|Environment                  |       |         |          |       |              |
|Sport, Recreation, Arts and  |56936  |17255    |30.31%    |31385  |55.12%        |
|Culture                      |       |         |          |       |              |
|Gauteng Shared Services      |       |         |          |       |              |
|Center                       |       |         |          |       |              |
|Total        |975205|2632699    |27.00%       |6959796|71.37|
|             |2     |           |             |       |%    |

Capital Expenditure
|R'000                            |Capit|Capital   |%       |Capital |% Capital |
|                                 |al   |Expenditur|Capital |Expendit|Expenditur|
|                                 |Budge|e for the |Expendit|ure to  |e to date |
|                                 |t    |Quarter   |ure for |date    |          |
|                                 |     |          |the     |        |          |
|                                 |     |          |Quarter |        |          |
|Health                           |49594|36524     |7.36%   |71619   |14.44%    |
|                                 |0    |          |        |        |          |
|Social Development               |11647|1010      |8.67%   |2791    |23.96%    |
|Office of the Premier            |4239 |732       |17.27%  |2838    |66.95%    |
|Gauteng Provincial Legislature   |11395|1528      |13.41%  |7808    |68.52%    |
|Finance & Economic Affairs       |59157|1302      |2.20%   |3218    |5.44%     |
|Housing                          |14923|683       |4.58%   |4373    |29.30%    |
|Local Government                 |1435 |178       |12.40%  |215     |14.98%    |
|Public Transport, Roads & Works  |69864|1826      |0.26%   |6697    |0.96%     |
|                                 |0    |          |        |        |          |
|Community Safety                 |9882 |277       |2.80%   |5593    |56.60%    |
|Agriculture, Conservation &      |8640 |1011      |11.70%  |3930    |45.49%    |
|Environment                      |     |          |        |        |          |
|Sport, Recreation, Arts and      |627  |398       |63.48%  |1131    |180.38%   |
|Culture                          |     |          |        |        |          |
|Gauteng Shared Services Center   |33661|1790      |5.32%   |7475    |22.21%    |
|Total                            |2156031|235718       |10.93%  |412934 |19.15%  |
|Education                        |456170 |139381       |30.55%  |698047 |153.02% |
|Health                           |366677 |70525        |19.23%  |256768 |70.03%  |
|Social Welfare & Population      |9976262|2674687      |26.81%  |7847960|78.67%  |
|Development                      |       |             |        |       |        |
|Office of the Premier            |18056  |1454         |8.05%   |4317   |23.91%  |
|Provincial Parliament            |10613  |2531         |23.85%  |7574   |71.37%  |
|Agriculture & Environmental      |304371 |71839        |23.60%  |199043 |65.39%  |
|Affairs                          |       |             |        |       |        |
|Economic Development             |63599  |29229        |45.96%  |82955  |130.43% |
|Provincial Treasury              |804    |301          |37.44%  |909    |113.06% |
|Housing                          |749460 |149168       |19.90%  |509048 |67.92%  |
|Community Safety & Liaison       |85     |275          |323.53% |286    |336.47% |
|The Royal Household              |137    |18           |13.14%  |73     |53.28%  |
|Traditional & Local Government   |126943 |42155        |33.21%  |60814  |47.91%  |
|Affairs                          |       |             |        |       |        |
|Transport                        |27340  |1693         |6.19%   |14232  |52.06%  |
|Works                            |6513   |1014         |15.57%  |4259   |65.39%  |
|Arts, Culture & Tourism          |105899 |5701         |5.38%   |8261   |7.80%   |
|Sport & Recreation               |4610   |610          |13.23%  |660    |14.32%  |
|Reconstruction & Development     |       |             |        |       |        |
|Total                            |1221753|3190581  |26.11%  |9695206  |79.35%   |
|                                 |9      |         |        |         |         |
|Education                        |710353 |81163    |11.43%  |95854    |13.49%   |
|Health                           |569197 |165853   |29.14%  |318366   |55.93%   |
|Social Welfare & Population      |55701  |13981    |25.10%  |23337    |41.90%   |
|Development                      |       |         |        |         |         |
|Office of the Premier            |5512   |449      |8.15%   |1037     |18.81%   |
|Provincial Parliament            |30361  |507      |1.67%   |4338     |14.29%   |
|Agriculture & Environmental      |99054  |11152    |11.26%  |17189    |17.35%   |
|Affairs                          |       |         |        |         |         |
|Economic Development             |3257   |359      |11.02%  |1014     |31.13%   |
|Provincial Treasury              |17380  |2952     |16.99%  |3832     |22.05%   |
|Housing                          |13027  |1919     |14.73%  |5740     |44.06%   |
|Community Safety & Liaison       |364    |6        |1.65%   |12       |3.30%    |
|The Royal Household              |3053   |763      |24.99%  |1740     |56.99%   |
|Traditional & Local Government   |36308  |1839     |5.06%   |16690    |45.97%   |
|Affairs                          |       |         |        |         |         |
|Transport                        |1099581|269201   |24.48%  |806706   |73.36%   |
|Works                            |62973  |5796     |9.20%   |12885    |20.46%   |
|Arts, Culture & Tourism          |4257   |84       |1.97%   | 91      | 2.14%   |
|Total                          |271257|556060       |20.50%   |1308904 |        |
|                               |5     |             |         |        |        |
|Health                         |376009|956160       |25.43%   |2669456 |70.99%  |
|                               |4     |             |         |        |        |
|Welfare                        |575724|141759       |24.62%   |299392  |52.00%  |
|Sport, Arts & Culture          |72401 |18584        |25.67%   |50217   |69.36%  |
|Safety, Security & Liaison     |16102 |3665         |22.76%   |11444   |71.07%  |
|Office of the Premier          |199420|45134        |22.63%   |110353  |55.34%  |
|Local Government & Housing     |358322|73332        |20.47%   |243083  |67.84%  |
|Provincial Legislature         |84436 |18147        |21.49%   |48091   |56.96%  |
|Public Works                   |751716|197792       |26.31%   |524769  |69.81%  |
|Finance & Economic Development |490238|140280       |28.61%   |325964  |66.49%  |
|Agriculture                    |606358|156601       |25.83%   |431602  |71.18%  |
|Transport                      |309596|95367        |30.80%   |233352  |75.37%  |
|Total                        |162309|4262758   |26.26%         |11509933|70.91%   |
|                             |93    |          |               |        |         |
|Health                       |83489 |11774     |14.10%         |41258   |49.42%   |
|Welfare                      |604604|1532061   |25.34%         |4438432 |73.41%   |
|                             |9     |          |               |        |         |
|Sport, Arts & Culture        |2142  |16        |0.75%          |896     |41.83%   |
|Safety, Security & Liaison   |2381  |510       |21.42%         |524     |22.01%   |
|Office of the Premier        |40354 |17830     |44.18%         |21829   |54.09%   |
|Local Government & Housing   |418576|86653     |20.70%         |226084  |54.01%   |
|Provincial Legislature       |8898  |541       |6.08%          |7054    |79.28%   |
|Public Works                 |665793|113495    |17.05%         |455858  |68.47%   |
|Finance & Economic           |267927|59351     |22.15%         |178735  |66.71%   |
|Development                  |      |          |               |        |         |
|Agriculture                  |45408 |10694     |23.55%         |33231   |73.18%   |
|Transport                    |155626|46809     |30.08%         |113456  |72.90%   |
|Total                     |7909477 |1926821       |24.36%     |5640320  |71.31%  |
|Health                    |396039  |79925         |20.18%     |248293   |62.69%  |
|Welfare                   |90282   |1633          |1.81%      |12090    |13.39%  |
|Sport, Arts & Culture     |4245    |86            |2.03%      |1551     |36.54%  |
|Safety, Security & Liaison|2400    |241           |10.04%     |658      |27.42%  |
|Office of the Premier     |21370   |1175          |5.50%      |1845     |8.63%   |
|Local Government & Housing|80822   |8492          |10.51%     |48507    |60.02%  |
|Provincial Legislature    |9833    |363           |3.69%      |2336     |23.76%  |
|Public Works              |100497  |16741         |16.66%     |45383    |45.16%  |
|Finance & Economic        |94085   |5548          |5.90%      |56023    |59.55%  |
|Development               |        |              |           |         |        |
|Agriculture               |143467  |17064         |11.89%     |49644    |34.60%  |
|Transport                 |22068   |683           |3.09%      |11822    |53.57%  |
|Total                     |147554|205968      |13.96%          |806208 |54.64%   |
|                          |5     |            |                |       |         |
|Education                 |482575|1233257     |25.56%          |3360830|69.64%   |
|                          |9     |            |                |       |         |
|Health                    |206779|553245      |26.76%          |1469816|71.08%   |
|                          |8     |            |                |       |         |
|Social Development        |266771|89594       |33.58%          |202735 |76.00%   |
|Office of the Premier     |108057|26490       |24.51%          |75963  |70.30%   |
|Finance                   |176748|51888       |29.36%          |106803 |60.43%   |
|Agriculture & Land        |335487|80107       |23.88%          |206780 |61.64%   |
|Administration            |      |            |                |       |         |
|Roads & Transport         |454527|139834      |30.76%          |321446 |70.72%   |
|Safety & Security         |35247 |8614        |24.44%          |24437  |69.33%   |
|Local Government & Housing|112377|33428       |29.75%          |91243  |81.19%   |
|Provincial Legislature    |47593 |12364       |25.98%          |34011  |71.46%   |
|Culture, Sport &          |64186 |16826       |26.21%          |47390  |73.83%   |
|Recreation                |      |            |                |       |         |
|Economic Development &    |59219 |18051       |30.48%          |40593  |68.55%   |
|Planning                  |      |            |                |       |         |
|Public Works              |258781|69526       |26.87%          |171040 |66.09%   |
|Total Payments  |8812550  |2333224        |26.48%       |6153087  |69.82%       |
|Health          |73596    |20803          |28.27%       |51775    |70.35%       |
|Social          |3095130  |939636         |30.36%       |2377592  |76.82%       |
|Development     |         |               |             |         |             |
|Office of the   |1174     |30             |2.56%        |118      |10.05%       |
|Premier         |         |               |             |         |             |
|Finance         |69       |18             |26.09%       |57       |82.61%       |
|Agriculture &   |141027   |37278          |26.43%       |111291   |78.91%       |
|Land            |         |               |             |         |             |
|Administration  |         |               |             |         |             |
|Roads &         |982      |629            |64.05%       |1453     |147.96%      |
|Transport       |         |               |             |         |             |
|Safety &        |66       |200            |303.03%      |530      |803.03%      |
|Security        |         |               |             |         |             |
|Local Government|377866   |149456         |39.55%       |340369   |90.08%       |
|& Housing       |         |               |             |         |             |
|Provincial      |2700     |967            |35.81%       |2759     |102.19%      |
|Legislature     |         |               |             |         |             |
|Culture, Sport &|1980     |-88            |-4.44%       |2499     |126.21%      |
|Recreation      |         |               |             |         |             |
|Economic        |115833   |49452          |42.69%       |95020    |82.03%       |
|Development &   |         |               |             |         |             |
|Planning        |         |               |             |         |             |
|Public Works    |478      |511            |106.90%      |972      |203.35%      |
|Total Payments  |3967106  |1238585        |31.22%       |3120388  |78.66%       |

Capital

|R'000                   |Capita|Capital   |% Capital   |Capital  |% Capital    |
|                        |l     |Expenditur|Expenditure |Expenditu|Expenditure  |
|                        |Budget|e for the |for the     |re to    |to date      |
|                        |      |Quarter   |Quarter     |date     |             |
|Health                  |252491|13820     |5.47%       |38629    |15.30%       |
|Social Development      |7027  |456       |6.49%       |564      |8.03%        |
|Office of the Premier   |2549  |507       |19.89%      |1238     |48.57%       |
|Finance                 |15345 |1244      |8.11%       |6573     |42.83%       |
|Agriculture & Land      |24221 |4822      |19.91%      |5632     |23.25%       |
|Administration          |      |          |            |         |             |
|Roads & Transport       |379365|71437     |18.83%      |182838   |48.20%       |
|Safety & Security       |955   |112       |11.73%      |112      |11.73%       |
|Local Government &      |61151 |-12166    |-19.90%     |2447     |4.00%        |
|Housing                 |      |          |            |         |             |
|Provincial Legislature  |1691  |65        |3.84%       |431      |25.49%       |
|Culture, Sport &        |6660  |65        |0.98%       |560      |8.41%        |
|Recreation              |      |          |            |         |             |
|Economic Development &  |184   |          |0.00%       |         |             |
|Planning                |      |          |            |         |             |
|Public Works            |31410 |10187     |32.43%      |18336    |58.38%       |
|Total Payments                    |1008032|118548     |11.76%     |355751     |35.29%     |
|Health                            |2328748|595761     |25.58%     |1675195    |71.94%     |
|Social Development                |379484 |80557      |21.23%     |237917     |62.69%     |
|Office of the Premier             |142436 |31851      |22.36%     |93727      |65.80%     |
|Provincial Legislature            |60225  |9559       |15.87%     |33701      |55.96%     |
|Safety & Liaison                  |20087  |5143       |25.60%     |13802      |68.71%     |
|Finance & Economic Development    |239460 |51542      |21.52%     |150951     |63.04%     |
|Local government & Housing        |92661  |20711      |22.35%     |58652      |63.30%     |
|Transport & Roads                 |621428 |169493     |27.27%     |405856     |65.31%     |
|Public Works                      |330791 |82505      |24.94%     |216214     |65.36%     |
|Agriculture, Conservation,        |327596 |82314      |25.13%     |232745     |71.05%     |
|Environment & Tourism             |       |           |           |           |           |
|Sport, Arts & Culture             |103338 |19307      |18.68%     |55344      |53.56%     |
|Contingency Reserve               |13100  |           |0.00%      |           |0.00%      |
|Total                             |973801|2506931     |25.74%   |6834479|70.18%|
|                                  |2     |            |         |       |      |
|Health                            |69276 |18825       |27.17%   |43353  |62.58%|
|Social Development                |391142|912277      |23.32%   |2958942|75.65%|
|                                  |0     |            |         |       |      |
|Office of the Premier             |7994  |1197        |14.97%   |4287   |53.63%|
|Provincial Legislature            |62    |17          |27.42%   |54     |87.10%|
|Safety & Liaison                  |479   |409         |85.39%   |471    |98.33%|
|Finance & Economic Development    |58313 |5472        |9.38%    |18068  |30.98%|
|Local government & Housing        |573814|106789      |18.61%   |225148 |39.24%|
|Transport & Roads                 |281526|84553       |30.03%   |247027 |87.75%|
|Public Works                      |3193  |480         |15.03%   |2127   |66.61%|
|Agriculture, Conservation,        |173684|38509       |22.17%   |102402 |58.96%|
|Environment & Tourism             |      |            |         |       |      |
|Sport, Arts & Culture             |61682 |18370       |29.78%   |40513  |65.68%|
|Contingency Reserve               |      |            |         |       |      |
|Total                             |528267|1210778   |22.92%   |3742785 |70.85%  |
|                                  |9     |          |         |        |        |
|Education                         |204714|83776     |40.92%   |135640  |66.26%  |
|Health                            |266346|40414     |15.17%   |111878  |42.00%  |
|Social Development                |22554 |1778      |7.88%    |4366    |19.36%  |
|Office of the Premier             |2840  |86        |3.03%    |343     |12.08%  |
|Provincial Legislature            |17176 |4345      |25.30%   |13349   |77.72%  |
|Safety & Liaison                  |113   |24        |21.24%   | 40     |0.00%   |
|Local government & Housing        |22300 |2071      |9.29%    |7024    |31.50%  |
|Transport & Roads                 |242093|54323     |22.44%   |103568  |42.78%  |
|Public Works                      |33955 |6279      |18.49%   |10569   |31.13%  |
|Agriculture, Conservation,        |11453 |860       |7.51%    |3370    |29.42%  |
|Environment & Tourism             |      |          |         |        |        |
|Sport, Arts & Culture             |5363  |215       |4.01%    |6727    |125.43% |
|Contingency Reserve               |17527 |          |0.00%    |        |0.00%   |
|Total                             |860538|196649   |22.85%   |401136  |46.61%   |
|Health                            |731547|187060   |25.57%   |555097  |75.88%   |
|Social Services & Population      |174057|39688    |22.80%   |116471  |66.92%   |
|Development                       |      |         |         |        |         |
|Office of the Premier             |60530 |11835    |19.55%   |44810   |74.03%   |
|Legislature                       |42996 |9854     |22.92%   |28852   |67.10%   |
|Provincial Safety & Liaison       |11593 |2643     |22.80%   |7568    |65.28%   |
|Transport, Roads & Public Works   |177337|36782    |20.74%   |108717  |61.31%   |
|Economic Affairs & Tourism        |30140 |5575     |18.50%   |15097   |50.09%   |
|Sport, Arts & Culture             |37267 |9159     |24.58%   |29968   |80.41%   |
|Finance                           |67102 |12330    |18.38%   |34435   |51.32%   |
|Housing & Local Government        |78843 |15153    |19.22%   |47049   |59.67%   |
|Agriculture, Land Reform,         |125840|25279    |20.09%   |70744   |56.22%   |
|Environment & Conservation        |      |         |         |        |         |
|Total                                 |281176|720824 |25.64%   |2038157  |72.49% |
|                                      |7     |       |         |         |       |
|Health                                |18000 |3017   |16.76%   |10265    |57.03% |
|Social Services & Population          |113001|255032 |22.57%   |814022   |72.04% |
|Development                           |1     |       |         |         |       |
|Office of the Premier                 |6598  |24     |0.36%    |67       |1.02%  |
|Legislature                           |3030  |25     |0.83%    |2954     |97.49% |
|Provincial Safety & Liaison           |      |6      |         |18       |       |
|Transport, Roads & Public Works       |88606 |15242  |17.20%   |39652    |44.75% |
|Economic Affairs & Tourism            |17479 |4071   |23.29%   |7503     |42.93% |
|Sport, Arts & Culture                 |6047  |781    |12.92%   |2786     |46.07% |
|Finance                               |95    |19     |20.00%   |62       |65.26% |
|Housing & Local Government            |170118|33491  |19.69%   |150524   |88.48% |
|Agriculture, Land Reform, Environment |314   |140    |44.59%   |320      |101.91%|
|& Conservation                        |      |       |         |         |       |
|Total                         |154894|332641      |21.48%      |1121610  |72.41%   |
|                              |0     |            |            |         |         |
|Health                        |125292|26048       |20.79%      |36659    |29.26%   |
|Social Services & Population  |13807 |1682        |12.18%      |4592     |33.26%   |
|Development                   |      |            |            |         |         |
|Office of the Premier         |653   |747         |114.40%     |1157     |177.18%  |
|Legislature                   |200   |206         |103.00%     |-146     |-73.00%  |
|Provincial Safety & Liaison   |550   |24          |4.36%       |403      |73.27%   |
|Transport, Roads & Public     |108032|45050       |41.70%      |86551    |80.12%   |
|Works                         |      |            |            |         |         |
|Economic Affairs & Tourism    |430   |252         |58.60%      |270      |62.79%   |
|Sport, Arts & Culture         |9700  |13          |0.13%       |5961     |61.45%   |
|Finance                       |1091  |16          |1.47%       |624      |57.20%   |
|Housing & Local Government    |2531  |592         |23.39%      |1018     |40.22%   |
|Agriculture, Land Reform,     |3800  |94          |2.47%       |1433     |37.71%   |
|Environment & Conservation    |      |            |            |         |         |
|Total                            |282061 |78106    |27.69%   |149337   |52.94%   |
|Health                           |4314542|1126520  |26.11%   |3099669  |71.84%   |
|Social Services & Poverty        |422694 |99992    |23.66%   |269254   |63.70%   |
|Alleviation                      |       |         |         |         |         |
|Provincial Administration        |251969 |60372    |23.96%   |169301   |67.19%   |
|Provincial Parliament            |37038  |9467     |25.56%   |26157    |70.62%   |
|Provincial Treasury              |102744 |22184    |21.59%   |66113    |64.35%   |
|Community Safety                 |127069 |33680    |26.51%   |86436    |68.02%   |
|Housing                          |81135  |14358    |17.70%   |39994    |49.29%   |
|Environmental Affairs &          |63526  |14306    |22.52%   |38154    |60.06%   |
|Development Planning             |       |         |         |         |         |
|Transport & Public Works         |951556 |210321   |22.10%   |587760   |61.77%   |
|Agriculture                      |142554 |40783    |28.61%   |105760   |74.19%   |
|Local Government                 |53661  |9461     |17.63%   |24502    |45.66%   |
|Economic Development & Tourism   |49051  |12580    |25.65%   |28411    |57.92%   |
|Cultural Affairs & Sport         |122864 |30678    |24.97%   |83213    |67.73%   |
|Total                            |117859|3067367   |26.03%      |832880|70.67%  |
|                                 |57    |          |            |2     |        |
|Health                           |458641|111716    |24.36%      |328408|71.60%  |
|Social Services & Poverty        |388462|991717    |25.53%      |282990|72.85%  |
|Alleviation                      |3     |          |            |9     |        |
|Provincial Administration        |4880  |1936      |39.67%      |4006  |82.09%  |
|Provincial Parliament            |8495  |1507      |17.74%      |7657  |90.14%  |
|Provincial Treasury              |320   |22        |6.88%       |138   |43.13%  |
|Community Safety                 |31513 |14351     |45.54%      |28802 |91.40%  |
|Housing                          |629821|159919    |25.39%      |330802|52.52%  |
|Environmental Affairs &          |72515 |16989     |23.43%      |56134 |77.41%  |
|Development Planning             |      |          |            |      |        |
|Transport & Public Works         |73828 |13515     |18.31%      |30263 |40.99%  |
|Agriculture                      |40959 |17279     |42.19%      |24656 |60.20%  |
|Local Government                 |29003 |3191      |11.00%      |11341 |39.10%  |
|Economic Development & Tourism   |77080 |54121     |70.21%      |68347 |88.67%  |
|Cultural Affairs & Sport         |31285 |5302      |16.95%      |18391 |58.79%  |
|Total                            |57637|1546130  |26.83%     |4067584  |70.57%  |
|                                 |54   |         |           |         |        |
|Health                           |10516|18571    |17.66%     |35110    |33.39%  |
|                                 |0    |         |           |         |        |
|Social Services & Poverty        |19187|7402     |38.58%     |11031    |57.49%  |
|Alleviation                      |     |         |           |         |        |
|Provincial Administration        |40392|1948     |4.82%      |3777     |9.35%   |
|Provincial Parliament            |1328 |         |0.00%      |296      |22.29%  |
|Provincial Treasury              |5916 |1164     |19.68%     |1818     |30.73%  |
|Community Safety                 |3045 |399      |13.10%     |984      |32.32%  |
|Housing                          |1925 |320      |16.62%     |1133     |58.86%  |
|Environmental Affairs &          |1376 |19       |1.38%      |465      |33.79%  |
|Development Planning             |     |         |           |         |        |
|Transport & Public Works         |85693|175316   |20.46%     |448659   |52.36%  |
|                                 |2    |         |           |         |        |
|Agriculture                      |47131|2331     |4.95%      |5106     |10.83%  |
|Local Government                 |6358 |407      |6.40%      |842      |13.24%  |
|Economic Development & Tourism   |405  |270      |66.67%     |465      |114.81% |
|Cultural Affairs & Sport         |2090 |63       |3.01%      |1109     |53.06%  |
|Total                                                               |
|Input into and early view on policy priorities, new spending        |
|policies and outstanding issues                                     |
|Activities                                                          |
|2006/7 – 2008/9 drafting cycle                                      |
|1. The JBC will be briefed by National Treasury at earliest possible|
|point on                                                            |
|Budget process and Treasury Guidelines                              |
|Cabinet’s guidelines regarding budget priorities                    |
|Outstanding issues on spending departments’ budgets                 |
|The JBC will receive further briefings on outcomes of executive     |
|processes as cycle unfolds                                          |
|2. The JBC will receive briefings by Finance and Fiscal Commission  |
|on its recommendations on the Division of Revenue Bill; and the     |
|outcome of FFC research in other areas                              |
|3. The JBC will continue to work with the NT to maintain and develop|
|observation status in key executive events                          |
|4. The Portfolio and Select Committees will be briefed by spending  |
|departments on new spending policies submitted to Treasury in terms |
|of the budget process guidelines.                                   |
|5. The Portfolio and Select Committees will channel comments /      |
|concerns to JBC for inclusion in pre-budget report to executive     |
|6. The JBC will provide a pre-budget report to executive in time for|
|meeting of Ministers’ Committee on Budget in October. The JBC will  |
|design a process for this report, including whether it will be      |
|tabled in the main House, and whether a response will be requested  |
|from the executive and when.                                        |
|7. The JBC will meet on the MTBPS, consider whether its concerns    |
|have been addressed and report to Parliament. The JBC will decide   |
|closer to the time whether to conduct hearings.                     |
|2007/8 – 2009/10 preparation cycle                                  |
|8. The JBC will review the effectiveness of its activities in the   |
|2006/7—2008/9 cycle early in 2006 and develop a programme for 2007/8|
|to 2009/10 along similar lines.                                     |
|9. In addition the JBC will identify key issues for in depth        |
|research (Public Expenditure Review style) in the 2007/8 to 2009/10 |
|cycle in October 2005 in order to inform its engagement in this     |
|cycle                                                               |
|10. The JBC will highlight areas of concern for drafting 2007/8 to  |
|2009/10 in its report after the first reading of 2006/7 Budget      |


3.2 Conceptualising the JBCs role in the Legislative phase


Guiding decisions
1. The legislative phase starts when the Budget is tabled and ends when the
   relevant Acts are passed.
    • Parliament has the strongest constitutional mandate in the legislative
      phase of the budget process.
    • The JBC will review allocations in line with government’s spending
      priorities and existing legislation.
    • The JBC will however not attempt in depth engagement with all
      spending. Given current capacity constraints, the JBC will rather
      focus on specific, substantive spending areas or departments. These
      areas will be identified in advance of the budget being tabled, on
      account of its oversight over actual expenditure and its interaction
      with Portfolio and Select Committees. The JBC will also use its
      interaction with the executive in the budget preparation phase to
      identify priority focus areas. These might be in line with the
      executive’s spending priorities.
    • In the legislative phase the JBC will utilize the budget documentation
      to
         o Relate past performance to spending plans
         o Ascertain whether concerns in drafting phase have received
           attention
    • The JBC will coordinate its investigation into specific spending areas
      with relevant portfolio and select committees
    • In engaging with the budget as tabled in the immediate future, the JBC
      would pay particular attention to
         o Funding of new spending policies
         o Changes over baseline
         o Capital projects funding and implementation
         o Intergovernmental issues (FFC report)
         o Financial management issues

Activities in the Legislative Phase
|Objective                                                             |
|Meaningful engagement with budget in approval phase, facilitation of  |
|public debate and budget transparency on budgeting issues             |
|Activities                                                            |
|For Budget 2006/7                                                     |
|1. The JBC will develop a process and discuss it with stakeholders in |
|Parliament at the end of 2005 to include Portfolio Committee and      |
|Select Committee input into its activities for Budget 2006/7.         |
|2. The JBC will hold hearings on selected issues after budget day.    |
|3. The JBC will compile a report for Parliament                       |
|The Report will present findings and make recommendations on the      |
|effectiveness and efficiency of spending in specific areas as         |
|investigated over the course of the budget cycle.                     |
|If relevant, the report will also make recommendations on new issues  |
|arising from the Committee’s deliberations                            |
|If relevant, the report will make recommendations on budget           |
|allocations more broadly (with other words on the distribution of     |
|expenditure between spending areas) relating to the executive’s       |
|overall policy priorities and relating to existing legislation.       |
|The report will include recommendations not only on budget policy     |
|issues, but also on issues of financial management where relevant     |
|These recommendations will be aimed at                                |
|Addressing progress on concerns highlighted in pre-budget report      |
|Highlighting areas of concern for upcoming budget (for which          |
|preparation in executive is just starting), with other words, engage  |
|with forward treatment in budget preparation of allocations in outer  |
|years                                                                 |
|Highlighting areas of concern for engagement with actual expenditure  |
|reports                                                               |
|Highlighting areas of concern for Portfolio and Select Committee      |
|follow-up                                                             |
|For Budget 2007/8                                                     |
|4. The JBC will review its set of post-budget activities in the course|
|of 2006 for Budget 2007/8, taking into account the outcome of the     |
|Taskforce on Oversight and Accountability.                            |

The Diagramme below sets out role and activities up to point of budget
approval.

   Diagramme 1: JBC Role and Activities in Budget Preparation and Approval
                                   Phases



      [pic]




3.3 Principles for JBC activities during Budget Execution


Guiding Decisions
1. The JBC has a mandate to monitor the actual revenue and expenditure
   reports published by the National Treasury. In fulfilling this task the
   JBC will
    • Link up its monitoring with its pre-budget work. With other words, it
      will track spending areas and issues it highlighted in the pre-budget
      and budget report.
    • Coordinate with Portfolio and Select Committees by
         o Alerting these committees to issues that should be tracked or
           that arise from the actual revenue and expenditure reports
         o Coordinating oversight on actual revenue and expenditure with
           oversight of Annual Reports and Strategic Plans
    • Target specific spending areas and departments on account of
         o Experience with quarterly reports (year-on-year)
         o Scopa and OAG
         o From government policy priorities (eg DTI re job creation)

2. In order to practice effective oversight the monthly and quarterly
   reports on their own are not enough. They need to be complemented by
   additional information from departments (through sector committees)
    • the JBC would need monthly cash flow projections and the operational
      plans of spending departments.
    • It would also need additional information on the strategic plan
      linkages to budget and the quarterly reports.
   Given current capacity, it is clear that the JBC will not be able to
   engage in depth with all spending areas. It will therefore focus on
   specific spending areas to investigate beyond the numbers.

3. The JBC will utilise monthly and quarterly cash flow reports to
    • Watch for implementation of new spending policies (request additional
      information from identified departments)
    • Underspending / savings
    • Pull through issues id-ed into implementation
    • Identify areas for closer focus
    • Personnel spending (vacancies and filled posts; particularly where
      personnel sizable portion of budget)
Activities in the Execution Phase
|Objective                                                           |
|Effective parliamentary oversight over the implementation of the    |
|budget, service delivery in line with plans                         |
|Activities (2005/6)                                                 |
|1. The JBC will request aggregate monthly cash flow projections for |
|all spending departments as soon as possible, plus updates during   |
|the year where relevant                                             |
|2. JBC will request more detailed cash flow projections and         |
|operational plans from specific spending departments, in            |
|coordination with the relevant Portfolio and Select Committees      |
|3. The JBC will request briefings from specific departments, in     |
|coordination with the relevant Portfolio and Select Committees, on  |
|Strategic Plan linkages to budget and operational plans and to the  |
|cashflow projections.                                               |
|4. The JBC will request follow-up briefings, in coordination with   |
|the relevant Portfolio and Select Committees, on implementation in  |
|line with Strategic Plan and Budgets, and on the achievement of     |
|spending undertaken for specific spending departments.              |
|5. The JBC will commission research on budget implementation in     |
|specific spending areas and departments (in coordination with the   |
|relevant Portfolio and Select Committees), piloting in 2005 – if    |
|funds can be raised – and extending the programme in 2006.          |
|6. The JBC will compile quarterly reports for Parliament that       |
|relates the actual revenue and spending reports to budget           |
|implementation and service delivery. The reports will comment on    |
|progress with budget implementation overall. The reports will draw  |
|on investigations into specific spending areas by commenting on     |
|The timeliness of activities of the spending department             |
|The efficiency of spending and the speediness and quality of service|
|delivery (JBC not only to investigate whether spending is taking    |
|place, but to which effect)                                         |
|7. At end of fiscal year the JBC will compile a briefing report to  |
|SCOPA highlighting areas of high concern on account of its          |
|engagement with budget implementation.                              |

The JBC expects to make slow progress in moving from commenting on spending
to coordinate work on and commenting on the timeliness, quality and
efficiency of service delivery on back of the actual revenue and
expenditure reports. However, it will endeavour to shift its practice in
this direction from the 2005/6 spending year.


   Committee structure and work method

The following principles were formulated for how the committee will work to
fulfill the tasks set out above.
1. There will be specialization within the committee. Specific members will
   be assigned to specific sub-committees charged with engaging with
   specific spending areas, Portfolio and Select Committees and spending
   departments.
2. The Committee will deliberate further as to whether this specialization
   in the current cycle will be in line with the identified areas of
   investigation, or whether it will organize itself immediately in broad
   functional sub-committees, to which specific spending area issues will be
   assigned. The latter carries the benefit of being permanent for this
   Parliament, and of more in-depth engagement over time.
3. The sub-committees will be the engines of the JBCs work. With other
   words, the committee will meet mainly as a full committee
     a. In September/October to agree and compile the pre-budget report
     b. At the time of the MTBPS
     c. After the Budget has been tabled
     d. On a quarterly basis (see point 6 below)
   However, the JBC Chair may call a full committee meeting at any point.
4. Portfolio and Select committees will be invited to delegate a ‘budget
   specialist’ who will
     a. act as ‘floating’ members of the JBC, that is join the JBC and
        relevant JBC sub-committees
     b. be the liaison with the JBC
     c. facilitate joint sittings of the Portfolio and Select Committees
        and the JBC sub-committee to undertake the activities as set out
        above.
   The JBC will work through the Chairs of the relevant committees to agree
   and operationalise the system. Part of this process would be to agree
   what level of representation the ‘budget specialist’ will enjoy on the
   JBC: whether as observers or full members.
5. The JBC will undertake in full committee and as sub-committees joint
   sittings -- albeit in the budget preparation and approval or
   implementation phases -- with Portfolio and Select Committees to
     a. Deliberate on areas highlighted and formulate report findings and
        recommendations
     b. Receive briefings from spending departments and National Treasury
        on specific spending areas and issues
   The JBC may at times formulate findings and recommendations not in a
   joint sitting, but with the participation of the ‘budget specialist’
   only.
6. On a quarterly basis the JBC will have extended meetings to
     a. Agree on forward work of sub-committees
     b. Report back on on-going work in sub-committees
     c. Agree on Quarterly report to Parliament.
7. The JBC may create ad-hoc sub-committees to look at cross-cutting areas.
   Members of Portfolio and Select Committees may be invited onto these
   committees.
8. When the cluster system is in place, the JBC will align its operations
   to make use of the system.
9. The JBC will commission research into specific spending areas that it
   targets for engagement.
10. The JBC may undertake oversight visits to spending departments or to
   service delivery sites as part of its oversight work.
11. The JBC will draft a proposal before end 2005 to establish a
   Parliamentary Budget Office. To this end it will delegate a sub-
   committee.
12. The JBC will formulate a strategy to increase financial resources of
   the committee in the meantime, to undertake research and further
   development work.




5. Operationalising the Strategic Plan

This strategic plan is at a fairly high level. The JBC needs to undertake
further development, as well as monitoring activities in support of
strategic plan implementation. This section briefly discusses the further
planning and budgeting; and monitoring and evaluation activities that are
required.


5.1 Planning and budgeting

The JBC needs to programme steps in specific activity areas – for example
getting agreement from parliamentary structures on coordination between the
committee and other committees and developing a methodology for undertaking
public expenditure reviews. It also needs to develop a guideline financial
requirement for undertaking the identified activities, and prioritise its
activities against its existing and potential financial resources. These
activities will be undertaken in the 3rd quarter of 2005, resulting in an
operational plan for 2005/6. A draft implementation plan is provided in
Annex 1. This plan will be finalized in the 3rd quarter of 2005/6.


5.2 Monitoring and Evaluation

The JBC will monitor the effectiveness of its Strategy by holding a
quarterly review meeting -- in September 2005, November 2005, February 2006
and May 2006 -- to monitor progress with strategy implementation, do a scan
for changes in the national budget environment, identify obstacles to
strategy implementation and formulate mitigation strategies. The JBC will
adjust the strategy in year if required. The meeting in May 2006 will be
more extensive, and will be utilized to roll over the Strategy Document for
2007/8 – 2009/10 budget cycle.


             Annex 1. Draft Operational Plan Outline and Budget



                              Operational Plan


|   |           |2005              |2006                    |2007                    |
|   |                                                                                |
|2  |Discuss interface of activities with NT; briefing by National Treasury          |
|3  |Present programme of activities to NT and agree interaction for budget cycle for|
|   |2006 Budget                                                                     |
|7  |First Briefing completed                                                        |
|10 |JBC clarify process for compiling and submitting pre-budget discussion paper to |
|   |MCoB                                                                            |
|16 |JBC agrees focus areas, identifies required preparation work and agrees         |
|   |programme for MTBPS                                                             |
|20|JB|                  |                        |                        |
|  |C |                  |                        |                        |
|  |re|                  |                        |                        |
|  |vi|                  |                        |                        |
|  |ew|                  |                        |                        |
|  |s |                  |                        |                        |
|  |ac|                  |                        |                        |
|  |ti|                  |                        |                        |
|  |vi|                  |                        |                        |
|  |ti|                  |                        |                        |
|  |es|                  |                        |                        |
|  |an|                  |                        |                        |
|  |d |                  |                        |                        |
|  |fi|                  |                        |                        |
|  |na|                  |                        |                        |
|  |li|                  |                        |                        |
|  |se|                  |                        |                        |
|  |pr|                  |                        |                        |
|  |og|                  |                        |                        |
|  |ra|                  |                        |                        |
|  |mm|                  |                        |                        |
|  |e |                  |                        |                        |
|  |fo|                  |                        |                        |
|  |r |                  |                        |                        |
|  |pr|                  |                        |                        |
|  |ep|                  |                        |                        |
|  |ar|                  |                        |                        |
|  |at|                  |                        |                        |
|  |io|                  |                        |                        |
|  |n |                  |                        |                        |
|  |ph|                  |                        |                        |
|  |as|                  |                        |                        |
|  |e |                  |                        |                        |
|  |of|                  |                        |                        |
|  |Bu|                  |                        |                        |
|  |dg|                  |                        |                        |
|  |et|                  |                        |                        |
|  |20|                  |                        |                        |
|  |07|                  |                        |                        |
|   |                                                                       |
|23 |Develop and agree process in Parliament for Budget 2006 legislative    |
|   |phase                                                                  |
|24 |JBC finalises process                                                  |
|28 |JBC holds hearings                                                     |
|31 |JBC reviews successes and failures of process for Budget 2006 and make |
|   |recommendations for Budget 2007                                        |
|33 |JBC request spending department cash flow projections for remainder of |
|   |2005, and 2006                                                         |
|   |JBC reviews engagement with Budget 2005, adjust activities forward     |
|41 |Finalise programme and budget                                          |
|42|JB|                  |                        |                        |
|  |C |                  |                        |                        |
|  |su|                  |                        |                        |
|  |bm|                  |                        |                        |
|  |it|                  |                        |                        |
|  |s |                  |                        |                        |
|  |st|                  |                        |                        |
|  |ra|                  |                        |                        |
|  |te|                  |                        |                        |
|  |gi|                  |                        |                        |
|  |c |                  |                        |                        |
|  |pl|                  |                        |                        |
|  |an|                  |                        |                        |
|  |to|                  |                        |                        |
|  |Pa|                  |                        |                        |
|  |rl|                  |                        |                        |
|  |ia|                  |                        |                        |
|  |me|                  |                        |                        |
|  |nt|                  |                        |                        |
|   |                                                                       |
|46 |JBC finalises committee structure, interface with Portfolio and Select |
|   |Committees (Streamline with rows 11, 24)                               |
|54                     |Quarterly meetings to |                |
|                       |review strategic      |                |
|                       |effectiveness of      |                |
|                       |programme, structures |                |
|                       |and activities        |                |
|                       |(streamline with rows |                |
|                       |20,21, 30 and 43)     |                |
|Budget Oversight       |Interrogate           |All             |
|                       |Departmental Budgets  |                |
|                       |with a view to        |                |
|                       |monitoring the        |                |
|                       |allocation of funds   |                |
|                       |for issues relating to|                |
|                       |youth                 |                |
|Mainstreaming Strategy |Ensure that           |To be assigned  |
|                       |mainstreaming strategy|                |
|                       |is applied to all     |                |
|                       |Departments (focus on |                |
|                       |Target Departments for|                |
|                       |this financial year)  |                |
|National Youth Service |Ensure that Youth have|DPSA            |
|                       |access to bursaries in|Department of   |
|                       |Science and Technology|Finance         |
|                       |as per the national   |Department of   |
|                       |commitment of the     |Education       |
|                       |Minister of Finance   |                |
|                       |                      |                |
|HIV and AIDS and TB    |Ensure that grants for|Social          |
|                       |child headed          |Development     |
|                       |households are        |Department of   |
|                       |distributed           |Health          |
|                       |effectively           |                |
|Support to Programmatic|Ensure Youth are      |• Agriculture   |
|Work of Various        |trained in            |and Land Affairs|
|Departments            |Agribusiness and as   |                |
|                       |emerging farmers      |                |
|                       |                      |                |
|Website                |To be assigned        |                |
|Youth Toll Free Line/  |To be assigned        |                |
|Youth Information      |                      |                |
|Guide/ Youth           |                      |                |
|Information Services   |                      |                |
|Economic               |Ensure employment of  |Public works    |
|Participation/Relations|Youth through the     |DOL             |
|hips with Umsobomvu    |Extended Public Works |DWAF            |
|Youth Fund             |Programme             |DEAT            |
|                       |DOL placement of      |Agriculture and |
|                       |Learnership candidates|Land Affairs    |
|                       |–% of jobs created    |                |
|                       |focused on youths     |                |
|                       |                      |                |
|                       |Ensure Youth          |                |
|                       |entrepreneurship with |DTI             |
|                       |a focus on Youth      |DEAT            |
|                       |Co-ops (Agri and Trade|(Provincial)    |
|                       |and Industry)         |DEAT(National)  |
|                       |                      |                |
|                       |Ensure that Youth are |                |
|                       |absorbed in franchises|                |
|                       |and that training is  |DTI             |
|                       |provided              |DEAT            |
|                       |                      |(Provincial)    |
|                       |                      |DEAT(National)  |
|Local Government       |To be assigned        |                |
|Capacity Building      |Ensure access for     |DPSA            |
|                       |Youth on Bursaries    |DOF             |
|                       |focusing on Science   |Department of   |
|                       |and Technology as per |Education       |
|                       |the national          |                |
|                       |commitment from the   |                |
|                       |Minister of Finance   |                |
|                       |                      |                |
|                       |                      |DPSA            |
|                       |Ensure access to      |DOL             |
|                       |Learnerships (5% of   |                |
|                       |each Departments      |                |
|                       |establishment)        |                |
|                       |                      |                |



3.27  Children


As protection of the vulnerable includes children, the Committee identified
the media and its impact on the young as a key area to be monitored.

|Strategic Focus Area  |Action for Committee  |Target           |
|                      |                      |Departments      |
|Budget Oversight      |Interrogate           |Sport            |
|                      |Departmental Budgets  |Social           |
|                      |with a view to        |Development      |
|                      |monitoring the        |DOE              |
|                      |allocation of funds   |DOL              |
|                      |for issues relating to|                 |
|                      |children              |                 |
|Mainstreaming Strategy|Ensure that           |All              |
|                      |mainstreaming strategy|                 |
|                      |is applied to target  |                 |
|                      |departments           |                 |
|Media                 |Ensure that Media     |Communications   |
|                      |Houses are screening  |ICASA            |
|                      |programmes for        |BCCSA            |
|                      |Violence, Language,   |DOE              |
|                      |Nudity, Sex and       |                 |
|                      |Prejudice             |                 |
|Safety in Schools     |Ensure that issues of |DOE, DOL, Safety |
|                      |safety and security in|and Security,    |
|                      |schools are dealt with|SAPS, Sport,     |
|                      |at a                  |Presidency       |
|                      |policy/implementation |                 |
|                      |level                 |                 |
|Recreational Services |Ensure appropriate    |Sport, Arts and  |
|                      |recreational services |Culture, DOL,    |
|                      |are developed for     |Safety and       |
|                      |Children              |Security, SAPS,  |
|                      |                      |Local Government |
|                      |                      |(SALGA),         |
|                      |                      |Presidency       |
|Interface with civil  |To be assigned        |                 |
|society               |                      |                 |
|Early Childhood       |Ensure that resources |DOE, DOL, DOH,   |
|Development (ECD)     |and policy development|Social           |
|                      |are assigned to ECD   |Development,     |
|                      |                      |Presidency       |
|Policy Gaps           |Ensure that policy    |DOE, DOH, DOL,   |
|                      |gaps are identified   |Sport, Arts and  |
|                      |and policies are      |Culture,         |
|                      |developed             |Presidency       |
|Database Development  |Ensure that a database|STATS SA, DOE,   |
|                      |is developed and      |DOH, Safety and  |
|                      |updated for tracking  |Security, SAPS,  |
|                      |and monitoring issues |Presidency       |
|                      |affecting Children    |                 |
|Legislation           |Ensure that all       |All              |
|                      |legislation affecting |                 |
|                      |children is monitored |                 |
|                      |for compliance. Ensure|                 |
|                      |that public           |                 |
|                      |participation         |                 |
|                      |processes are complied|                 |
|                      |with respect to the   |                 |
|                      |processing of         |                 |
|                      |legislation           |                 |
|Children’s Day        |Ensure that Programmes|All              |
|                      |are included in all   |                 |
|                      |Department’s plans    |                 |
|                      |with regard to        |                 |
|                      |celebratory events    |                 |
|                      |such as Children’s’   |                 |
|                      |Day                   |                 |
|Follow up on Reports  |Ensure follow up with |Refer to Report  |
|                      |the relevant          |for target       |
|                      |Departments on the    |departments      |
|                      |implementation of     |                 |
|                      |recommendations       |                 |
|                      |contained in the      |                 |
|                      |report of the Task    |                 |
|                      |Group on the Sexual   |                 |
|                      |Abuse of Children.    |                 |


                           3.28  Disabled Persons


The principle of “Nothing About Us, Without Us” is the principle that needs
to be reflected in all aspects of Departments’ strategies and policies.

|Strategic Focus  |Action for Committee     |Target Departments|
|Area             |                         |                  |
|Budget Oversight |Interrogate Departmental |All               |
|                 |budgets with a view to   |                  |
|                 |monitoring the allocation|                  |
|                 |of funds for issues      |                  |
|                 |relating to disabled     |                  |
|                 |persons                  |                  |
|Presidency       |Ensure unnecessary delays|Committee to      |
|                 |in policy implementation |address directly  |
|                 |are addressed            |                  |
|Mainstreaming    |Ensure that mainstreaming|All               |
|Strategy         |strategy is applied to   |                  |
|                 |target Departments       |                  |
|Transport        |Ensure meaningful        |Transport         |
|                 |accessibility to public  |Public Works      |
|                 |transport and related    |DPSA              |
|                 |facilities               |DOL               |
|Health           |Ensure the following     |DOH               |
|                 |Health Care priorities   |DOE               |
|                 |are focused on:          |                  |
|                 |Access to healthcare     |                  |
|                 |Early childhood          |                  |
|                 |development for children |                  |
|                 |with disabilities        |                  |
|                 |Disability detection and |                  |
|                 |assessment               |                  |
|                 |Rehabilitation           |                  |
|Social           |Ensure drafting of a     |Social Development|
|Development      |definition and assessment|                  |
|                 |of disability            |                  |
|                 |Ensure adequate provision|                  |
|                 |of social grants for     |                  |
|                 |poverty alleviation      |                  |
|Trade & Industry |Ensure development of an |DTI               |
|                 |Economic Participation   |DOL               |
|                 |Programme                |DOE               |
|Labour           |Ensure Skills development|DOE               |
|                 |is implemented           |                  |
|                 |Ensure Employment Equity,|                  |
|                 |Basic Conditions of      |                  |
|                 |Employment, Code of Good |                  |
|                 |Practice are applied     |                  |
|Education        |Ensure access to         |DOE               |
|                 |(inclusive) education and|Social Development|
|                 |school feeding           |                  |
|Housing          |Ensure access to         |Housing           |
|                 |construction             |                  |
|                 |Ensure access to         |                  |
|                 |accessible accommodation |                  |
|                 |and ownership            |                  |
|Communication    |Ensure access to         |Communication     |
|                 |broadcasting and         |DOL               |
|                 |communication            |ICASA             |
|                 |Ensure access to         |BCCSA             |
|                 |information technology   |                  |
|                 |Ensure skills development|                  |
|                 |and employment           |                  |
|                 |opportunities in         |                  |
|                 |broadcasting             |                  |
|Public Service   |Ensure implementation of |DPSA              |
|                 |the Presidential review  |                  |
|                 |with regard to Batho Pele|                  |
|                 |Ensure implementation of |                  |
|                 |Community Development    |                  |
|                 |Workers                  |                  |
|Science &        |Ensure promotion and     |Science and       |
|Technology       |development of Braille as|Technology        |
|                 |an augmentative tool for |                  |
|                 |readers who require it   |                  |
|Arts & Culture   |Ensure development and   |Arts and Culture  |
|                 |promotion of sign        |                  |
|                 |language                 |                  |
|                 |Ensure economic          |                  |
|                 |development and skills   |                  |
|                 |development through the  |                  |
|                 |Arts                     |                  |
|Public Works     |Ensure accessibility to  |DPSA              |
|                 |Public Buildings and     |                  |
|                 |services                 |                  |
|Provincial and   |Ensure access to service |Local Government  |
|Local Government |delivery and             |(SALGA)           |
|                 |implementation of        |                  |
|                 |Indigent Policy          |                  |


     3.29  The following key issues were highlighted by all the groups:


    • Unnecessary delays in the  development  of  programme  policy  in  the
      Office of the Presidency;
    • An input has been made to the MTEF to assist with  the  needs  of  the
      OSDP. A suggestion was made that tax should be directed  to  the  OSDP
      and contribute to disabled persons in the economy;
    • Inter-Departmental collaboration is weak;
    • Line Department responses with regard to Youth, Children and  Disabled
      Persons are not forthcoming. In 2001, only 3 Departments responded  to
      Disability alignment;
    • Staff who advocate for Youth, Children and Disabled Persons issues are
      normally at a low level in the organisation. This is  not  aligned  to
      the national priority provided by the placement of Youth, Children and
      Disabled Persons in the Presidency;
    • The monitoring of Provincial Departments was raised as  a  problem  as
      there is currently no link with the Provinces;
    • A lack of an overall communication strategy was highlighted by all
      three groups;
    • The lack of a link between the work of the JMC QLS of Youth,  Children
      and Disabled Persons was raised with regard to how Committee  work  is
      taken to the Constituencies;
    • The need was raised for identifying national priorities; and
    • The National Plan of Action is being updated. The issue raised here
      related to the need for a Provincial Plan of Action to enable holistic
      oversight of issues relating to Youth, Children and Disabled Persons.




3.30  Operating Principles


It was suggested the following principles be adopted to ensure effective
delivery on the mandate of the Committee:


      • Dedicated membership of the Committee
      • Scheduling of meetings to avoid clashes and provide adequate
        resources for the Committee to do its work; and
      • Scheduling to facilitate Committee sub-group effectiveness


3.31  Support


The Committee requires a much more comprehensive and focused support  system
to fulfil its mandate. Therefore, it must be very clear on its  deliverables
so that the appropriate support is provided  to  it.  The  existing  support
structure is able to provide this support  to  a  limited  degree.  However,
this is set to change as an investigation is  currently  being  commissioned
to propose a robust support structure for Committees in Parliament.

A proposal was forwarded for a  Committee  Support  Coordinator  to  oversee
Secretarial support, Research support and Administrative support.


In terms of systems  and  procedures,  Members  felt  that  current  support
provision  is  not  adequate  with  regard  to  document   management,   the
production  process,   prioritisation,   research,   meeting   and   hearing
preparation, follow-through and staff management.

The proposals regarding more effective support for this Committee included:

      • A shared support structure in which legal, research and information
        services work as a technical support team.

Integral to the success of this support team, the Committee has to:


      • Have regular briefings with the team
      • Assist with the scrutiny of issues
      • Track issues with the team
      • Assist in developing tools for use by the team
      • Identify emerging issues for the benefit of the Team and the
        Committee

3.32  Method of Work


The Committee has to decide on a  range  of  tools  to  use  to  manage  its
oversight function. Amongst these are:


      • Tools used in plenary (questions, motions, statements, debates);
      • Tools used as part of the oversight function (public hearings, site
        visits); and
      • Tools  used  in  ensuring  the  legislative  process  (tracking  of
        legislative process, briefings).


The Committee needs to redefine  its  operating  structure  and  systems  to
enable it to fulfil its mandate with regard to its  role  of  oversight  and
monitoring.  According  to  a  discussion  document  on  the  Mandates   and
Functioning  of  Joint  Monitoring  Committees,  it  was  found   that   the
Committee’s  monitoring  role  is  specifically  related  to   “Government’s
commitments”. Further, the Committee as  a  Forum  of  Parliament  would  be
expected to focus  its  role  on  the  national  sphere  of  government  (in
accordance  with  the  principles  of  co-operative  and   intergovernmental
relations in the Constitution, Chapter 3) 4


What this means for the Committee is  that  it  has  to  monitor  and  track
national  policy,  programmes  and  budgets.  The  Committee’s  mandate   is
specific and multi-sectoral covering all national Departments and Organs  of
State.

However, practical issues relating to the quality of life and status of
Youth, Children and Disabled Persons are often experienced directly at
community or provincial level. It has been suggested that the provincial
legislatures establish similar committees to monitor compliance on a
provincial level. This would allow for meaningful interaction with the
Committee and would result in the Committee having a comprehensive “window”
on national and provincial competences concerning Youth, Children and
Disabled Persons.

Bills that are brought before Parliament may respond to particular policy
directives affecting Youth, Children and Disabled Persons directly or
indirectly. The Committee should therefore scan all Bills for impact on the
Quality of Life and Status of Youth, Children and Disabled Persons. The
Committee would have to engage with relevant Committees on any issues of
concern in a Bill.



In monitoring progress it would also engage  with  specific  Departments  on
the implementation of relevant provisions  (affecting  Youth,  Children  and
Disabled Persons) when Bills are enacted.

The Committee can on its own initiative also scan departmental  reports  and
other papers that are tabled.

As a basis for carrying  out  its  role,  the  Committee  should  compile  a
register of international commitments entered into by government.


In exercising its functions, the Committee has agreed, together with the
Office of the Presidency, in particular with the (ORC), (YC), and the
(OSDP), to engage in a more constructive manner so that the Committee might
fulfill its mandate more effectively.


3.33  Meetings and Scheduling of Meetings



One of the difficulties experienced by the Committee was the effective
scheduling of meetings and the availability of Members for these meetings.


By virtue of  being  joint  structures,  the  Committee  has  difficulty  in
scheduling meetings to accommodate the activities and  programming  of  both
Houses. A schedule was developed by the previous Chairperson  of  Committees
in the NA, in which it was agreed to set aside Fridays for Joint  Monitoring
Committees. This was not successful as Committee members  still  experienced
clashes with NCOP meetings scheduled  for  Fridays  and  Members  were  also
unavailable due to other commitments.


The current situation requires creative  planning  and  scheduling  to  deal
with this problem. It was suggested that meetings be planned in advance  and
placed on the Order Paper and that Members prioritise Committee meetings.


In addition, the Committee should  make  use  of  an  integrated  electronic
scheduling system to facilitate easy access  and  information  sharing.  The
Committee could then schedule meetings at short notice to  scan  Bills,  for
instance, as it would have an overall view of all meetings scheduled.

3.34  Committee Views

The Committee resolved that it should strengthen its ties with all  relevant
departments by working  closely  with  Director-Generals  and  all  relevant
Committees in  Parliament,  tracking  all  legislation  that  has  a  direct
bearing on the Committee.  This  will  be  done  by  deploying  one  or  two
representatives  in  these  meetings,  ensuring   that   matters   affecting
children, youth and disabled persons are properly addressed and attended  to
prior the finalization of such legislation.

The Committee acknowledged that unemployment is global problem  and  advised
that youth can do voluntary services e.g. in police or military service  for
them to learn.  The Committee has to hold  briefings,  hearing  of  evidence
and write letters where necessary and to solicit research capacity form  the
office of Dr Gabriel and in the office of legal advisors within  Parliament.
 The Committee  can  also  write  letters  to  SALGA  and  to  Provinces  to
establish on how issues are mainstreamed.  The Committee  acknowledged  that
the NCOP would have a more dynamic interaction with Provinces.   Furthermore
in future engagements, the Umsobomvu Youth Fund  should  appear  before  the
Committee to brief it on its functions and progress and  problems  if  there
are any.  It should have a  similar  working  relationship  with  the  other
three sectors.

The Committee has to improve on communication,  there  is  a  need  to  take
these matters beyond Parliament and the society needs to be  informed  in  a
manner that would make them really understand issues.  The  Committee  needs
to have a database e.g. on all the reports that come to it by liaising  with
the Minister Pahad’s office, source out information  on  Budget  Vote1  e.g.
establish the role of the Committee in the budget process.  It is  the  view
of  the  Committee  that  the  creation  of  subcommittees   would   curtail
absenteeism in meetings, which is caused mainly by the clashes  of  meetings
among other reasons.

4.    RECOMMENDATIONS

The Committee made the following recommendations:

      • Subcommittees should be formulated and the Committee has  to  elect
        conveners and agree on the functional areas  of  those  committees,
        targeting  priority  areas  that  they  have   to   cover.    These
        subcommittees  have  to  find  creative  and  effective   ways   of
        researching areas of interest that are relevant to their  theme  by
        using the right tools e.g. strategic plans of relevant departments,
        budget speeches and by referring to the State of the Nation Address
        content.
      • The Committee can propose amendments through available channels  to
        the Rules Committee.
      • The parent Committee should meet once a month or  once  a  term  to
        deliberate and finalise the business of  the  subcommittees  or  to
        consider reports of the work of its subcommittees.
      • The subcommittees would meet at times convenient for all members of
        that particular subcommittee.  The  convener  will  work  with  the
        Chairperson, the Deputy Chairperson and the Committee Secretary  to
        ensure  the  smooth  running  of  the  process.   The  subcommittee
        meetings should be advertised in the order paper.
      • Both the Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson should  be  present
        in all the subcommittees whenever they convene.
      • There should be a standard format of reporting (a Dynamic Reporting
        Mechanism)
      • The Committee should get reports of the Employment Equity  Act  and
        Skills  Development  Act  among  other  relevant   legislation   to
        establish the extent to which the Department of Labour  managed  to
        address matters affecting the development of  Children,  Youth  and
        Disabled Persons.
      • The Committee requires a Subject  Specialist  that  will  help  the
        Committee to fulfil its mandate
      • Reciprocal communication – inter-sectoral,  inter-departmental  and
        inter-governmental  collaboration  has  to  be  strengthened,   the
        Committee should invite relevant departments, relevant  sectors  to
        give an account of their respective budgets  on  disability,  youth
        and  children.   It  can  also  invite  or  write  letters  to  the
        communities or local government to check on the  level  of  support
        given for the projects and programmes aimed at the  improvement  of
        quality of life and status of children, youth and disabled persons.
      • It is critical for  the  Committee  to  call  Disability  Units  to
        account  on  their  budget  so  that  the  Committee  can  make   a
        determination on whether the money allocated to them is  enough  or
        not enough for these units to function optimally.
      • The Committee has to look at  the  programme  of  the  Medium  Term
        Expenditure Framework (MTEF), hold discussions with  the  MTEF,  be
        aware of the its time frames and work according to the cycle of the
        MTEF so that it can be better positioned to raise issues  affecting
        its work timeously.
      • The Committee would report to both Houses on the work  that  it  is
        doing

5.    CONCLUSION

The Committee could not formulate its programme for 2005 to 2006 due to  the
work that members had  to  cover  within  the  two  days  of  the  strategic
planning workshop. It was important for the Committee to first wait for  the
report that would emanate form the workshop in  order  to  come  up  with  a
comprehensive programme. The Committee agreed to hold a follow  up  workshop
for this purpose. The Committee took a resolution that it  would  report  to
both Houses on its work and follow up on  its  recommendations  by  checking
the implementation thereof

6.    APPENDAGES


   WORKFLOW, OPERATING MODEL, STRUCTURE AND INTEGRATED
   OVERSIGHT MODEL


The following diagrams  present  a  workflow,  an  operating  model,  and  a
structure, and an integrated oversight model for the Committee.

   JMC ON IMPROVEMENT OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH, CHILDREN AND
                          DISABLED PERSONS WORKFLOW



































                                          Designed by Consultancy In Session







International Conventions inform the policy and strategy positions with
regard to Youth, Children and Disabled Persons. The Presidency houses
Offices representing Youth, Children and Disabled Persons. Oversight of the
Executive is enabled through Departments, which are responsible for
governance, management and implementation. Amongst others, the Committee
monitors and tracks Legislation, Programmes and Budgets of Departments for
compliance with the rights of Youth, Children and Disabled Persons.

   JMC ON IMPROVEMENT OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH, AND DISABLED
                           PERSONS OPERATING MODEL

































                                          Designed by Consultancy In Session






The strategic planning process for the Committee is based on the
Constitutional mandate of the Committee. Its Vision and Mission are its
strategic statements of intent.

The Operating Model, consisting of an appropriate organizational design
structure, systems (Committee Programme and reporting systems) and
Committee support, will ensure successful service delivery.













   JMC ON IMPROVEMENT OF QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH AND
                  DISABLED PERSONS STRUCTURE AND SUB GROUPS






























                                          Designed by Consultancy In Session


The structure for the Committee is as follows:

      • A core committee consisting of 24 fulltime Members and 10
        alternates;
      • A convenor for each of the 3 sub-groups namely, Youth, Children and
        Disabled;
      • A Working group consisting of selected Members. The Chair or Deputy
        Chair rove within these groups;
      • Focal Points to streamline Committee delivery as mandated; and
      • Partnerships with relevant institutions to enhance strategic impact
            of the Committee.




JMC QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF YOUTH, CHILDREN AND DISABLED PERSONS
INTEGRATED OVERSIGHT MODEL











































There are various ways in which oversight takes place. Amongst these are:

      • Departmental Hearings;
      • Visits (National and International);
      • Committee initiatives; and
      • Referrals of reports from the House(s).


The information gathered during this process is evaluated, monitored and
tracked by the Committee in partnership with the YC, ORC and OSDP, as well
as other related role-players. The oversight function is active when
challenges and gaps are identified and solutions are defined and channelled
to the appropriate source.

The workshop resolved that:

      The  breakaway  sessions  were  useful  in  mapping  the   Committee’s
        direction with regard to children, youth and disabled persons,  but
        more work will be required to develop a comprehensive work plan for
        the Committee;


      The Committee will have a follow-up meeting (possibly in the form of a
        workshop) to develop its programme, based on information  assembled
        during this workshop; and


      The interaction between the Committee and  the  3  Programmes  in  the
        Presidency must be significantly enhanced.




   2.    Report of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Amendment Regulations to
    Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act, dated 12 August
                                    2005:

      The Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Amendment Regulations to Public  Funding
      of  Represented  Political  Parties  Act,  having   considered   draft
      amendment  regulations  tabled  by  the  Minister  for   Justice   and
      Constitutional Development on 22 July 2005, referred to it, recommends
      to the President, in terms of section 10(1) of the Public  Funding  of
      Represented Political Parties Act, 1997 (Act No. 103  of  1997),  that
      the said regulations be amended to read as follows:


                                  SCHEDULE


      Definitions


           1.  In this Schedule "the  Regulations"  means  the  regulations
      published under Government Notice No.  R 117 of 20 November 1998.


      Amendment of Regulation 5 of the Regulations

            2.   Regulation 5 of the Regulations is hereby amended—
      (a)   by the substitution  for  subregulation  (1)  of  the  following
subregulation:
              "(1) Subject to subregulation (3), all allocations to which a
           political  party  is  entitled  as  determined   in   terms   of
           regulations 3 and 4, must be paid  to  the  political  party  in
           question in four equal instalments, each within three months  of
           the previous payment.  The first instalment must be paid  within
           four weeks of the beginning of the financial year in question.";
            and
      (b)   by the addition of the following subregulation:
             "(3) (a) The Commission must, within ten days after the date on
           which the Speaker of a  legislature  has  published  the  notice
           contemplated in item 5(3) of Schedule 6A to the Constitution, re-
           allocate in accordance with the provisions of regulations 3  and
           4, as the case may be, fifty (50) per cent of the  total  amount
           of funding determined  in  terms  of  regulation  2(1)  for  the
           financial year in question to the political parties that, at the
           expiry of the period referred to in item 5(3) of Schedule 6A  to
           the Constitution, qualify for the allocation of moneys from  the
           Fund in terms of section 5 of the Act.
             (b) All allocations to which a political party is  entitled  in
           terms of paragraph (a), must be paid to the political  party  in
           question in two equal instalments.  The first instalment must be
           paid within the first fifteen days of  October  and  the  second
           instalment must be paid within the first fifteen days of January
           of the financial year in question.".

      Amendment of Regulation 8 of the Regulations

           3.  Regulation 8 of the Regulations is  hereby  amended  by  the
      substitution for subregulation (2) of the following subregulation:
             "(2) The information required for the purposes of subregulation
           (1) must be furnished to the Commission—
           (a)   by the accounting officer referred to in section  6(1)  of
               the Act within three months after the end of  the  financial
               year in question;  or
           b) in the case of a  political  party  contemplated  in  section
              6A(3) of the Act, by the person who last held the  office  of
              accounting officer referred to in section 6(1) of the Act  of
              that party or, if he or she is not available, the  leader  of
              that party within two months after the date on which a  party
              is required to close its books  and  records  of  account  in
              terms of section 6A(4) of the Act.".



    National Assembly


1.    Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Appointment of Deputy Public
    Protector, dated 10 August 2005:

       The Ad Hoc Committee on Appointment of Deputy Public Protector,
       having been appointed by the House on 17 May 2005 to make a
       nomination to the House in order to enable it to recommend to the
       President in terms of section 2A(1) of the Public Protector Act (Act
       No 23 of 1994) a person for appointment as Deputy Public Protector,
       reports as follows:


       The Committee invited the public to submit nominations to it.
       Nominations were received in respect of 10 candidates, 9 males and 1
       female.


       The Committee met on 2 August 2005 to consider the nominations. On
       10 August 2005, however, the Committee felt that there was not
       sufficient gender representation, and therefore resolved to
       readvertise for further nominations.


       The Committee therefore requests the House to extend the deadline of
       18 August 2005 by which it was required to report, to 20 October
       2005.


    Report to be considered.

2.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development on the Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill [B 22 -  2005]
    (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 19 August 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
    having considered the subject of the Constitutional  Matters  Amendment
    Bill [B 22 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75),  referred  to  it  and
    classified by the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  as  a  section  75  Bill,
    endorses the classification of the  Bill  and  reports  the  Bill  with
    amendments [B 22A - 2005].
    The Committee wishes to report further, as follows:


      1.    During its deliberations on the Bill, the Committee  noted  that
           the Public Funding of Represented Political  Parties  Act,  1997
           (Act 103 of 1997) (the Funding Act), already  provides  for  two
           scenarios where a political party has to repay to the  Electoral
           Commission the unspent balances of all  moneys  that  have  been
           allocated to it in terms  of  section  5  of  the  Funding  Act,
           namely—
           (a)    where  a  political  party  ceases  to  qualify  for  the
                 allocation  of  moneys  from  the   Represented   Political
                 Parties’ Fund (the Fund) (existing section 5(4));  and
           (b)    if  Parliament  and  every  provincial  legislature   are
                 dissolved in terms of the Constitution or if Parliament  or
                 any provincial legislature is so  dissolved  in  any  other
                 circumstances (existing section 9(3) and (4)).

      2.    The provisions of the new section 6A that are to be inserted  in
           the Funding Act create a third scenario where a political  party
           has to repay to the Electoral Commission the unspent balances of
           all moneys that have been allocated to it in terms of section  5
           of the Funding Act, namely where  a  political  party,  after  a
           window  for  "floor  crossing",  ceases  to  qualify   for   the
           allocation of moneys from the Fund in terms of section 5 of  the
           Funding Act.  The Committee, during  its  deliberations  on  the
           Bill, deemed it appropriate to regulate the repayment of unspent
           balances of moneys in terms of the new section 6A in more detail
           than the repayment of unspent balances of  moneys  is  presently
           regulated in the existing sections 5(4) and 9(3) and (4) of  the
           Funding Act.


      3.    The new section  6A(8)  empowers  the  Electoral  Commission  to
           appoint  a  public  accountant  and   auditor   registered   and
           practising as such in  terms  of  the  Public  Accountants'  and
           Auditors' Act, 1991 (Act No. 80 of 1991),  to,  amongst  others,
           audit the books and records of account kept in terms of  section
           6 of the Funding Act by a political party that—
           (a)   ceases to qualify for the allocation of  moneys  from  the
                 Fund in terms of section 5  of  the  Funding  Act  after  a
                 window for "floor crossing";  and
           (b)   consequently, has to repay to the Electoral Commission the
                 unspent balances of the moneys allocated to it.
           The question has been raised whether this power  should  not  be
           extended to instances─
           (i)   where the accounting officer of a political  party,  after
                 the end of a financial year, fails to have  the  books  and
                 records of  account  of  the  party  audited  by  a  public
                 accountant and auditor  and,  subsequently,  to  submit  an
                 auditor’s report and audited  statement  to  the  Electoral
                 Commission as required by section 6 of the Funding Act;  or
           (ii)  where the Electoral Commission  is  dissatisfied  with  an
                 auditor’s report and audited statement so submitted.


      4.    The Committee also deemed it desirable to insert a  new  section
           9A in the Funding Act providing for certain offences that  could
           be committed by the accounting officer or leader of a  political
           party that has to repay, in terms of the  new  section  6A,  the
           unspent balances of all moneys that have been allocated to it in
           terms of section 5 of the Funding Act.   Those  offences  could,
           however, not be made applicable to the  accounting  officers  of
           political parties that have to repay their unspent  balances  of
           moneys in terms of sections 5(4) and 9(3)(b) and  (4)(b)(ii)  of
           the Funding Act, as no provision is made in those sections as to
           who will be responsible for repaying the unspent balances to the
           Commission.


      5.    Due to the urgency of having the Bill passed by  Parliament  and
           implemented before the next window  for  "floor  crossing"  that
           starts on 1 September 2005, the Committee was not in a  position
           to—
           (a)   investigate the desirability of—
                 (i)   bringing the provisions of the existing sections 5(4)
                       and 9(3) and (4) of the Funding Act  into  line  with
                       the new section 6A and to consider the  consequences,
                       if any, of such alignment;
                 (ii)  empowering the  Electoral  Commission  to  appoint  a
                       public accountant and auditor in instances where  the
                       accounting officer of a political  party,  after  the
                       end of a financial year, fails to have the books  and
                       records of account of the party audited by  a  public
                       accountant and auditor as required by  section  6  of
                       the Funding Act or where the Electoral Commission  is
                       dissatisfied with an  auditor’s  report  and  audited
                       statement  so  submitted  to  it  in  terms  of  that
                       section;
                 (iii) making the offences created in  the  new  section  9A
                       applicable to the accounting  officers  of  political
                       parties that have to repay their unspent balances  of
                       moneys in terms of  sections  5(4)  and  9(3)(b)  and
                       (4)(b)(ii) of the Funding Act;  and
                 (iv)  contemplating  appropriate  sanctions  for  political
                       parties which or  accounting  officers  of  political
                       parties who contravene or fail  to  comply  with  the
                       provisions of section 6 of the Funding Act;  and
           (b)   obtain the formal views of the Electoral Commission on the
                 above matters.


      6.    In the light of the above, the  Committee  recommends  that  the
           Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development be requested
           to direct her Department to investigate the matters referred  to
           in  paragraph  5  above  with  a  view  of  submitting  amending
           legislation,  if  necessary,  to  Parliament  at  the   earliest
           opportunity.


Report to be considered.


                           TUESDAY, 23 AUGUST 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 22 August 2005 in terms of Joint
    Rule 160(4), classified the Repeal of Black Administration Act and
    Amendment of Certain Laws Bill [B 25 – 2005], introduced in the
    National Assembly, as a section 76 Bill and as a Bill falling within
    the ambit of section 18(1)(a) of the Traditional Leadership and
    Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No. 41 of 2003).

National Assembly

The Speaker
1.    Membership of Assembly

      (a)   The following member vacated his seat in the National Assembly
         with effect from 16 August 2005:

            Henderson, R K.

      (b)   The vacancy which occurred owing to the resignation of his seat
         in the National Assembly by Mr R K Henderson with effect from 16
         August 2005 had been filled with effect from 17 August 2005 by the
         nomination of Ms S J Loe.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve Bank
         for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

      b) Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of Southern
         Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


      c) Activities Report of the Development Bank of Southern Africa for
         2004-2005.


      d) Development Bank of Southern Africa – Footprints of Development
         2001-2005.


      e) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board for
         2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 51-2005].


      f) Government Notice No 1114 published in Government Gazette No 27773
         dated 15 July 2005: Amendment of the list of public entities as
         contained in schedule 2 and 3 of the Public Finance Management Act,
         1999.


2.    The Minister of Communications


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Broadcasting
         Corporation (SABC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      a) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
         Mr K Sulliman, an additional magistrate at the Durban Magistrate
         Court.


      b) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
         Mr M S E Khumalo, magistrate and Head of office at the Amsterdam
         Magistrate Court.
      c) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
         Mr M F Mathe, an additional magistrate at the Pine Town Magistrate
         Court.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the Budget
      Hearings, dated 22 June 2005:

1. Introduction

1.1   The Portfolio Committee on Transport conducted a series of budget
      hearings in Parliament between the 9th March and 18th May 2005. The
      hearings covered the Department of Transport, as well as all of the
      public entities that fall under the national transport budget: the
      South African Rail Commuter Corporation, the South African National
      Roads Agency Limited, the Road Accident Fund, the Cross-Border Road
      Transport Agency, the South African Maritime Safety Authority, the
      South African Civil Aviation Authority, the Road Traffic Management
      Corporation, the Railway Safety Regulator, the Air Traffic and
      Navigation Services Company, and the Airports Company of South Africa.
      The Urban Transport Fund will now be incorporated into the
      Department’s budget and will no longer be a separate reporting entity.
1.2   In the hearings, the Committee focused on assessing whether the
      transport budget made adequate provision for the strategic plans of
      the Department and of the public entities. The hearings were also used
      as an opportunity to discuss the appropriateness of the major
      objectives of these various strategic plans.

1.3   In regard to this general approach, the Committee notes that, while
      the Department complied with the requirement that departmental
      strategic plans be tabled seven days before the relevant budget vote
      in the National Assembly, one week is entirely inadequate for an
      effective public hearings process. The Department did, indeed, provide
      the committee with an advance draft version of the strategic plan, and
      we commend them for this. Our concern is not with the Department, but
      with the need to improve the general approach of Parliament to the
      budget hearings and votes.

1.4   In the course of our hearings many matters of detail emerged, some
      indicating important progress, others indicating areas that require
      attention. The Committee will follow up on all of these matters in
      detail. In this report we highlight some of the major features of the
      Transport Budget, and we note some significant areas of concern.

2.    The National Department of Transport
2.1   The department’s budget for 2005/6 is aligned to and generally
      supports an important organisational restructuring underway within the
      department. In the previous year, the Portfolio Committee expressed
      some concern about the department’s organisational design. It was not
      always clear why some functions belonged to one programme rather than
      another. The Committee believes that the strategic objectives of the
      department and the alignment of departmental programmes are now
      significantly improved. In particular, the organisational changes, and
      the budget allocations to support these changes, provide greater focus
      to the critical area of transport regulation. Key areas of transport,
      which have tended to be somewhat neglected, the rail, aviation and
      maritime sectors, now also receive better attention in the new
      organisational design.

2.2   This year’s transport budget also more adequately reflects
      government’s overall strategic objective of leading a major and
      expanded infrastructural programme to lower the costs of doing
      business in South Africa, to address our developmental challenges, and
      to provide jobs. Additional allocations for passenger rail
      infrastructure, for instance, have been made – R500 million for the
      2005 budget, with a further R100 million and R250 million envisaged
      for the following budgets. In partnership with provinces, the
      Department has been active in revitalising a number of strategic
      branch lines that are critical to the economic and social
      sustainability and development of rural areas and towns. Work is
      nearing completion on the Kei Rail line in the Eastern Cape, and
      preliminary work has started on improving the Nkwaleni line in KZN and
      the Belmont-Douglas line in the Northern Cape.

2.3   The Committee is also tracking the infrastructural spending on road
      construction, upgrading and maintenance. R1, 5bn (up from R1, 1bn in
      2001/2) is earmarked in this budget for this purpose, and is almost
      entirely transferred through to the South African National Roads
      Agency Ltd. The Committee believes that closer monitoring and
      coordination is required of other road infrastructure funding,
      including funding allocated to expanded public works programmes,
      poverty relief and job creation.

2.4   The area of road traffic enforcement remains a major concern. This
      year’s budget sees a significantly increased allocation to the Road
      Traffic Management Corporation (R10, 7 million), but the RTMC has
      failed to function thus far. The Committee notes that the founding
      legislation was passed in 2000, and there has been a chief executive
      officer at the corporation for some two years already. Progress is now
      a matter of urgency and will need to be monitored closely in the
      coming period. The important Administrative Adjudication of Road
      Traffic Offences legislation has also still to be implemented by the
      Department.
2.5   Another area of significant challenge lies in meeting the
      Department’s objective of providing safe, affordable and efficient
      public transport. The Committee played an active role in helping to re-
      define the taxi recapitalisation programme, scaling it down from its
      original well intentioned but unworkable approach. We welcome the new
      scaled-down policy, and we welcome the Department’s assurance that it
      will continuously engage the SA National Taxi Council and all other
      relevant stakeholders as the process unfolds.

2.6   We also welcome the important budgetary increases provided for bus
      and rail subsidies – they are expected to grow (along with rail
      infrastructure spending) by 7,6 percent per year between 2004/5 and
      2007/8. However, we note that the institutional channels through which
      public transport subsidies are administered still tend to militate
      against achieving modally integrated public transport services. The
      rail subsidy is administered by a national agency, the South African
      Rail Commuter Corporation. Bus subsidies are transferred from the
      National Department to provinces. Minibuses, the major mode of public
      transport in our country, are not operationally subsidised, although
      the nationally administered recapitalisation programme will be a major
      capital subsidy.

      However, these different subsidy streams tend in practice to
      discourage rather than foster inter-modal integration of all forms of
      public transport at the local level. There is also an institutional
      disjuncture between urban spatial planning related to IDPs (a local
      government competence) and public transport subsidies that tend to be
      driven nationally or provincially. The Committee believes that in the
      coming years we must move towards a much more integrated approach to
      the subsidisation, planning and regulation of public transport.

2.7   In the previous Parliament, the Transport Portfolio Committee
      initiated the proposal that the South African Police Services should
      establish a dedicated transport unit. Although this falls under the
      Safety and Security budget, we are pleased to note that the SAPS has
      indeed trained and launched a pilot railway police unit for the Metro
      rail system in the Western Cape. We warmly welcome this development,
      and trust that it will be replicated elsewhere in the country. Working
      together with our counterparts in the Safety and Security Portfolio
      Committee, we will continue to monitor progress in this respect.

2.8   The Committee is satisfied that the Department and other relevant
      public entities in the transport field are beginning to gear-up for
      the 2010 World Soccer Cup Finals in South Africa. The event will
      present many public transport challenges. These challenges are,
      however, also an opportunity to undertake public transport initiatives
      that need to be addressed in any case. While we are satisfied that the
      relevant preparations are being undertaken, finalisation and much of
      the rolling-out of transport infrastructure will only be possible when
      firm decisions are taken in regard to venues. The Committee will
      continue to track developments on this front.

3.    Transport-related public entities

3.1   In its budget hearings the Committee also engaged with all the public
      entities reporting to the Minister of Transport (as listed in 1.1
      above). Many of these entities are functioning effectively in their
      respective areas – in particular, we note the work of the Air Traffic
      Navigation Services Agency, the South African National Roads Agency
      Limited and the Airports Company of South Africa. The Committee also
      noted an important improvement in the reporting to Parliament of the
      Cross-Border Road Transport Agency. However, some of the other public
      entities are facing complicated challenges and/or are failing to
      perform adequately.

3.2   The Committee has been monitoring the Public Finance Management Act
      compliance of the public entities falling under our budget. In this
      regard, the Department reported to the Committee that several public
      entities failed to meet the 30th September 2004 deadline for the
      submission of their audited reports. These entities were the SARCC,
      RAF, SAMSA, SACAA, CBRTA, RTMC and RSR. In the case of the CBRTA, this
      was the third time running that it has missed the annual deadline. The
      Committee also notes that the Auditor General gave qualified reports
      to the RAF, SARCC and SAMSA, and disclaimers to his reports on SANRAL
      and CBRTA.

3.3   The Road Accident Fund continues to be a major concern. There has
      been a significant increase in revenue for the fund from the fuel
      levy. Revenue grew from R2, 6 billion in 2001/2 to R4, 5 billion in
      2004/5. Despite this growth, the Fund’s expenditure has consistently
      outstripped revenue since 2001/2, exhausting its reserves. Total
      claims paid rose from R3.1bn in 2003 to R3, 99bn in 2004. There is a
      significant backlog of claims and the discounted actuarial liability
      of the Fund is of great concern. It is clear that the present
      situation is not sustainable. The underlying reasons for this
      situation are several and include poor management, significant levels
      of apparent corruption, and excessive payments to legal and medical
      professionals to the detriment of actual road accident claimants –
      itself the consequence of the often excessively litigious, fault-based
      system the RAF is mandated to operate. While important progress has
      been made in revamping management structures and in rooting out
      corruption, many of the problems of the Fund are of a more systemic
      kind. Government has accepted, in principle, the recommendations of
      the Road Accident Fund Commission, although affordability concerns
      remain. It is the view of the Committee that decisive and far-reaching
      decisions will have to be made about the Fund in the coming years.
      Piece-meal reforms, including the present RAF Amendment Bill with
      which the Committee is busy, may be helpful but will not get to the
      root of the challenges.

3.4   The Department is overseeing a process of integration of the South
      African Rail Commuter Corporation and Metro rail. The Committee
      supports this process, while appreciating that institutional
      integration is often a complex process. One such complexity is that
      the SARCC’s assets have been incorrectly valued. Generally Accepted
      Accounting Practice (GAAP) depreciates rail rolling stock over a 33-
      year period. When the SARCC was devolved out of the old SA Transport
      Services in 1990, for some reason the used rolling stock assets it
      then acquired were treated as if they, too, were new and the 33-year
      depreciation count started all over again. The assets of the SARCC
      have, therefore, been significantly over-valued, and it is for this
      reason that its recent audited reports have been qualified. A second
      major challenge facing the integration of SARCC and Metro rail lies in
      the funding flow.

      The SARCC has been operating as a public utility with a public service
      mandate, transferring the rail subsidy from the national budget
      through to the operator, Metro rail. However, Metro rail functions as
      a public enterprise and its estimated R950 million annual fare income
      is not passed back to SARCC, but on to its current parent company,
      Transnet. Achieving an effective integration of two public entities
      with somewhat different institutional mandates and cultures will need
      to be accomplished with the strategic priority being placed on
      expanded, safe and affordable rail transport as part of a wider public
      transport system.

3.5   The Railway Safety Regulator is a new public entity established in
      terms of legislation passed in 2002. The total transfers to the RSR
      from the Department of Transport are expected to increase by 14,1% per
      year over the MTEF period, from R15 million in 2004/5 to R22, 3
      million in 2007/8. The Committee appreciates that the RSR is still in
      a formative stage, but we are concerned that the present Board does
      not appear to have any significant railway experience, nor are there
      any relevant trade union representatives. In our budgetary hearings we
      were also concerned that the RSR representatives did not appear to
      have a clear strategic plan. Progress at the RSR will need to be
      closely monitored over the coming period.

Report to be considered.

-----------------------
[1]  See par 3.1 on page 96 of annual report.
[2] See notes 11.5 and 11.4 on pages 124 and 123.
Treasury Regulation 3.2.1.
.
12 See Appendix 8.
[3] In the first year (2004) the Pan-African Parliament operated  without  a
budget and therefore relied on voluntarism  by  National  Governments.   The
Parliament was established in terms of Article 5 of the Constitutive Act  of
the Union as the representative body of the African people  to  enable  full
participation in the development of their continent, promotion of peace  and
human rights and development of culture of democracy in Africa.

[4] , The PAP work plan is attached as Annexure 1.

[5] The PAP budget is attached as Annexure 2.


