---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 22 February 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-02-22
---

TUESDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2005
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.




                       FORMAL REMOVAL OF OLD BLACK ROD



                               (Announcement)


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, we shall now proceed with the
formal removal of the old Black Rod and the introduction of the new Black
Rod as the symbol of authority of this House. I will therefore suspend the
sitting. Members are requested to remain seated while the procession, led
by the Usher of the Black Rod, that will consist of me, the Chairperson of
Committees and the Deputy Chairperson of Committees, takes the Black Rod
outside.

We will come back to install the new Black Rod. The bells will be rung
shortly for the resumption of business when the procession - with the Usher
bearing the new Black Rod - will enter the Chamber from the front entrance.
Proceedings are now suspended.

Business suspended at 14:02 and resumed at 14:05.




                        INSTALLATION OF NEW BLACK ROD


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, we are now installing the new
Black Rod. You might have seen the old one that we have removed. It was a
very thin Black Rod and it didn’t actually show the decorum of this House.
In keeping with the dignity of the National Council of Provinces, we now
have the new Black Rod installed.

I am just going to speak very briefly. We are honoured here by the presence
of the former presiding officer of this House who will open the debate on
the new Black Rod since she participated a great deal in actually giving
input regarding the new Black Rod, which now represents the nine provinces.

The Black Rod symbolises the authority of the House and serves to emphasise
the dignity and formality of proceedings. The National Council of
Provinces, which now celebrates its eighth birthday, was the product of the
constitutional process that sought to ensure that provincial interests are
taken into account in the national sphere of government.

I want to point out to the President and to all members who are in the
House today that we are not just installing the Black Rod today, but
another symbolic aspect of this ceremony is that we are eight years in
existence, since we were born in 1996. I think we must applaud ourselves
because the baby has grown. [Applause.] I can assure you that the baby is
growing very well. You can see that the baby is well fed. You can also see
that though she is still a toddler, she walks very well and she has begun
to speak very well with the public out there in the provinces.

This new Black Rod reflects the process that acknowledges the nine of
provinces of the new South Africa. Its new design echoes the important role
of the provinces in ensuring a better quality of life for all South
Africans. It acknowledges the people who live in our provinces and the rich
resources that we have been blessed with.

The giant protea at the top of the Black Rod should speak to us of a nation
blossoming in its democracy. Indeed, our 10th year democracy celebrations
highlighted many of the great achievements of our nation. But, like any
plant, for our nation to grow, it needs watering and nourishment. Sometimes
it even needs weeding. That responsibility of watering and nourishing it by
building schools, roads, houses and hospitals, providing basic services and
creating employment for our people is the role of the national, provincial
and local governments – the nation’s gardens.

Parliament’s role is to ensure that the nation grows by conducting
oversight over the executive and applying the principles of co-operative
governance. As Parliament we need to work with the gardeners for this
flower to blossom. May this new symbol inspire this House to serve the
people of South Africa diligently in pursuit of a better quality of life
for all!

I now afford the representatives from the provinces and those speakers who
are listed on the speakers’ list the opportunity to comment on the
historical installation of the new Black Rod. In terms of my list I have
Mrs Naledi Pandor, the Minister of Education, to lead this discussion.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, do you want me to go to the podium?
Things have changed so much! [Laughter.] Hon Chairperson, Mr President, hon
members, in my time, no member would have shouted, “Things have changed!”
[Laughter.]

Thank you for this opportunity to address the House on this historic
occasion, the launching and installation of the new Black Rod of the
National Council of Provinces. I don’t see a lot of black on the Black Rod.
But it is, as the Chairperson has said, a rather striking Black Rod and I
congratulate the Chairperson and all hon members on this new symbol.

The transformation of South Africa from its apartheid past into a country
that reflects the aspirations elaborated in the Freedom Charter has set our
government and this Parliament a number of challenges. As the President
indicated in his reply to the state of the nation debate last week, our
nation expects to see itself in its entirety reflected in each of the
institutions of South Africa.

One of the features of policies of exclusion, particularly that of racism,
is that the effect is often to render the marginalised invisible. This
invisibility has been the lived experience of the majority of the people of
our country. And, we are engaged as Parliament and as government in the
dual task of creating the visibility of the marginalised, alongside the
concrete expression of unity in diversity of all our people.

The processes followed by Parliament since 1994 in giving effect to
inclusion and representivity have been noteworthy and nationally
significant. Colleagues will recall that the first set of processes began
in 1994 with the removal of former apartheid art from the Old Assembly
dining hall. Those paintings reflected much that was ugly in our past and
it is pleasing that we use the walls of Parliament for more engaging
exhibitions today.

The second set of transformation processes related to the efforts to make
Parliament open and accessible, opening up committees as well as
facilitating public access to debates; and, more recently, adopting the new
language policy of Parliament and the fact that MPs are now able to use any
of the official languages of our country in their deliberations in this
institution. Additional steps beyond these were taken to make sure that
Parliament is accessible to those with disabilities.

Our government has also not been inactive in this regard. We have new
national symbols: a new flag, which we all love; a new anthem, which many
of us sing, though some sing it quite badly; and a new Coat of Arms. All of
these reflect the importance of the expression of unity in diversity in
South Africa.

This new Black Rod is part of our national project of transformation, of
changing those aspects of governance that still remain foreign to our
political culture so that the majority of people will now find it easier to
identify with our national symbols and our national aspirations.

Black Rod, it is called. Many people have asked: What is it? It’s a symbol
of authority. Yes, but as with many other symbols, it is not a symbol that
is found in our traditions, not a symbol from our culture, not a symbol
politically specific to our system of governance. So, in line with our
desire to achieve unity in diversity, we decided that we would not throw
out the Black Rod. We have rather changed the Black Rod into a symbol with
which all our people can identify.

It would be important to indicate to hon members that the design came out
of the contributions of the people of our country, and that it is not
something that came from the presiding officers. A notice was sent out to
the public; submissions were received. Interestingly, it would seem, Mr
Chairperson and Mr President, that the favourite stand-up-straight weapon
of South Africa is the knobkierie because the bulk of the submissions
called for that shape.

We transformed our Chamber of this very House for similar reasons to those
that have led to the transformation of the Black Rod from a staff into a
knobkierie. The major symbolic reason, hon members will recall, for
refurbishing the Chamber was our desire to transform the adversarial
Westminster-style seating plan of the Chamber. This was because we have a
Constitution that enshrines co-operative governance between our three
spheres of government.
The National Council of Provinces, as the Chairperson has said, as the
Chamber that represents provincial and local government at the national
level, is a linking institution that involves the provinces in national
policy formulation and the consideration of national matters. It thus also
ensures the responsiveness of national government to provincial interests.

Before the transformation that occurred to the Chamber, we worked in a
building that was designed for the Westminster adversarial parliamentary
system. The Westminster model of parliamentary government is based on a
very particular tradition that traces its roots back to ancient practices
of governance in England. Of course, we inherited such a system. Its
intention was to have the House at the upper level, the House of Lords,
providing the nation with representation and leadership in the absence of
the king.

The spatial relationship in the old Senate of this House was based on a
representation of two opposing sides of debate. The length of two swords
separated the benches. In the event that the debate got ugly, the opponent
with a sword would be out of reach of the opponent that he wanted to hurt.

The authority of the president of the Senate was vested in the name of the
king. Thus the president of the Senate sat in a chair that was reminiscent
of a classical throne in terms of scale, ornate structure and meaning. The
Black Rod was thus an extension of the authority of the president of the
Senate and it was meant to regulate speech and to punish in the name of the
king, hence the Usher of the Black Rod was very similar to a captain of the
guard or a sergeant in the police service.

We then had to face the question of how we reshaped the adversarial
architecture so that we reflect a parliament in which the people indeed do
govern. With support from a range of progressive professionals, we achieved
this change. We developed a particular philosophy with respect to how we
would want the Chamber to look.

I believe that it is entirely fitting that we should remember Revel Fox,
whose inspiration as an architect was instrumental in bringing about the
changes of which we speak. He was a remarkable architect; a man committed
to transformation, a man whose contribution to architecture in Cape Town
will be remembered for many years to come.

We have therefore a radical pattern of seating that allows continuous eye
contact between delegates and the Chairperson. The sitting arrangement
gives the Chairperson a new and greater depth of authority – an authority
based on participation and not, as under the Westminster system, on keeping
two parties apart. By establishing the Chairperson as the hub of a spatial
pinwheel, new territory was charted in South African political history
about how exactly provinces relate to each other and to the national
government.

Now we have a new Black Rod that everyone will immediately recognise as a
knobkierie. The symbolism is extremely complex and I am sure that all our
children in the country in our schools are going to learn a lot about our
country and ourselves when they seek to understand what each aspect of the
symbol represents.

The protea at the head of the knobkierie is South Africa’s national flower
and symbolises our national pride. The beadwork lower down the rod
represents our diverse people and our rich cultural heritage. The clasping
hands in gold symbolise freedom, peace and co-operation. The Black Rod will
stand in a drum whenever the Council is in session. The drum is symbolic of
calling people together, to gather and speak. It also symbolises our
achievement of democracy through dialogue.

We then get to the provincial symbols as we look at the band on the drum.
The North West has chosen a calabash gourd; the Free State has a cluster of
lily blossoms; the Northern Cape has a thorn tree; Mpumalanga has a daisy;
the Eastern Cape has a red aloe – an indigenous succulent with medicinal
and other qualities, a symbol of perseverance and strength; KwaZulu-Natal
has a gentle flower; Limpopo has the sturdy baobab tree; Gauteng has iron
which symbolises its industrial strength; and the Western Cape is
symbolised by grapes - and I need to say no more. [Laughter.]

In closing, we can see that a massive transformation has indeed taken
place. The Black Rod has been successfully changed into a symbol that
represents unity in diversity. The House, through this symbol, is clearly
guided to pursue inclusivity, harmony, consensus, and a parliament that
fully reflects the Freedom Charter and its aspiration and call that the
people shall indeed govern. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Ms Pandor, Minister of Education
and former presiding officer of this Council. I now take this opportunity
to formally acknowledge the hon President in the NCOP. As you would know,
we invited the President to come and grace this occasion, and also observe
when we introduce the new Black Rod today. We therefore really welcome the
President to be with us today. Thank you very much, Mr President.
[Applause.]

I must also say that the schedule of the President is quite tight. His
office has discussed it with me. When the time is opportune I will announce
the departure of the President. The grapes as symbol of the Western Cape
represent the great agricultural activity of grapes and nothing else.
[Laughter.]

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, Mr President, hon Ministers and Premiers present
here this afternoon, I have a difficult task following in the steps of the
hon Minister Pandor, who spoke so eloquently with regard to this House and
the new Black Rod. However, first of all I would like to congratulate this
House on behalf of my party, the DA, on its eighth birthday. It is truly a
memorable occasion, and I trust that everyone had a slice of the cake at
lunchtime.

The Black Rod was first used in South Africa in the Senate, under the 1910
constitution of the then Union of South Africa. It is a symbol of authority
that many parliaments of the Commonwealth countries have adopted and
adapted to reflect their own unique traditions and cultures. The Black Rod,
in fact, has been in existence in the Westminster parliament, as we heard
just now, for over 600 years.

The then South African Senate continued to use the Black Rod until South
Africa became a republic in 1961. The then so-called Staff of Office of the
Senate replaced the Black Rod in 1961, and became the symbol of the State
President. The Senate, established in terms of the interim constitution of
1993, readopted the Black Rod and when the NCOP was created in terms of the
Constitution of 1996 it inherited the title and the Black Rod from the
Senate.

The Black Rod, however, reflects the South Africa of pre-1994. Parliament
felt it was time that the old symbols changed and new symbols that reflect
the new political dispensation were adopted. The change in the symbols of
Parliament has been launched in phases: First, the National Assembly’s
Mace, then the Black Rod, and lastly, a new parliamentary emblem.

Whilst a great deal of the pomp and ceremony associated with the Black Rod
has been done away with by the NCOP, it must always serve as a reminder of
the historical struggles of people against arbitrary rule, and always
remain a symbol of authority and democracy. The Black Rod is therefore
placed next to the President’s office’s chair, to symbolise that the House
is formally in session, and is intended to reflect the dignity of the NCOP.

My party, the DA, therefore fully supports the new Black Rod, and the
symbol of democracy and authority it represents. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, angilibonge leli thuba ngoba liyivela kancane.
Ngingumuntu womdabu-ke mina izinto zesilungu angizazi. Iminyaka seyilishumi
ngilapha. Ngangilokhu ngiyibona le ndoda ingena nodondolo lapha ihamba
phambili kodwa ngingazi lutho ukuthi kuphathelene nani [Uhleko]. Iphelile-
ke iminyaka eyishumi. Onyakeni weshumi nanye ima ngifunda okunye.
Ngingumuntu omdala. Uyabona uma kukhulunywa ngodondolo, kusuke kukhulunywa
ngento ebalulekile. Mina njengomuntu womdabu, nginemishiza eminingi ekhaya.
Ubaba uba nodondolo lwakhe. Uzolubona-ke lolu dondolo lukababa ngesikhathi
sokugcina ukuthi lubalulekile. Uma sekukhona ihlambo, kubizwa abadala babe
khona ukuze-ke kuthathwe lolo dondolo lunikezwe omunye wamadodana alowo
baba ongasekho emhlabeni kuthiwe-ke, “Nangu-ke osezophatha induku kababa”.

Uyabona-ke manje ukuthi-ke sifunda okunye-ke nalapha esilungwini ngoba
nakhu phela uMongameli wezwe ulapha ukuze azobona ukuthi asikhwabanisi
ngalolu dondolo silunikeze omunye ngapha esikhundleni somuntu ofanele.
Nakhu-ke Sihlalo lapha engikhona-ke, nawe kufanele uziqale kahle izinto
ngoba phela ngeke ukwazi ukuthi uzohlala kuleso sihlalo uma leyo ntonga
ingekho eduze kwakho. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, may I thank you for this opportunity because it
is a very special occasion. I am an African person, I do not know Western
things. I have now been here for 10 years. I used to see a man entering
with the Mace walking in front of us, but I did not know what it was about.
[Laughter.] These 10 years are over. It is only now, in the 11th year, that
I am learning something, and I am an old person. If we are talking about
the Mace, we are talking about an important thing. I, as an African person,
have a lot of fighting sticks at home. The father has his walking stick.
You will see during the last hours that this stick is important. During the
cleansing ceremony, the elders are called in so that that stick will be
given to one of the sons of the deceased and they will say: “Here is the
one who will take father’s stick.”

Can you see now that we are learning something else in Western culture,
because it is as if the President himself is here to see that we are not
doing the wrong thing with this Mace, like giving it to someone other than
the relevant person. Chairperson, here I am; you must also start things in
the correct manner because you will not be able to sit in that Chair if the
Mace is not next to you.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am just worried there is no interpretation
up there. Anyway, continue, Mr Mzizi.

Mr M A MZIZI: Umuntu womdabu akakwazi ukukhuluma isilungu ngoba akafundile.
[Uhleko]. Ngizoyibhala inkulumo ukuze bayithole. [An African person does
not know how to speak English, because he is uneducated. [Laughter.] I will
submit this speech in black and white so that they receive it.]

Chairperson, hon members, and the President, the Black Rod should bring new
changes to this Chamber. If one thinks of some of the wisdom flowing from
David’s lips, as read from the Holy Book that says, “Thy rod and thy staff
comforts me”. Lokhu-ke kusho khona lokhu esikushoyo. [This means that we
are saying this.] Surely, the Rod has a fundamental value in our lives.
There was value in the first Rod.

Asisho ukuthi phela leyo yokuqala yayingenalutho njengoba sesikhuluma
ngalena yanamhlanje. [We do not mean that the previous Rod had no value
while we are talking about this one today.]

The fact remains that the old order changeth, and yieldeth places to new.
You will agree with me that in the 10 years behind us, a lot has been done,
which indicates that we must change with time.

Lokhu akube umyalezo noma kubani olapha endlini. Ubhoko yinto ebalulekile
empilweni yomuntu. Kwaze kwaqanjwa isisho esithi “umthwalo usobhokweni”
ngoba uhambo lude, uthwala umthwalo ngalo. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[This must be the message to everyone in this House. A stick is something
very important in a person’s life. There is even a saying that goes, “ready
for the way”, because on a long journey it is used to carry the luggage.]

Modulasetulo, a re itshwareletseng ka lere lena, re ikokotlele ka lona. Mme
ke bona tlholo pheletsong ya leeto lena. Tsela ena ya NCOP e telele. Yaka
Modimo a ka hlohonolofatsa lere lena. E tshweu kgotso! [Mahofi.]
(Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, let us hold on to this Rod, and let it guide us. I foresee
triumph at the end of this journey. This journey of the NCOP is a long one.
May God bless this Rod. [Thank you!] [Applause.]]

Mr K SINCLAIR: Chairperson, Mr President, hon Ministers, colleagues and
friends, as representatives of the people of the Republic of South Africa
we are gathered here today in the higher House of Parliament for a very
special event. On behalf of the people of South Africa we recognise the
injustices of our past. We honour all those who suffered for justice and
freedom in our land. We respect those who have worked to build and believed
that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white. As we
speak today we stand united in our diversity.

Therefore it would be important on this very special day to once again
reiterate the importance of our institution. Section 42(4) of the
Constitution mandates a specific set of functions and responsibilities for
the NCOP. When we launch a Black Rod today, it just cannot be a symbol of
democracy vested in the authority of the Council, because it is - and it
must be - far more than that. It must be a voice for the people of the
provinces: from the mother who is struggling to make ends meet in Langa to
the irrigation farmer next to the Limpopo River, from the small miner in
Alexander Bay to the fisherman of Kosi Bay. This Black Rod must be the
cornerstone in which they entrust their public representatives to look
after their interests in a free and a democratic society.

The principle of democracy must never become just a word when it suits us.
We must treasure it. We must be principled about it and even more, we must
use the political power that we gain from democracy in a responsible
manner. The words of a lecturer at the University of Nairobi, Ofika
Kitonga, then seem very appropriate. He said:


  Democracy has become one of the core and foremost preoccupations of the
  people of the world today. All over the world, millions of men and women
  are clamouring for it, ready to consent enormous sacrifices of sweat,
  tears and blood, up to and including death to secure it. This is a
  measure of the value of democracy to civilised mankind.

Therefore, on behalf of the NNP it’s a privilege to also add our voice to
congratulate all people who were involved in the development, planning and
manufacturing of this new symbol of our democracy. It is appropriate when
we also celebrate the 8th anniversary of the NCOP that we also today accept
a new symbol for this institution. We trust and believe that it would be
instrumental in making democracy work and through that ensure that the
people of this country, black and white, share in the benefits of our
democracy. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I also wish to announce the presence of
Heraldry South Africa, whose members are in the Chamber. They have helped
to design this Black Rod. And I also wish to recognise the producer of the
Black Rod, the Palgiari Group. Everything here on this Black Rod has been
handmade. No machine was used. That is why it took such a long time. So the
workmanship is very good as you can see on the Black Rod here. We welcome
them. They are in the gallery. [Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, it is indicated on the speakers list that
I shall address the House in English, but I shall take the example of
colleague Abram Mzizi and address the Chamber in my mother tongue.

Voorsitter, die VF Plus verwelkom die ingebruikneming van die nuwe Ampstaf.
Dit is die voorsetting van ’n baie lang tradisie, wat vir ’n kort periode
van 14 jaar onderbreek is. Daar is verwys na die koloniale en Britse
verbintenis gedurende die tydperk toe ons die Unie van Suid-Afrika was, na
die republikeinse tydperk en dan die onderbroke tydperk daarna. Daar is
hierna verwys. Dit is nou weer ingestel en dit is verblydend, Voorsitter,
dat die tradisionele geskiedenis nie vergeet word nie, want ’n nasie en ’n
land wat sy geskiedenis en herkoms vergeet, het nie ’n toekoms nie. Dit is
verblydend dat dit in hierdie aspek weerspieël word.

Die betekenis van die ingebruikneming van die Ampstaf lê daarin dat hierdie
Raad dan verder gevestig word as ’n volwaardige Tweede Kamer van die
Parlement en nie noodwendig net onder die Nasionale Vergadering staan nie,
maar inderdaad langs hom as ’n volwaardige Kamer van die Parlement. Dit is
eweneens betekenisvol dat dit saamval met die agtjarige herdenking van die
Nasionale Raad van Provinsies as ’n selfstandige Raad. Dit is die wens van
die VF Plus dat die ingebruikneming van die Ampstaf ’n simbool sal wees van
die groot rol wat elke provinsie afsonderlik en gesamentlik speel in die
funksionering van die Parlement in Suid-Afrika. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, the FF Plus welcomes the introduction of the new Black Rod,
and this is the continuation of a very long tradition, which was only
broken for a brief 14 years. There was reference to the colonial and
British connection during the time when we were the Union of South Africa,
before the republican period, and the subsequent intermediate period.
Reference was made to this. It has now been introduced again and it is
heartening, Chairperson, that the traditional history has not been
forgotten, because a nation and a country that forgets its history and
origin does not have a future. It is heartening that it is reflected in
this aspect.

The significance of the introduction of the Black Rod lies in the fact that
this Council is furthermore being established as a full-fledged Second
Chamber of Parliament and that it is not necessarily inferior to the
National Assembly, but that it indeed has a place next to it as a full-
fledged Chamber of Parliament. It is also significant that this coincides
with the eighth commemoration of the National Council of Provinces as an
autonomous council. It is the wish of the FF that the introduction of the
Black Rod will be a symbol of the important role played by each province
individually and collectively in the functioning of the Parliament in South
Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Chairperson, Hon President, and Deputy
Chairperson of the Council, hon Minister, hon Premiers, permanent delegates
and special delegates, today we are celebrating the eight years of the
National Council of Provinces, a new Black Rod for the National Council of
Provinces, and at the same time, we are also celebrating 50 years of the
Freedom Charter.

During the apartheid era the South African Parliament had had two Black
Rods, one for the Union of the Parliament, one for the Parliament of the
Republic. The Gentlemen Usher of the Black Rod served in the legislative
council of the two Chambers of the Cape Parliament and then in the Senate
of the Union Parliament. The Office of the Usher was the symbol of
oppression and sexism, as only men were appointed as the Usher of the Black
Rod. For the first time in 1994, a woman was appointed as the Usher of the
Black Rod. Today we have just installed the new Black Rod.

In 1955 the Congress of the People said that the people shall govern. The
preamble of our Constitution says:


  We the people of South Africa have laid the foundation for a democratic
  and open society in government that is based on the will of the people.

Arising from the clause of the Freedom Charter and the preamble of our
Constitution, looking at this Black Rod, there is a reflection of all
provincial symbols and these provinces were formed by the will of the
people. The head of the Rod is a Protea flower with nine leaves, which
signifies the national pride and describes the importance and the
uniqueness of this House. Nine leaves means that we represent nine
provinces and not nine political parties - and that is the uniqueness of
this House.

The Freedom Charter further says that the doors of culture shall be open.
Looking at this Black Rod, we see that the beadwork alludes to our cultural
heritage and our traditions, particularly for us as Africans. Flowers from
the coats of arms of the various provinces also indicate that we celebrate
our culture in diversity.

The Freedom Charter further says: There shall be peace and friendship and
all national groups shall have equal rights. The clasping hands on this Rod
allude to our freedom, peace and co-operation. This confirms that the
Freedom Charter is the charter of the people. In this House we are
different groups and we enjoy working together for the betterment of the
lives of our people. Today we have the Constitution, which guarantees the
rights of all South Africans, including the right to equality. It protects
the rights of all people to freedom of all religion, belief or opinion,
freedom of expression, association and movement.

This Black Rod was crafted through the ideas and expression of the
different people of our country. The drum is also an expression of the
African tradition of drums calling people to gather and speak as we are
doing right now. The Black Rod confirms what was said by the Congress of
the People, when they said: South Africa belongs to all who live in it. It
also confirms that we have a democratic Parliament - a Parliament of the
people by the people and for the people. I thank you. [Applause.]


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Hon Chairperson, Your
Excellency Mr President, the Minister of Education Mrs Pandor, hon
Premiers, Chief Whips of the Majority Party, Chief Whip of the NCOP Mr
Windvoël, Chief Whips of all other parties, House Chairpersons of the
National Assembly, members of Salga, hon members, distinguished guests, the
Bureau of Heraldry, the Chief Director of National Archives Dr Dominy, the
Pagliari Group, Mr Regusto and parliamentary staff, it is a great honour to
be part of this auspicious event. In closing this important event, it would
be easy to just allow time to take its course and have all get back to
work. However, it is important to close events such as this one properly.
In doing so, allow me to make a few comments.

The launch of the new Black Rod in the National Council of Provinces is an
important sign of the necessary transformation that is part of the mandate
that our people gave us. It signals that we act on a vision that comes from
the people.

Our nation consists of people who are truly diverse in terms of social,
economic, race, ethnic and cultural status. It is a fact that none of us
will ever deny, but that diversity cannot nullify the fact that we are all
Africans from this continent. It can also not nullify the fact that we have
a common history, a common struggle and a common vision for the future of
our country. Those are but a few things that unite us as a nation of this
country, South Africa.

It has been made eloquently clear by other speakers today that this
Parliament is on African soil, and that it is absolutely necessary for its
symbols to be relevant to and reflect the people of this nation. This is an
African democracy. This National Council of Provinces is an African
institution in which all our people are seriously busy legislating,
overseeing and checking on the implementation of policies that will make
our people’s lives better.

We do the business of this Parliament based on their needs, their views,
their ideals and their vision. And because of that, this Parliament, its
symbols and its business, is in need of change. And it is surely changing.
This ceremonial event is, at its core, all about celebrating such a change
from one symbol with a history that tragically never belonged to or
recognised all the people, to one that symbolises a true and sincere move
to include all the people, no matter how diverse our make-up is.

These are facts that have been recognised as early as 17 August 2000, when
the previous Speaker announced the process of changing Parliament’s
symbols. Today that call for a change of symbols becomes a reality. It is
all about what is appropriate and relevant for an institution that drives
the transformation of the people’s economic and social development. It is
all about the people’s Parliament that functions as part of a caring,
developmental state that enhances the ethos and values of all our people.
It is all about being true to our history and the vision that comes from
the people. It is all about leadership, unwaveringly carrying out the
mandates that the people gave us.

As part of that recognition, we can today stand here and say that we have
followed through on the intention to change this symbol bring it closer to
the reality of us legislating in an African country for the development of
all our people. We can stand here today and say that another phase of
changing the symbols of our Parliament is being accomplished. We follow on
after the unveiling of the new African Mace in the National Assembly in our
launching of this new African Black Rod in the NCOP.

As a symbol of the authority of the NCOP and its Chairperson, it is
important that such a symbol is in line with the values and ethos of a
democratic country that pursues the development of all people. It is a
development that remains rooted in the values and visions of the Freedom
Charter. It is an undeniable fact that this vision and our Constitution
remain inseparably linked.

In changing our symbols, we act on an ethos of empowering and developing
all people, no matter what their social status, colour or creed is. We do
this in line with African values, namely that all of us are equally
respected, valued and cared for by this democratic, developmental state on
our African continent. This new Black Rod is one of the new symbols that
appropriately enhances the rich diversity of our people and their history.

In closing, I want to thank His Excellency the President, hon members,
Chief Whips of the Majority Party and other parties, the Chief Whip of the
NCOP, distinguished guests, the Pagliari Group, the Heraldry Council and
all parliamentary staff for the leadership, the craftpersonship and the
effort that all have put in to make this event such a success. Now we can
all get back to work again and beat the drums! I thank you. Ke a leboga.
Enkosi. Baie dankie. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy Chairperson of the Council, I would
want to see all hon members of the Council practising all these eleven
official languages very actively in 2005. The message I am giving across is
that all of us have to speak these languages. I would like to thank the
President for being with us until we concluded the debate on this matter.
It is now my turn to announce that the President has to leave us because he
has other engagements. Once more, on behalf of the Council, I would like to
thank you very much, Mr President for being with us. [Applause.]

                              Debate concluded.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                     (The late Raymond “Oom Ray“ Mhlaba)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Hon members, I have
been informed that the Whips have agreed that there would be no notices of
motion, but that an opportunity would be given to the Chief Whip of the
Council to move a motion without notice.

   The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby move on
   behalf of all parties and all of us in this House:

That the Council –


     (1)    notes with great sadness the passing on of a stalwart  and  hero
         of the struggle for a  free,  democratic  South  Africa,  Oom  Ray
         Mhlaba;


     (2)    notes Oom Ray’s outstanding commitment and leadership  qualities
         during a time when the apartheid regime incarcerated him and other
         senior leaders of the movement;
     (3)    further notes the outstanding public leadership role that he has
         played as Premier of the Eastern Cape as our democracy  took  root
         during the First Decade of Democracy;


     (4)    pays tribute to Oom  Ray  as  an  outstanding  revolutionary,  a
         selfless and dedicated combatant and  much-respected  and  admired
         leader;


     (5)    expresses our collective sadness as his death robs us of another
         hero who hails  from  a  splendid,  unforgettable   generation  of
         leaders; and


     (6)     salutes  the  nation’s  hero,  Raymond  (Oom  Ray)  Mhlaba  and
         expresses its profound and sincere condolences to his family.

Motion agreed in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.




            DEBATE ON THE PRESIDENT’S STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS


The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Deputy
Chairperson, excuse me for my not having been here for a long time. So I
have missed out on the podium being used. In the state of the nation
address our President focused on the theme: Parliament: The voice of the
people - realising a better life for all.
Hierdie tema, in kombinasie met ons viering van die 50ste herdenking van
die kongres van die mense en die Vryheidsmanifes - ‘n gebeurtenis wat ‘n
halfeeu gelede werklik mening gegee het aan die opinies en aspirasies van
ons mense - plaas die klem op die betekenis van demokrasie. Die klem is om
te verseker dat ons instellings wat verantwoordelik is om die mense te
verteenwoordig, dit doen ten einde ons agenda van ‘n beter lewe vir almal
en om seker te maak dat ons dit wel realiseer. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[This theme, in combination with our celebration of the 50th anniversary of
the Congress of the People and the Freedom Charter  - an event that half a
century ago truly gave substance to the opinions and aspirations of our
people – puts the emphasis on the significance of democracy. The emphasis
is to ensure that our institutions that are responsible for representing
the people do so for the purposes of our agenda to create a better life for
all and that we do in fact achieve this.]

This afternoon, as we join in the President’s state of the nation debate,
we also dip our banner for Isithwalandwe, Oom Ray Raymond Mhlaba, someone
who was centrally part of forming this democracy.
As I return to the issue of the voice of the people realising a better life
for all, the emphasis is on creating the mechanisms and truly supporting
these democratic institutions to operate optimally to give effect to our
dictum: The People Shall Govern.

The report card our President gave clearly reflects our achievements. But
it also honestly reveals where we must improve.
We believe though that what is essential for improving on our efforts is a
strong state that can live up to the expectations that particularly the
poor have of the state. Those who fall outside the parameters of the market
also usually live and operate in sectors in our society where community
organisations are particularly poorly institutionalised and poorly
resourced. Their only option is to turn to the state. We cannot fail these
people.

In 1996 we opted for constitutional arrangements that are universally
recognised as empowering to ordinary people. We deliberately opted for
bringing government closer to the people and opening avenues for the
participation of people at all levels of government. These constitutional
arrangements include the three spheres of government, of which local
government is structured to have a tight and close relationship with local
communities. Local government is supported by the national and provincial
spheres, but is charged with and given the resources from the central
fiscus to perform critically important development functions such as water
distribution, sanitation, municipal health services and electricity
distribution.

We balanced this effort of decentralisation with opting for a unitary state
rather than a federal one. This was to ensure that people’s voices from all
corners of our expansive country could be heard in the debates on national
policy issues, and that they were not restricted to localised issues - a
limitation often experienced in federal systems. It was to ensure that
geographically entrenched narrow interests did not riddle our country, but
that we operated in unison. It was decided to opt for a system that would
support nation-building in a society that had come from deeply entrenched
divisions.

The NCOP has a particularly important role in representing the voices of
our people and their regional interests in Parliament. And when we consider
new legislation and when policy is formulated, it is important to consider
the effect of these in its regional-specific context. The NCOP is important
in overseeing the performance of government in a way that the special
requirements of specific regional interests are addressed.

Our engagements with the issue of decentralisation and centralisation have
been exercised with great commitment since we came to power. Our efforts
over the past decade are testimony to this government’s commitment to
decentralised power, resources and accountability. Where the people’s
interests were served, we restructured the ownership of our parastatals. We
have opted for Public Service transformation that significantly increased
professional and managerial power as opposed to hoarding of power by the
executive. We have strengthened the independent oversight institutions
created in Chapter 9 of the Constitution.

Notwithstanding these and many other efforts more recently, it seems as if
there is a concerted effort to create the impression that we are set on
centralising all power in this society in the Presidency and Cabinet and
the institutions that have been created to support them. There are also
concerted attempts to vilify this government as a power-hungry bunch of
sycophants.

Of course, it serves the agenda of the liberals in our midst who want a
weak and powerless state. A weak state will open the way to them to operate
a society on the basis of creating an environment that serves the interests
of the rich and leaves the poor to their own devices. It will create an
environment in which we will not be able to build a more egalitarian
society by redistributing some of the wealth that was built on the backs of
black exploited workers. It will create a society in which worker’s rights
are nonexistent.

The liberal agenda is deliberately confusing the idea of a strong and co-
ordinated state with that of monopolised power. They confuse the idea of
letting all the units of government share a commitment to the overall
direction in which we want society to move with:


  Taking control of every branch of government, every independent state
  institution and every space in public and private life.

The laws of nature are instrumental to our understanding for the need of a
centrifugal force. Our solar system is a system because it is governed by a
shared magnetic field that creates certain forces. It does not mean that
various bodies lose their independence of operating, but there is a basic
law of nature that allows them to function in a predictable and orderly
pattern; equally so in the case of government.

As we allow the forces that pull government in localised and decentralised
directions to strengthen, we are obliged to match these forces with a
stronger, unifying force at the centre of government. Not to dictate and
usurp but to ensure that no inefficiencies creep in as a consequence of
competing initiatives. Not to weaken and to undermine, but to ensure the
best possible utilisation of our resources in the battle against poverty.

We are proceeding apace with giving effect to the provision of the
Constitution that deals with the creation of a single Public Service. We
are working towards creating a Public Service that embraces all three
spheres of government unified in terms of the goal that government pursues
and in terms of the system that underpins its work. We are also rapidly
increasing the numbers and competence of our community development workers,
a core of public servants that crosses the divide between the spheres and
lines of government, a core which is employed by provinces but working at
local government level to add additional capacity and to strengthen
government’s relationship with the people.

Various agendas of different opposition parties are converging in a strange
pattern. Transformation is cast in the light of being the downfall of
continued development. Racial transformation is seen as the antithesis of a
competent Public Service. And transformation is being portrayed as being
insulting to black people. Now, I want to state here today: This is simply
not true. Racial and gender transformation of the machinery of the state is
a precondition of a sustainable and competent pool of Public Service
workers.

Racial and gender transformation is a necessary precondition for the
creation of a responsive Public Service. And we have come a long way in
pursuing the employment equity goals that we have set and we will continue
to do so, particularly in those provinces that have been lagging while they
were under the political control of parties hostile to government’s agenda.

A further strange agenda is that of the big liberals; the ones who up to
now have only cared about individuals and now pretend to be speaking on
behalf of communities - a rather strange phenomenon. They, who
underestimated and disregarded the social embeddedness of individuals, now
want to be the big protectors of group rights; they, who until recently
could only think of representing the interests of the English elite are now
trying to fight the cause of Afrikaans. Indeed we are living in strange
times! Or as the Chinese curse goes: We are living in interesting times!
[Applause.]

Coming from the history that we do, we know the importance of mobilising
the energy of the people for achieving success. We know the capacity to
make things happen that is locked up in our people. They have shown in the
past that they can make a country ungovernable if government does not
represent their interests. Go back to the Freedom Charter. [Interjections.]
No government can justly claim authority unless it is the will the people
and it’s because we are respectful of this power of the people. We know
that we derive our legitimacy as a government from their support and
therefore we have created a multitude of avenues through which they can
live up to the dream and make a reality of the Freedom Charter: “The people
shall Govern”. And we will not allow our communities to be exploited for
easy political point-scoring by forces whose real agenda has nothing to do
with the socio-economic liberation of the masses.

As representatives of the overwhelming majority of our people, we must
ensure that our people do not have to move outside the democratic avenues
that we have created for the voicing of their concerns and interests. After
all, our people created that. They made this House and this democracy what
it is. And when we as representatives of the people do not ensure that the
mechanisms that have been created function optimally at street level, we
create the opportunity for communities to be exploited to stage violent
demonstration and destruction, saying they are not heard by the ruling
party and by the government. But we also know about false prophets. And
those false prophets will be dealt with.

We must be confident that this is not the case because of the effective
functioning of the mechanisms that we have created. We must be confident in
the people through whom we have been placed in positions of trust. People
who do not use democratic means to voice their opinions and concerns must
understand that they are detracting from the nation’s democratic agenda and
undermining development.

We have come a long way since Kliptown and our democratic awakening in 1994
to be standing here a decade later, proud of our achievement and looking
forward to the further entrenchment of the ideals of the Freedom Charter,
which in the words of the President will be marked by, and I quote:

The further entrenchment of democracy in our country; transforming our
  country into a genuinely nonracial society; transforming our country into
  a genuinely nonsexist society; eradicating poverty and underdevelopment
  within the context of a thriving and growing first economy and the
  successful transformation of the second economy; opening the vistas
  towards the spiritual and material fulfilment of each and every South
  African; securing the safety and security of our people; building a strong
  and efficient state that truly serves the interests of our people; and
  contributing to the victory of the African Renaissance and the achievement
  of a goal of a better life for the peoples of Africa and the rest of the
  world. The people shall govern! Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. [Applause.]

Nk B N DLULANE: Sekela-sihlalo obekekileyo, ziNkulumbuso zamaphondo
ngamaphondo ezikhoyo, malungu ahloniphekileyo, malungu ka-SALGA, manene
nani manenekazi, abameli bokwenene nabenyani beli lizwe, bahlanganisa
iintloko baze baseka uxwebhu lokuzisa iinguqu kweli lizwe kuma-50 eminyaka
eyadlulayo. Olo xwebhu lobulumko nolwazi oluphangaleleyo, nangona lulula
lulandeleka, lulo olwaseka ikhondo lenguqu yeli lizwe ukusuka kwithuba
lengcinezelo nexesha lika”Fayayo” ukuza kuthi ga  kweli thuba sikulo
lolawulo lwentando yesininzi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Ms B N DLULANE: Hon Deputy Chairperson, Premiers from the different
provinces, hon members, members of Salga, ladies and gentlemen, fellow
countrymen and comrades who assisted with the formulation of the Freedom
Charter 50 years ago, a document that brought change to this country. It is
a document that is full of wisdom and knowledge, thoroughly accessible and
user-friendly, that was the benchmark for change from the days of struggle
up to the present in our democracy.]

The achievements of the past 10 years reflect the consistency of the ANC’s
policies, which date as far back as 1955 when the Congress of the People
adopted the Freedom Charter. We have seen the values of the Freedom Charter
enshrined in the Constitution. They formed the bedrock of our
Reconstruction and Development Programme and the Freedom Charter has
remained a living document with its values reflected in our policies.

Yiyo loo nto uMongameli weli lizwe, uThabo Mbeki, ohloniphekileyo, ethethe
wenjenje, ngesiXhosa, ndimcaphula kumsitho wokuvala imibhiyozo yokugqiba
iminyaka eli-10 eli lizwe liphethwe ngurhulumente wentando yesininzi
okhokelwa yi ANC.

   Urhulumente uzakuqhuba ongeze kwiimali ezifunekayo zokwenzela ukuba
   abantu bafumane izindlu; amanzi; iindawo zangasese; umbane; iiklinikhi;
   izikolo kunye nezinye izinto eziza kwenza ukuba sonke siphile kakuhle.
   Abo kufuneka befumene indodla nezibonelelo zemali kurhulumente, baza
   kuzifumana. Nabo kufuneka befumene amanzi nombane simahla mabazifumane
   ezi zinto.


Atsho amazwi kaMongameli.

Ngokukhokelwa nokulandela imimiselo yoMqulu weNkululeko, kungoku nje, emve
kwe-10 leminyaka sikolurhulumente wentando yesininzi, izinga lamandla emali
lime kanye apho belisekelwe laze lathekelelwa khona yiBhanki yethu
enguVimba, kwisine ekhulwini. Yiloo nto uMongameli uThabo Mbeki, kwintetho
yakhe eyayijoliswe kwisizwe ePalamente ngoLwesihlanu, umhla we-11
kuFebruary 2005, eyibethelele into yokuba, kweli shumi lesibini leminyaka
siliqala ngoku sikulawulo lwentando yesininzi kubaluleke kakhulu ukuba sime
simi ngokungenalusini, sizimisela iinkqubo esivumelanayo ngazo neziza
kuqinisekisa ukuba bonke abemi boMzantsi Afrika bakhululekile kwiimeko
zentlalo ezithi zibenze ukuba bangabi nasidima, badeleleke.

Sihlalo obekekileyo, sokukhumbula ukuba imimiselo kwakunye namagatya
ephelele oMqulu weNkululeko ngalawo amisela uluntu olukhathalayo ukuba
wonke ubani, kwanothathatha, unelungelo lobuntu nelokuxhamla ubomi
obungcono. Kungenxa yamalungelo kunye neenkqubo zalo rhulumente ukuba kho
kwalenkqubo ebalaseleyo yemisebenzi yoluntu enatyisiweyo, engundaba
mlonyeni kwilizwe liphela, njengoko sele luluninzi uluntu oluzuzayo
noluxhamlayo kuyo, nolukwazileyo ukususa ikati eziko sithetha nje.

Phofu ke nangona kunjalo, asisafuni ukuba esi sininzi sixhamle kule nkqubo.
Le nkqubo imiselwe kuwo onke amaphondo, kwaye sele imisele ngaphaya kwewaka
namashumi amahlanu emisetyenzana, yaqesha ukuya kuma-75 000 abantu, into
ebangele impumelelo emangalisayo phaya eLimpompo, ngomsebenzi wabo ogama
lingu”Gondo lashu” ngesiVenda, gama elo elithetha ukuthi ngesintu esi
ndiphuma kuso eMpuma-Koloni, “impumelelo yethu”.

Sihlalo, kujongwe enkalweni ke, njengoko intaka isakha ngoboya benye, ukuba
le nkqubo iyimpumelelo eLimpopo inabe iye kwamanye amaphondo njengokuba oko
isisiseko sale nkqubo yemisebenzi yoluntu enatyisiweyo ukuze nakwezinye
iindawo ibe yimpumelelo njengaseLimpopo. Huntshu Limpompo!

Malungu ahloniphekileyo ale Ndlu, yile nkqubo eza kuthi ngempumelelo yayo,
abantu beli lizwe bayeke ukuba ziimpula zikalujacu, bangene gomomo kuluhlu
loluntu olukuqoqosho lwesibini, ze bathi ngaxeshanye babenobuchule
ababufumanayo, obuza kubenza ukuba babenako ukuqesheka ngethuba likaxakeka.
Obu buchule buya kubenza  babenako ukuvula amashishinana abo amancinci,
babengabaqeshi ngokwabo ukuze ngolo hlobo bakwazi ukuxhamla kwimvumelwano
eyenziwe kunye nabo ngabakwa-ABSA, apho oosomashishini abasakhasayo bakwazi
ukunikwa imali-mboleko okanye ukunikwa imali ungenamali kwiakhawunti yakho
yebhanki leyo, ze kwakhona kungafuneki babe neziqinisekiso zemali xa
benikwa imisebenzi yexeshana exabiso liyakuma kwizigidi ezi-5 zeerandi Le
mvumelwano sele isebenza phaya eMpumalanga.

Sihlalo wam namalungu abekekileyo, kungumdla omkhulu ke okokuba yonke
imisebenzi neenkqubo zibe yimpumelelo xa zisungulwa kwamanye amaphondo. Le
inkqubo nayo kufunaneka ilandelwe ukuze ibe yimpumelelo. Ngaphambili
wawungasoze uthi ungusomashishini osakhasayo, uhambe uye ebhankini ogcina
kuyo imali, unikwe into ekuthiwa ngamakhumsha yi-overdraft, kodwa namhlanje
ngenxa yalo rhulumente okhokelwa nguMongameli uThabo Mbeki, uthi ngoku
uyimpula kalujacu uyifumane loo nto. UABSA uyakunika.

Sihlaba ikhwelo ke  nakwabanye oongxowa-nkulu nabanye oosomashishini
abanjeengebhanki ukuba balandele ekhondweni lika-ABSA. Sithi halala!
kwiimvumelwano ezinjengezi zakwa-ABSA, ezisekelwe ukulungiselela abantu
bethu, nokuba zibavulele inyoba yokuphuhlisa amashishini abo ukuze nabo
bathathe inxaxheba ekutshabalaliseni indlala eluntwini labo ngokuvula
izithuba zemisebenzi.

Sicela umngeni kubo bonke oongxowa-nkulu abakhulu ukuba baqalise babe
luncedo bekopa phaya ku-ABSA, ukwenzela ukuba abantu belizwe lethu
babuyelwe sisidima sabo sobuntu, baxhamle ngokulinganayo kwizibonelelo
eziza norhulumente wentando yesininzi. Makuqondwe ukuba buninzi ubutyebi,
ikakhulu kubantu basemakhaya. Ndiyitsho le nto kuba ndisazi ukuba phaya. .
. [Laphela ixesha.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[That is the reason why the President of this country, hon Thabo Mbeki, in
his speech at the closing ceremony of the celebration of 10 years of
freedom under the ANC government, said in isiXhosa that the government
would increase the allocation of resources to provide people with houses,
water, sanitation, electricity, clinics, schools and other facilities,
which would provide a better life for all.  Those eligible for pensions and
grants would get them. And those who are eligible for free basic water and
electricity would receive them.

These are the words of the President.

By following the guidelines stipulated in the Freedom Charter, now, after
10 years of democracy inflation is still at 4% as was estimated by the
South African Reserve Bank. This is the reason why President Thabo Mbeki in
his state of the nation address in Parliament on Friday, 11 February 2005,
emphasised that at the beginning of this second decade of our democracy it
is important to implement programmes that will develop South African
citizens socially and make them dignified people.

Hon Chairperson, we will remember the aspect “all people shall enjoy equal
human rights”, as declared in the Freedom Charter. It is because of human
rights and programmes of government that we have established the well-known
Expanded Public Works Programme, which affords South Africans the
opportunities for poverty alleviation.

Such programmes need to continue for people to benefit. This Expanded
Public Works Programme is being implemented in all the provinces and 1 050
jobs have been created and 75 000 people have been employed. This is a
tremendous success in Limpopo, and the project is called  “Gondo lashu” in
Venda, which means “Our success” in isiXhosa.

Chairperson, we are looking forward to the Expanded Public Works Programme
being implemented in all the provinces, as it has been very successful in
Limpopo. We say: Well done, Limpopo!

Hon members of the House, it is the success of this programme that will
alleviate the poverty of the people of this country and they can become
part of the first economy.  The skills of people will be developed and that
will make them employable. These skills will enable them to start small
businesses and through their entrepreneurship they could have opportunities
and enter into agreements with Absa for overdraft facilities. On the other
hand, they can obtain loans without security for up to R5 million. This
agreement is in place in Mpumalanga.

Chairperson and hon members, it is motivating when projects are initiated
and implemented in other provinces. This project must be monitored in order
for it to be a success. Previously no budding businessman would be allowed
to have an overdraft at a bank without security, but today that is possible
because of the government led by President Thabo Mbeki. Absa is prepared to
do this.

Chairperson, this is a call to other fats cats and institutions in the
banking sector to follow the example set by Absa. We commend agreements
such as those that are in place, that give opportunities for growth through
entrepreneurship to alleviate poverty as they provide job opportunities.

We plead with all fat cats to follow the example of Absa and help our
people to restore their human dignity and gain equal opportunities from
democratic government services. There is great wealth, more especially
among our people in the rural areas. I say this because . . . [Time
expired.]]

Mr M M MATOMELA (Eastern Cape): Hon Chairperson, let me start off by
saluting Oom Ray . . .

. . . iSithwalandwe, iqhawe lamaqhawe. Sithi lala ngoxolo, Ndobe. Nangona
silila nje, kodwa silila sikikizela kuba ubungumakhi wesizwe. Siyabulela
kwaye sivuya ngokuthi sisisizwe esimnyama sibe siyavuna kumsebenzi owenziwe
nguNdobe. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[. . . one of our stalwarts and a hero among heroes. Rest in peace. His
passing saddens us, but we feel privileged and inspired to have had him in
our lives as he contributed to building this country. As the South African
black nation we are grateful and extremely happy that we were blessed to
have had somebody like Ndobe, the fruits of whose toil we now enjoy.]

In his state of the nation address on 11 February 2005 the hon President
Mbeki outlined the core strategy objectives that will frame our policies
and programmes in our second decade of liberation. I’m not going to repeat
them because the Minister has already summarised them.

With respect to the Eastern Cape our provincial growth and development
plan, the PGDP, aligns directly with the core thrust of the Medium-Term
Strategy Framework. For purposes of this input I will focus on four
strategic goals of the MTSF as outlined in the state of the nation address.
In each focus area I will consider the implications for the Eastern Cape
and outline our programmatic commitments as specified in the PGDP and the
Premier’s state of the province address.

Goal one deals with increasing the rate of investment in the economy. The
primary goal here is twofold: firstly to increase levels of productive
investment in the economy through developing an enabling environment for
public sector growth and, secondly, to rapidly increase levels of public
and private sector investment in economic infrastructure, and public sector
investment in health and education infrastructure.

Key initiatives outlined in the state of the province address and the PGDP
speak to continued support for agriculture and agriprocessing, including a
massive food programme; milling and processing of plants; cotton production
and sugar beet. Other initiatives include the realisation of our tourism
potential, as well as investment in our IDZs, such as Coega and East
London.

Goal two involves facilitating economic activity within the second economy.
Key initiatives mentioned in the state of the nation address that are
integrated in our PGDP include the following: The Expanded Public Works
Programme, which deals with job creation, provision of services and
infrastructure development; housing development to promote sustainable
communities; SME development through regular reforms; microcredit and
business support; investment in skills through learnerships; FET
development and student assistance; land reform and agricultural support.

Goal three involves social services, income support and human development.
Programmes here refer to the safety net that has been developed for the
very poor and vulnerable.

As a province we have focused many of our Public Service improvement
efforts on our three social sector departments that are charged with
delivering basic services to the poor. Our focus this year will be on
improving access to and the quality of education, which will include
intensifying efforts to eradicate mud structures; improving delivery of
social grants; modernising health services and addressing critical skills
shortages; and improving delivery of the primary school nutrition
programme.

Goal four involves improving the capacity of the state. Key measures here,
as outlined in the state of the nation address, speak to capacity
development in service delivery; local government planning; economic
development; combating crime and improving the justice system.

Key initiatives underway in the Eastern Cape province include the
strengthening of the Office of the Premier in order to improve co-
ordination and monitoring of the PGDP. Linked to this is the development of
an electronic monitoring system to track delivery and expenditure on all
PGDP projects; the implementation of Project Consolidate in order to build
service delivery capacity in less-capacitated municipalities; continued
efforts to develop capacity in our three key social sector departments;
improving financial management and fiscal discipline in order to address
the deficit; strengthening intergovernmental relations and planning
alignment.

As different spheres of government we often tend to overstate the
nonalignment between national, provincial and local government. Our
assessment is that we are more aligned than we would admit when it comes to
strategic focus and priorities. This is clearly illustrated in the close
alignment between the MTSF and our PGDP.

Our assessment of IDPs in the province shows a close strategic alignment.
Nonetheless, there is room for improvement with respect to collaboration
around implementation, and we are looking forward to the implementation of
the intergovernmental relations Act and proposed institutional monarchy.
Thank you very much, hon Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, I was afraid that you didn’t want the
opposition to be heard, so I got quite a fright when you called another
member to address the House.

Agb Minister Fraser-Moleketi, u mag miskien verbaas wees om te hoor dat die
oorweldigende meerderheid van Suid-Afrikaners, ongeag aan watter politieke
party hulle behoort, of hulle nou liberaal is in u oë of nie, almal wil
help om armoede uit te wis, om die vergrype van die verlede reg te stel en
in harmonie saam te leef.

Die klem wat op ekonomiese groei en werkskepping laat val is, is veral
goeie nuus. Die uitwissing van armoede en werkloosheid is noodsaaklik en
ons stem saam dat alle wette en regulasies wat werkskepping en ontwikkeling
vertraag, weer na gekyk moet word. Wat egter teleurstellend is, is om te
sien dat dieselfde foute wat dekades lank deur die NP gemaak is, nou deur
die ANC herhaal word. Die swaar hand van die staat het vir dekades lank
bruin- en swartmense onderdruk en nou ervaar Afrikaanssprekende burgers die
ongerief van ’n onsimpatieke regering. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die aanslag – julle moet maar luister – teen Afrikaans en veral teen
Afrikaanse skole en universiteite is heeltemal onnodig. Die debat in
Afrikanergeledere word veral oorheers deur ouers wat bekommerd is oor dít
wat in skole en in universiteite aan die gang is. Hierdie debat het niks te
make met ’n hunkering na die verlede of met ’n nuwe soort apartheid nie,
maar het alles te make met hoë standaarde en kwaliteitonderrig vir hul
kinders.

Duisende hoogsgeskoolde onderwysers het net eenvoudig verdwyn en nou sit
ons met die probleem van ‘n tekorte in die onderwys. Die oplossing is nie
om Kubaanse onderwysers te werf nie. Kundige wiskunde- en
wetenskaponderwysers is in die land beskikbaar en moet net aangemoedig word
om terug te keer na die onderwys. Die druk op model C-skole is
onverklaarbaar. Dit sou baie meer sin kon maak om die konsep net eenvoudig
aan te pas by die nuwe omstandighede in die land.

Wat universiteite betref, is dit onaanvaarbaar dat Afrikaanse universiteite
geteiken word en dat al die ander universiteite toegelaat word om soos in
die verlede hul sake te bedryf.

Wat plaaslike bestuur betref, deel ons die President se kommer dat daar
groot probleme ondervind word. Die waarheid is egter dat plaaslike bestuur
nie slegs probleme het nie, maar dat dit in baie gevalle besig is om in
duie te stort. Die 136 munisipaliteite wat reeds in groot moeilikheid is,
is nie die volle waarheid nie. Daar is baie ander munisipaliteite wat
dieselfde lot in die gesig staar. Addisionele finansiering, opleiding en
die konsolidasieprojek is noodsaaklik en die DA ondersteun die poging ten
volle. Een aspek van die probleem met die . . . [Tyd verstreke.][Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Minister Fraser-Moleketi, you might be surprised to hear that the
overwhelming majority of South Africans, irrespective of which political
party they belong to, whether or not they are liberal in your view, want to
help to eradicate poverty, to rectify the transgressions of the past and to
live together in harmony.

The emphasis placed on economic growth, and job creation in particular, is
good news. The eradication of poverty and unemployment is essential and we
agree that all laws and regulations delaying job creation and development
should be looked at again. What is disappointing, however, is to see that
the same mistakes which were made by the NP for decades are now being
repeated by the ANC. For decades the heavy hand of the state repressed
coloureds and blacks, and now Afrikaans-speaking citizens experience the
discomfort of an unsympathetic government. [Interjections.]

The onslaught – you simply have to listen – against Afrikaans, and
especially against Afrikaans schools and universities, is totally
unnecessary. The debate amongst Afrikaners is predominated specifically by
parents who are concerned about what is happening in schools and
universities. This debate has nothing to do with a hankering after the past
or with a new kind of apartheid, but has everything to do with high
standards and quality education for their children.

Thousands of highly educated teachers have simply disappeared and now we
have the problem of shortages in education. The solution is not to recruit
Cuban teachers. Expert mathematics and science teachers are available in
this country and merely have to be encouraged to return to teaching. The
pressure on Model C schools is inexplicable. It would have made much more
sense simply to adapt the concept to the new circumstances in the country.

As far as universities are concerned, it is unacceptable that Afrikaans
universities are being targeted and that all the other universities are
allowed to conduct their affairs like before.

As far as local government is concerned, we share the President’s concern
that major problems are being experienced. The truth, however, is that
local government not only has problems, but that in many cases it is
collapsing. The 136 municipalities that are already in big trouble do not
reflect the whole truth. There are many other municipalities that are
facing the same fate. Additional financing, training and Project
Consolidate are essential, and the DA supports the effort wholeheartedly.

One aspect of the problem with the . . . [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Ms B Marshoff): Hon members, the Minister
for Public Service and Administration Mrs Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi,
colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, I would have loved to take Mr Le Roux on.

Mnr Le Roux, ek sal dit nie vandag doen nie. Ek het baie ander kole om te
gooi en ek sal nie op jou kan reageer nie. [Mr Le Roux, I will not do it
today. I have many other bones to pick and I will be unable to respond to
you.]

Hon Deputy Chairperson, on behalf of the people of the Free State, I would
like to take this opportunity to pay homage to one of the great leaders of
the people’s movement, Oom Ray. Like so many others before me have said, we
want to say to the people of our country - but especially to the people of
the Eastern Cape - that we really appreciate everything that he has done
for this country and that we will continue to work like the example he has
set for us and continue to serve the people of our country.

In a recent interview Oom Ray said that the struggle to him was like
oxygen, without the struggle he could not survive and we will use that
oxygen to continue to drive the processes that the ANC-led government has
identified up till now, including improving the quality of our life of our
people.

We, as the people of the Free State, thank this House for giving us this
opportunity to respond to the debate on the state of the nation address
that was delivered by the President. We want to acknowledge that
collectively as the Free State provincial government we have strived to
ensure that we advance the vision as enshrined in the Freedom Charter that
was adopted fifty years ago.

Hon Deputy Chairperson, in our social sector we are proud to state that by
31 January 2005 - if we look at the beneficiaries with regards to social
benefits in our province - we were paying out benefits to an amount of R569
000 and we had 560 people benefiting from social grants in our province. Of
these, R301 000 went to our child support grant support, R125 000 to old
age grants and R122 000 to disability grants; not forgetting also the
foster care grants that we are paying out to vulnerable children that were
left destitute due to their parents having passed away, but also due to
other reasons within the environment in which they find themselves.

We also want to pride ourselves on being a caring government in our
province. We know that it is our responsibility to guarantee securing the
safety and security for all our people and especially to the most
vulnerable groups.

To this effect, hon Deputy Chairperson, during 2004 as we have stated in
the state of the province address, we have issued more than 6,5 thousand
protection orders against perpetrators of abuse against women and children.

Furthermore we have placed 1 100 sexually abused children and we have less
than 9 000 missing children in places of safety. But we did not just do
this; we also initiated a programme for the rehabilitation of perpetrators
in line with our vision of a caring government. But also in line with our
vision we have adopted the restoration justice and the reintegration of the
perpetrators into society. And we can say that it has been a very
successful programme.

At present the school nutrition feeding scheme provides food to 287 000
learners. Our learner transport programme benefits 364 learners; in 1 011
farm school learners are in hostel accommodation and the reason why we have
introduced this programme was because of the insensitivity of our farmers
in the province who are closing down farm schools, evicting families from
the farms and also not caring about whether these children were receiving
education or not.

We have also introduced a programme for children who have had to walk for
more than 21 km. We have introduced a transport system and these children
are being carried to school on a daily basis. In line with our vision to
provide care to those who are less fortunate than ourselves, 707 youth have
gone through a learnership programme in the province up until now and, hon
Minister, in line with what you have set us to do we have already employed
95 community development workers and another 225 community development
workers will be taken on board as from 1 March. This training programme has
been highlighted by the ANC government to ensure that we establish and
strengthen the links between the different spheres of government; and our
community development workers are the first line of defence to ensure that
our community issues are being given the credibility that it deserves.

Indeed, hon Ministers, during these past years that we have strove to give
effect to the commitment that we made in the Freedom Charter we have stated
that the doors of learning shall be opened to all.

Hon members, as one of the poorest provinces we recognise the extent to
which poverty undermines the health of a number of our people. We are thus
confronted by a whole range of diseases of poverty to which we have
responded by relentlessly placing an emphasis on the implementation of our
provincial health programme strategy that is supported by a comprehensive
programme and we can tell that it is beginning to show results because
diseases of lifestyle such as diabetes, hypertension and such things are
already showing a decline in our province. We are also promoting primary
health care vigilantly in our province and are also ensuring that children
will benefit through this programme.

During the state of the nation address, the President affirmed that with
regard to HIV/Aids in particular, the government’s comprehensive plan,
which is amongst the best in the world -combining awareness, treatment and
home-based care - is being implemented with great vigour. To this extent
the Free State Provincial Government too is committed to continuing to
strength and  expand access to quality health at all levels of care and
especially to people living with HIV/Aids.

We are dedicated to improving the quality of lives of our people and to
give an indication of what we have already done, during the past year we
have built an additional 1 350 rural houses for those people in our
province who have been marginalized for so long. We have restored to them
their dignity, given them something that they can begin to call their own,
but also we know that through the rural housing programme we are saying to
our people that indeed you have a caring government in place and a
government that is going to respond to your needs.

In total 10 400 housing units have been handed over to our beneficiaries in
the past decade and we will continue, hon Ministers, to improve not only on
housing delivery but also on the quality of the structures that we deliver
to our people as well as our commitment in the province to the total
eradication of informal settlements within three years. How we are going to
do that is something that we are working on, we have already adopted our
special development plan and we have a programme in place that is beginning
to address that.

The Expanded Public Works Programme has also resulted in an additional 702
jobs within the construction sector for this year under review and we are
also positive that in this coming year we will be able to enhance it
further. We are in the process of ensuring that with the new statutes that
we are putting in place we will create more jobs, through Black Economic
Empowerment and also the support that we are giving to emerging farmers. In
addition, several jobs will be created through the continued expenditure on
the municipal infrastructure grant. An amount of R313 million has been
spent already and we are also going to expand even more in this financial
year. Not only just the municipal infrastructure grants
. . . [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): There are some changes
to our speaker’s list. After the hon Vilakazi, it will be the hon Sonyo of
Salga.

Nkk J N VILAKAZI: Mphathisihlalo ohloniphekileyo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe
namalungu onke ahloniphekileyo, uMongameli wezwe ukhulumile evula
iPhalamende. Simlalele ebika ngokwenziwe nokusazokwenziwa kule Ningizimu
Afrika esiyakheleyo.

Egameni le-IFP siyavuma. Kukhona okubalulekile osekwenziwe uHulumeni wethu.
Uma ngithi qaphuqaphu Mphathisihlalo, nakhu: Siwushayela izandla ugesi
namanzi osukhona emiphakathini eminingi, yize-ke nokho emakhaya amaningi
ezabelweni kusemnyama njalo namanzi lawo kusewusizi lodwa.

Ukwakhiwa kwezindlu nakho siyakubona, ukhona umehluko omkhulu kabi
esikhundleni semijondolo. Imijondolo-ke yona angazi noma iyoke inciphe na.
Ibukeka yanda mihla yonke kuthi uma kuna imvula kube cishi cishi, kudilika,
kucwila konakala impahla nokunye nokunye. Nanku nomlilo awuzibekile phansi
ushaya icole ezindaweni eziningi.

Impela sasicabanga ukuthi emva kweminyaka elishumi siyobe sesingcono, kodwa
lutho kunalokho imijondolo iyakhula ngesikhulu isivinini. Uhulumeni wethu
sekufanele ayibuke ngelinye iso le ndaba yezindlu ezingcono ezingakwazi
ukugwinya le minjondolo. Abantu bayazidinga izindlu ezingcono ukukhulisa
abantwana ngendlela enesithunzi.

Mayelana nesandulelangculazi nengculazi, yebo ikhona imizamo kodwa izwe
lethu libhekene nempi uqobo lwayo. Sidinga igalelo elithe xaxa ukulwa
nalolu bhubhane bakithi. Abantu basafisa okwezimpukane lapha emakhaya mihla
nayizolo. Kusemakhaya, kusemadolobheni kuyafana nje.

Mayelana nolimi lwethu, akubonakali kahle hle okwenziwayo ukunikeza ulimi
lwethu lwendabuko isithunzi esifaneleyo. Ulimi ngumongo wezwe uqobo.
Abantwana bethu abasakwazi ukukhuluma ulimi abaluncele ebeleni lonina.
Olwami nje ulimi weZulu, KwaZulu-Natali angiboni nakancane okwenziwayo
ukuluphakamisa, kunalokho abantwana bethu abasazi isiZulu.

Uhulumeni omkhulu asiliboni iqhaza alibambile ekukhuliseni ulimi
lwendabuko. Siyathokoza nje ukuzwa uNgqongqoshe wezeMfundo enza umnyakazo
kule ndima. Kubi konakele, sithi: Phambili Ngqongqoshe! Uma ngikhuluma
kanje angisho ukuthi akufundwe ngalo njengolimi lokufundisa kodwa sikhalela
ukuthi alufundwe njengesifundo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the
President said a great deal in his state of the nation address during the
opening of Parliament.

On behalf of the IFP we would like to say we agree that our Government has
done much. Chairperson, to mention but a few things, we highly appreciate
the installation of electricity in and supply of water to our communities,
although there are some rural areas that do not have electricity and water.

We also recognise the housing project. There is a paradigm shift from shack
dwellings to formal housing. I am not sure whether the number of shacks
will ever be reduced. It appears to be increasing, and when it rains they
fall down and the furniture that is inside is damaged. Fire-related
disasters also keep causing destruction in many areas.

We thought that after a period of 10 years we would have improved our
housing conditions, instead, the number of shacks is rapidly increasing.
Our government should consider the idea of building better housing, which
would eliminate all these shacks. People need better houses to bring up
their children in dignified conditions.

Regarding HIV and Aids, yes, of course there have been interventions,
although it appears that our country is facing a war itself. We need to
make a greater effort to fight this scourge. People are dying like flies,
whether they are in rural areas or urban areas; it is the same everywhere.

Chairperson and honourable House, it is not clear what is being done to
give our African languages the dignity they deserve. The language is the
backbone of the nation. Our children are unable to speak their mother
tongue. My mother tongue is isiZulu. I do not see anything that is being
done in KwaZulu-Natal to develop our vernacular; instead our children
cannot speak isiZulu. We have not seen anything done by the national
government to develop our indigenous language. We appreciate the initiative
taken by the Minister of Education in this regard. Things are tough and we
say: Long live the hon Minister! I am not saying that our language should
be used as a medium of instruction, but it must be included as a subject.]

Eleven official languages in South Africa are very important to us. For the
past 10 years we have still been speaking two languages, and those are
English and Afrikaans. But why?

Ukungalwazi ulimi lwendabuko kuqeda isithunzi sethu, kuqeda ababhali
bakusasa bezincwadi, kuqeda ukuhaywa kwezinkondlo, kuqeda abaqambi
bamaculo, kanye namasiko esizwe uqobo. Sidinga uhulumeni wethu eminyangweni
efaneleyo silibone iqhaza alibambile ukufuqa le nqola enzima kangaka
yolimi. [Kwaphela isikhathi.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The lack of knowledge of our indigenous language reduces our dignity. It
also reduces our future writers, the recitation of poems, composers of song
and also culture. We want the government to introduce indigenous languages
to relevant departments. [Time expired.]]

Mr S SOMYO (Salga): Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson, hon members, on
behalf of Salga we want to thank our President for his astute leadership
and setting a bold agenda for government that resonates with all South
Africans. As President Mbeki aptly points out, this year marks the fiftieth
anniversary of the Freedom Charter and its vision continues to guide our
programme. Central to these achievements is our success in advancing our
country away from its divided past towards the realisation of the vision
contained in the Freedom Charter, whose fiftieth anniversary we celebrate
this year, namely that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, both
black and white.

Hon members, let me take this opportunity to express our sincere
condolences to the family of Comrade Mhlaba. Oom Ray was a participant in
the 1955 Congress of the People and he will not only be remembered for his
anonymous and selfless contributions he made in the creation of a vision of
a South Africa, but we shall also remember the role he played as Premier of
the Eastern Cape in establishing a single administration and leading
government service delivery in the Eastern Cape.

This year will also mark the fifth year for democratic local government in
its current form. Local government has undergone three phases of
transformation with significant changes to the political form, demarcation,
administrative structures and functions and policies that had enormous
impact on municipalities. Throughout this period the vast majority of
municipalities provided services with minimal disruption. The road was not
an easy one and it required councillors to continuously keep up with
changing legislation, new government programmes, special skills required
for delivery services, continuous community participation and, at the same
time, transforming local government in a sustainable manner.

Salga is committed to the key programmes outlined by the President. In
support of the President’s call for more effective ward committees, we seek
to intensify the democratisation process through the enhancement of the
ward committees. These committees will deepen participation in government
and increase the level of accountability and transparency of local
government.

However, we must caution that a number of issues raised at the community
level do not distinguish between the different spheres of government. It is
therefore essential that other spheres of government join us at these
community meetings to understand the past of the community and to foster a
new level of co-operation between the spheres of government so that we are
able to overcome the challenges of sustainable service delivery.

The imbizos are suitable instruments to jointly get closer to the people.
We are confident that the community development workers will contribute to
facilitating in the governmental co-operation, working closely with
municipalities to overcome the challenges in service delivery.

Municipalities have been at the forefront of employment creation through
the presidential Expanded Public Works Programme. The most important
challenge is to grow the local economy in a manner that will minimise the
impoverishment of rural areas. This will require a co-ordinated approach
between local government and the economic cluster to synergise our efforts.


As hon members will concur, these programmes are central in developing and
transforming our second economy, whilst ensuring continued growth of the
first economy. Together with the Department of Provincial and Local
Government Salga has further developed and adopted the Project Consolidate
programme. The programme is aimed at supporting 136 identified
municipalities with the objective of accelerating effective delivery of
services and creating an environment for job creation through the Expanded
Public Works Programme.

In order for such a programme to succeed effectively, the level of co-
operation among municipalities and between the different spheres of
government is essential. Of critical importance is the need to share
information on best practices and challenges. Of critical importance is the
need to improve the image of local government. The challenges faced by
local government must be understood in context. Local government must be
supported to address these challenges in a constructive manner.

It is counterproductive to blame local government for the lack of service
delivery or for not addressing the backlogs overnight. We need to jointly
address these challenges through a single Public Service. As Salga we
continue to encourage our public servants, both politically and
administratively, to be guided by the principles of Batho People, putting
people first, as they discharge their responsibilities to our people.

The effective participation of all spheres of government in an
intergovernmental relation structures such as this one, are indeed of
paramount importance in the growth and development of our nation. As we
enter the second decade of democracy, Salga as the representative body of
municipalities further commits itself to advocating the interests of
municipalities in these structures with the aim of ensuring effective and
accelerated development in our local communities.

We are pleased to hear the President’s announcement to continue increasing
the resources available to local government, as national government has
done over the past eight years. These resources are indeed needed in
ensuring that local government fulfils its developmental mandate.

In conclusion, as municipal leaders we are uniquely positioned to
facilitate public participation in our effort to deepen democracy in our
country. The challenge of service delivery is difficult to achieve in a
sustainable manner without guaranteed participation of our people, both
black and white. In this regard we need an intergovernmental approach that
is mutually reinforcing and will enhance the agenda set by the President.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K SINCLAIR: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, premiers and
colleagues, a very noble woman in the Northern Cape with the name of Ruth
Mompati once said: “In South Africa you don’t decide to join politics;
politics decides to join you.” I want to speak as a politician today about
the President’s speech and his reply. I want to speak as an Afrikaner,
because sometimes people come and claim that they’re speaking on behalf of
the Afrikaans people of this country, but they don’t speak the truth about
what’s happening.
Agb Voorsitter, wat my betref, was daar drie kwessies wat die President na
vore gebring het. Die eerste kwessie was dat die President gesê het ons en
ons land is op koers. Die President het erken daar is sekere dinge wat
skort, dat daar sekere dinge is wat aandag nodig het; maar in die breë het
die President gesê ons is besig om na die behoeftes en belange van al die
mense in Suid-Afrika te kyk.

Die tweede kwessie was dat die President sekere groepe in die land, en
veral politieke groeperings soos die DA, ontbloot het vir wat hulle werklik
is. Die President het die DA ontbloot as ’n politieke party wat in wese ’n
konserwatiewe liggaam is met ’n liberale hart. [Gelag.] As ’n mens so
geluister het na wat sommige van die agb lede vroeër gesê het, het ’n mens
dit weer ervaar, want dit is absoluut vergesog om te dink dat ’n liberale
leier soos die agb Tony Leon nou kom voorspraak maak vir
moedertaalonderrig. Dit kan mos net nie wees nie. Dan is daar ’n verskil
tussen wat die hart sê en wat die liggaam doen. [Gelag.]

Ek dink ons sal nog baie in die toekoms met mekaar daaroor praat, maar ’n
mens moet baie versigtig wees as jy oor sulke emosionele goed soos die
onderwys, kerk en moedertaalonderrig begin praat. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek is
bly om te sien die agb Watson is wakker. Ek het gedink hy slaap! [Gelag.]
In hierdie jaar, die vyftigste wat ons as land en as mense wat aan die ANC
behoort die skryf van die Vryheidsmanifes gedenk, is die kritieke vraag wat
ons almal in hierdie Huis moet beantwoord, van die ANC na die DA na die OD
na die VF . . . [Tyd verstreke.]
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, as far as I am concerned there were three issues that the
President had raised. The first is that the President said that we, and our
country, were on track. The President acknowledged that there were some
things that were wrong and required attention, but on the whole the
President said that we were looking into the needs and after the interests
of all the people in South Africa.
The second issue was that the President exposed certain groups in the
country, and especially certain political groupings such as the DA, for
what they really are. The President exposed the DA as a political party
that is in essence a conservative body with a liberal heart. [Laughter.]
When listening to what some hon members said earlier on, one experienced
this once again, for it is absolutely far-fetched to think that a liberal
leader like the hon Tony Leon would now advocate mother tongue instruction.
Surely this cannot be true. Then there is a difference between what the
heart says and what the body does. [Laughter.]

I think we will be talking to one another about this on many more occasions
in future, but one should be very careful when speaking about such emotive
issues as education, religion and mother tongue instruction.
[Interjections.] I am glad to see that the hon Watson is awake. I thought
he was asleep! [Laughter.]

During this year, the fiftieth that we as a country and as people belonging
to the ANC are celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter, the
critical question that every one of us in this House should be answering,
from the ANC to the DA to the ID to the FF Plus . . .] [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN CAPE (Ms E D Peters): Madam Deputy Chairperson,
Madam Minister Fraser-Moleketi, hon members, I would like to start by
congratulating the NCOP on the installation of the Black Rod and also by
wishing us a happy birthday because we turned eight yesterday. [Applause.]
Unfortunately the Chairperson is not here. I heard him say that at eight
years the child starts to walk and talk, and I was surprised because at
eight years of age, children are already in Grade 3 at school! [Laughter.]
So I just want to say to him that the child is actually in the formative
years of schooling and it means that we really are in the learning curve,
and we are improving because we’ve started doing the right things. I would
like also to take this opportunity on behalf of the people of the Northern
Cape . . .

Go tlisa mafoko a matshediso go ANC, go Kapa Botlhaba le lelapa la ga Oom
Ray gore ba leleka ntho madi a tshologa. Se se ba tlhagetseng, se tlhagetse
rona rotlhe ka gore ntate Ray e ne e le moeteledipele wa rona rotlhe.
Molwela tokologo yo o pelokgale, yo o ileng a re direla gore e be re le mo
demokerasing gompieno. Ka jalo ke re matshediso go rona rotlhe. Matshediso
go Kapa Botlhaba le go African National Congress. (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[We convey our condolences to the ANC, to the Eastern Cape and to Oom Ray’s
family and hope that they accept this. What befell them has also affected
us because Oom Ray was a leader to us; I therefore convey my condolences to
all of us. This brave freedom fighter had worked to bring about the
democracy we have today. Our condolences to the Eastern Cape and the ANC.]

I would like to take the cue from the state of the nation address and
indicate that on Friday we also had an opportunity as the Northern Cape to
reflect on the achievements we have realised, and further mapped out our
future priorities in addressing the needs of our people. Allow me to use
this platform to do just that.

We are pleased once more to have dispelled the myth. Last year sometime in
July we were inundated with pressure from a national Sunday newspaper that
indicated that the Northern Cape was a bankrupt province and that we were
going to be failing in our mission to deliver on our commitments to the
people of the Northern Cape. I’m happy to indicate to the House today that
we have set the record straight: We did say we were not bankrupt and we
were at pains to be able to explain the situation in the Northern Cape.

I need to indicate to you, members, that some of the goals and targets that
we set for ourselves as a provincial government have been achieved, and a
lot still needs to be done to address some of the critical areas and speed
up the process of providing essential services to the poor communities in
my province. The province prides itself on the successful launch of the
provincial growth and development strategy. We did say that we would be
launching that strategy and we have done that. On 26 July 2004 we were able
to launch the comprehensive plan for the integrated treatment, care and
management of people living with HIV and Aids in the Northern Cape.

I would like to take this opportunity to highlight some of the other key
achievements we’ve been able to reach. Those would not be the only ones
that we’ve been able to achieve, but I’ll limit myself to them because of
time constraints. We have been able to make sure that the sexual offences
court, which we had indicated would be launched in De Aar, was launched.
That serves as indication for us that the offenders in the De Aar district
have been successfully prosecuted. I must also add here that there is an
indication that this court has been able to make sure that these offenders
– more than 2 000 of them – have already landed behind bars. I know that
this is creating problems for our Department of Correctional Services, but
the fact is, we need to secure convictions.

We did say that we were going to employ more than 464 police officers and
we have been able to achieve this. We did indicate to the nation that we
would be purchasing 142 new police vehicles, and an amount of R23,746
million was allocated for this in the 2004-05 financial year. Already, we
have been able to deliver 140 of these vehicles, which indicates to you
that we have been able to go beyond our target, because 191 vehicles were
ordered instead of the originally intended 142. We also said we needed to
be able to make sure that the Kuruman, Aggeneys, Steinkopf and Galeshewe
police stations were completed.

I think it is important that members of this house should be able to help
us as a province to ask the national Department of Public Works how long it
takes them to construct and build a police station. We’ve got a police
station that has been under construction for eight years, and it is just
too many years to be waiting for a police station in a community,
especially as is the case with the Kuruman and the Galeshewe police
stations. So it means that, whilst the province is trying to do its bit,
the national departments that work in the province must also try and do
their bit.

We did indicate that we as the Northern Cape, like the Eastern Cape and
other rural provinces, have serious problems of retaining professionals in
the deep rural areas and we have seen with the introduction of the rural
allowance that we were able to attract more professionals to those outlying
areas. In fact, because in the Northern Cape only Upington and Kimberley
have not been declared rural, we have seen a shift in which most of our
professionals who were in Kimberley and Upington are moving to the outlying
areas because of the incentive that they will be getting.

We have said that we were going to purchase 13 new ambulances and we have
been able to purchase them, and I can even indicate here that we have
fitted tracking systems, because these vehicles were at times used as
taxis. Because the Northern Cape is so vast our ECPs at times used these
vehicles to transport people between the outlying areas for their own
pockets by getting people to pay them for transport. So the tracking system
should be able to help us to actually know exactly at what time and where
the ambulance is deployed.

We did say that we would be able to distribute 9 950 food parcels to
households for an amount of R10 million. This commitment has experienced a
delay due to the fact that all provinces are still waiting for the national
Department of Social Services and Population Development to conclude the
tender process. We have started with the construction of schools in
Ritchie, Douglas and Schmidtsdrif, but we believe that we’ll be able to
make sure that by the end of this year the schools are opened, because we
had a delay due to the tender processes.

Talking about tender processes, we were informed that there is a system
that is used to award tenders. That has created problems for us in the
Northern Cape, where you’d find that one contractor gets more than 10
contracts from different departments in the province without anyone
checking whether this contractor has the ability or capacity to be able to
deliver. Take the Northern Cape, for example: If you give a contract to one
person in Kimberley and to the same person in Calvinia, to the same person
in Springbok and to the same person in Colesberg, that person is not going
to be able to monitor the construction process and make sure that he or she
delivers on time. What worries us is that it now seems that we have
contractors who are at times only sitting and developing tender documents
as opposed to making sure that they are able to deliver on those that they
have already received.

That is what creates the delays in the construction of major government
buildings in the Northern Cape. I need to indicate here that we are
appealing to the House here to help us to be able to eradicate this type of
tendency by ensuring that, if it is the rules that are the problem, we can
remove the rules so that it can become possible for us to deliver.

I need to indicate here that we did indicate last year that we would be
able to create 9 030 jobs through the Expanded Public Works Programme. We
have been able to exceed the target, and added to that I can indicate that
we have already started a project involving the manufacturing of paving
bricks and kerbs in Vanwyksvlei, the construction of a new bridge from
Blouputs to Riemvasmaak across the Orange River, the upgrading of the road
from Douglas to Hopetown from gravel to tar, the construction of the
Kommagas road to Springbok, as well as ensuring that this construction work
is 20% labour intensive. We have decided to adapt or change the 10%
national requirement to 20% so as to be able to accommodate more people in
the Northern Cape.

We are saying, added to this, we’ve got additional future commitments
because we have proven to ourselves, to South Africa and the people of the
Northern Cape that we are not a bankrupt province. We might have budgetary
constraints because we get limited amounts, but we are able to deliver
nevertheless.

Just as we’ve said that we were able to launch our PGDS, we are saying that
in this year we are going to make sure that the innovation fund that we
have set aside will be used to unlock development funding for creative,
innovative economic development initiatives such as the mariculture
industrial park in the Richtersveld in the Port Nolloth district. The
Umsobomvu Youth Fund will also focus on business skills development among
the youth to build enterprise development skills. The Umsobomvu Youth Fund
has also provided R6 million towards the construction of an access road to
Platfontein, which is where the !Xun and Khwe communities are relocating.
[Time expired.][Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, before I call upon the
next speaker, I want to bring to your attention that, due to other
engagements by the Minister, she’s not going to be with us for the entire
duration of this debate. One would wish that she will actually become part
of the whole process throughout, but, most unfortunately, she’s going to be
leaving us in the next few minutes to attend to other engagements.

Mr S SHICEKA: Deputy Chairperson of Committees, you’ll agree with me that
the women Premiers are the friends of the NCOP. Whenever they are called to
come here, they will be here. [Applause.]

I hope you will be able to give me two minutes of the ANC’s time, because I
know you are very strict with time. [Laughter.] Madam Minister of Public
Services and Administration, Premiers from the various provinces, hon
members of the executive from the different provinces, special delegates
from organised local government and hon members, in going back down memory
lane, when we assumed government in 1994 we were faced with insurmountable
social backlogs and high levels of inequality. In order to ensure the
implementation of the ideals espoused in the Freedom Charter, we adopted
the Reconstruction and Development Programme as an integrated and coherent
socio-economic policy framework for meeting the basic needs of our people.

As first priorities in this regard, the Reconstruction and Development
Programme identified land, housing, water, electricity, telecommunications,
transport, a clean and healthy environment, nutrition, healthcare and
social welfare. It said that in this way, we can begin to reconstruct
family and community lives of our society.

The RDP, therefore, committed the democratic government to move our country
forward decisively, to social transformation and the eradication of poverty
and underdevelopment. It is, therefore, indeed appropriate that we
juxtapose this debate against the background of our achievement and,
equally important, the challenges that we as government still face in the
social sector.

This progress is the direct result of our programmes and policies, which
provided the solid foundation during the first decade of our freedom.
Moreover, in this regard, we are convinced that the role played by our
government in both policy formulation and implementation with the
overwhelming support of our people is, indeed, the correct one.

In assessing the record of government, a discussion document titled Towards
a 10-year Review , noted the achievement that was made in realising the
objectives and the vision of the Freedom Charter. In relation to the whole
social sector cluster it noted, however, that different programmes which
respectively address income, asset and human resource poverty are taking
effect and showing improvement in the lives of our people. However, the
persistent poverty arising largely from unemployment, the apartheid legacy
and the difficulties in health demonstrate the magnitude of the challenge.

The 2004 ANC election manifesto addressed itself to these matters, as such:


  South Africa has a caring government with housing programmes for the
  poor, with social security grants for pensioners, young children, people
  with disabilities and other vulnerable groups, with programmes to
  redistribute land, with equality education open for all and other new
  opportunities for the youth, with clinics being built closer to where
  people live, with households being connected to water, electricity and
  more other social amenities including telecommunications.

In terms of the Vision 2014, we as the ANC are committed to reducing
poverty by half through economic development, comprehensive social
security, land reform and improved household and community assets. For the
next five years it has committed government to speeding up programmes to
provide water, sanitation, electricity and telephone services to those who
have not yet been connected, and to build more subsidised housing.

The President, during the state of the nation address in the National
Assembly, spoke passionately and sincerely about the challenges we are
still faced with as a nation, particularly in the social sector. In the
current context of our agenda of Project Consolidate, which is aimed at
providing urgent assistance to areas of local government that are seen to
be experiencing capacity problems in difficult areas such as the provision
of water, electricity and also services in general, should be fast-tracked.

As members of this august House we are entrusted with the critical role of
oversight as it relates to both the executive and local government. From
this it must be clear that it is expected of us to make interventions where
disjuncture occurs between the policy outcomes and the policy intentions.

Also, we need to be proactive with regard to the clarification of our
policies and raise awareness of the implications that occur in this regard.
In this regard, the Letsema Campaign remains our best vehicle to encourage
communities to work together to improve each other’s lives.

In addition, we need to redirect existing mechanisms to move towards a more
responsive and effective service delivery. In this regard, allow me to
quote the scholar, Max Weber, when he said:


  The assumption is that participatory democracy is impossible as a means
  of regulating government in large-scale societies. This is not only an
  indisputable reason that millions cannot regularly meet to take political
  decisions, but because the running of a complex society demands
  expertise.

The recruitment, training and deployment of community development workers
is aimed at doing exactly this and, precisely so, to ensure that the
expertise Weber spoke of is brought to bear in accessing information for
the improvement of the quality of the lives of our people. The value to be
added by community development workers in translating the ideals of the
Freedom Charter in the clause that says, the people shall govern, is
therefore critical.

In conclusion, Chairperson of Committees, before you use your hammer, we
believe that adequate resourcing of ward committees presents another
challenge, in order for them to achieve their legislative mandate.
Democracy has to be financed if it is to work.

The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration intends to
visit Brazil in the coming year, and in particular the province of Porto
Allegre. It is where participatory democracy in the form of participatory
budgeting is championed. We also intend to visit a province called Kerala
at the southern tip of India. That province has been under the rule of
communists for many years. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr J L MAHLANGU (Mpumalanga): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Premiers and
colleagues . . .

. . . ngibawa nami ukuthi ngingeze emazwini walabo esebakhulume ngaphambili
ukudlulisa amazwi wenduduzo emndenini ka Oom Ray. [. . . I would like to
add to the words of those who have already expressed their condolences to
the family of Oom Ray.]

Last Friday the President gave the line of march that we as servants of the
people need to take as we move towards the creation of the people-centred
society we all yearn for and deserve. On that occasion the hon President
made the point that, as we enter the second decade of democracy, we can
indeed take pride and courage in the fact that today more people enjoy the
opportunities and prospects offered by our fledgling democracy; a democracy
based on the will of the people and given life by that popular document of
the people, the Freedom Charter.

Today, in the true spirit of those who gave up their freedom and laid down
their lives in pursuit of a South Africa that belongs to all who live in
it, black and white, we gather to take stock of our achievements over the
past years. We do so truly convinced that indeed the people are governing.
Yes, indeed in the past 10 years we have moved a long way in creating a
better life for all our people. More people now have access to shelter and
security; more people, including children, women and the disabled, now have
access to social security, education and better health.

The President said during the state of the nation address that the
programme of action of government to achieve higher rates of economic
growth and development, improve the quality of life of all our people and
consolidate our social cohesion is on track. This is also agreed to by
economists in the country.

The province of Mpumalanga is also committed to bringing economic growth
and development. As the province of Mpumalanga it is our considered view
that this ought to be a year where our province begins to make serious
advances on employment creation.

Government, organised business, organised labour and community
organisations have pledged to work together to address the socio-economic
development challenges facing our province. The recently held provincial
growth and development summit has set the course on which we need to
follow.

Although the victories we have registered during our first 10 years of
freedom have laid a firm foundation for the new advances, during the next
decade a number of challenges remain.

The provision of potable water remains a huge challenge facing the
province. This is largely due to the acute shortage and lack of
infrastructure in other areas. The province has managed to provide free
basic water of six kilolitres to approximately 50% of households in the
province.

Let me hasten to add that Eskom is bringing back into service three
previously decommissioned power stations at Camden in Msukaligwa, Lomati in
Steve Tswete and Grootvlei in the Paleseng that will result in the creation
of 26 000 jobs both directly and indirectly in the province over the next
five years.

We have in the past 10 months provided shelter to close to 9 000
households. We have also embarked on an ambitious plan to eradicate the
bucket system in the province. The first, more than 6 000 households in
Gert Sibanda district, which include Dipaliseng, Albert Luthuli, Lekwa and
Msukaligwa, will be completed by 31 March this year. The remainder of the
projects will hopefully be completed before the end of this year. In other
words, when we reach the end of 2005 Mpumalanga will be without a bucket as
part of its sanitation. [Applause!]

The provincial executive has made concerted efforts to pull the education
department out of its low performance levels. These efforts are beginning
to bear fruit. The Department of Education has faced various constraints
including budgetary ones that impeded plans for the construction of
relevant infrastructure. More resources will be made available to the
department in the next five years for expenditure on infrastructure.

A total of 486 lay counsellors are assisting with the voluntary counselling
and testing programme. The province has vigorously embarked on training
health workers and to date in excess of 1 360 home-based caregivers are
receiving stipends. In the next three months we will finalise, resource and
implement a comprehensive specialised health service delivery plan.

To this end, we shall accelerate the implementation of the Iranian exchange
programme; accelerate roll-out of the mid-level health workers programme –
including career development paths. By July 2005 we should have integrated
municipal and provincial clinics to provide the same level of services in
the province.

The province previously indicated that it would fully integrate the
institution of traditional leadership into a democratic governance and
development. It has prepared two draft Bills in order to achieve these
goals. These Bills are the Mpumalanga Traditional Leaders and Governance
Bill and the Mpumalanga Provincial House of Local Houses of Traditional
Leaders Bill. It is envisaged that both these Bills will be introduced in
the provincial legislature for consideration and passing.

To improve the integrated planning among all spheres of government, the
province will be implementing an Integrated Development Planning Nerve
Centre and updating the Integrated Spatial Framework. The IDP Nerve Centre
will strengthen the link between local, provincial and national government
by providing a means whereby municipalities and provincial governments can
maintain and communicate key planning and IDP information, thereby allowing
access across all levels of government.

With regard to the schools audit - which amongst other things, the Minister
referred to – and the skills development, two companies have been appointed
to conduct a skills audit, which should be completed in the next four
months. This exercise will help in identifying gaps in the managers and
also help in empowering managers with appropriate skills, which will
ultimately lead to better service delivery in the province. This will also
lead to massive improvement in the management, organisation, technical and
other capabilities of government.

As the province of Mpumalanga, we would also like to bid farewell to our
distinguished Chief Justice, Judge Arthur Chaskalson, who will be stepping
down as the head of the Constitutional Court. We convey our humblest thanks
to the great son of our people. With these few words, I thank you.
[Applause!]

The PREMIER OF LIMPOPO (Mr T A MUFUMADI): Thank you, Chairperson. Minister
Moleketi, Premiers present here, hon members and the representatives of
Salga, on behalf of the Premier and the people of Limpopo, let me say that
we too have already begun to feel the void that has been left by Oom Ray,
and would like to express our sincere condolences to the family, the people
of the Eastern Cape and the ANC in particular.

Chairperson of the NCOP, we would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you as you assume your new responsibilities. It may be
belated, but we feel it is important that we do so. We are very grateful
and feel confident that you will not let us down. We also want to take this
opportunity to congratulate the NCOP for work done well in the last eight
years, which has today culminated in the unveiling of the new Black Rod,
which epitomises and symbolises the important role and impact of the
provincial sphere of government in the transformation of our society.

On 11 February 2005, the President of our country gave a detailed account
to the nation about the progress we have made in the past nine months, as
spelt out in the first state of the nation address of the 3rd democratic
Parliament. In his address the President also emphasised very strongly
areas that we have not been able to respond to adequately. We were reminded
of the real challenges that we still face, as elected representatives in
these legislative Chambers’ and the underperformance of the Public Service;
that the need for service delivery to the poor is more acute than ever
before, and that where we have failed in the past decade, it was not just
because of the lack of adequate resources.

In essence, the President has asked us the question: Do we have the
required capacity, skills, commitment and consciousness to translate and
implement government policies within the Public Service? The President
reminded us, and we agree as Limpopo, that we can do more with the
resources at our disposal to bring about qualitative changes to the
standard of living of our people.

Therefore, the challenge we face as various spheres of government and
parastatals is to build the relevant and much-needed capacity to implement
government programmes, and to ensure that the unskilled and unemployed are
equipped for the new challenges of our modernising economy. Critical to all
these challenges is that there can be no excuse for nonperformance and
underperformance by anyone of us because the inability to provide basic
services such as water, electricity, housing, jobs and proper educational
facilities is but the denial of the fruits of freedom and democracy to
those who sacrificed in our struggle.

Freedom and democracy to our people means the following, amongst other
things: Access to primary health care; building an economy that gives hope
to the unemployed, particularly the youth and our women; and it also means
giving shelter to the poor and the weak.

As a province, the growth and development strategy of our province is
informed and guided by the contract we have signed with our people – the
people’s contract, which places the needs of our people above anything
else, and which is nothing else but the commitment by the people of our
country to play an active role in charting their way into the future.

The state of the province address by the Premier has expanded and adapted
these national challenges to our own conditions. Unlike other provinces, we
have had an above-average national economic growth rate for the past four
years, but with much less job elasticity, particularly in the mining and
other sectors of our economy. Therefore, through our sectoral summits, we
have elaborated our growth development strategy with more emphasis on
manufacturing and beneficiation in all key sectors of the economy,
particularly in mining and agriculture.

In the coming medium-term expenditure financial years, we will continue to
commit more resources for the provision of priority public and social
infrastructure within the context of the Expanded Public Works Programme
with labour-intensive methods at the centre of every programme, without
delaying or compromising the quality of service that we need to provide to
our people. We believe that it is through deliberate government
interventions, resource reallocation and allocation that the economy of our
province will begin to narrow the gap between the first and the second
economies in our country.

We are beginning to witness sporadic incidents at local government level
elsewhere in our country, though this may not be prevalent in Limpopo.
Whilst this may to a lesser extent reflect a creeping impatience of
communities with regard to the slow pace of service delivery, we should and
must continue to make it our responsibility to have regular community
meetings for reporting back. This will ensure that there is no space for
opportunists and agent provocateurs, whose main agenda is nothing else but
to sow the seeds of confusion and incite communities so that they can
realise low voter turnout as we approach the next local government
elections. That is their wish.

The provincial government will continue its interaction with the
communities and all our people through our imbizos. Cabinet meets with the
people, the Premier and the Mayor’s forums because we truly identify with
the theme of this year’s opening of Parliament – Parliament, the voice of
the people.

Only yesterday we convened an all-stakeholder summit to address the issue
of water shortages in our province and to agree on a concrete and
structured co-ordinated plan to revive old and provide new infrastructure
for water provision for industrial and domestic consumption as well as
agricultural development, particularly for irrigation schemes for emerging
farmers in our province.

As far as education is concerned, we do accept that significant progress
has been made in the last decade. The challenge remains massive. We can say
without fear of our shadows following us later on in our lifetime that the
programmes we have will adequately address the challenges, as reflected in
the state of the nation address. We will use government and community
structures, particularly community development workers, to quantify the
actual challenges with regard to school needs analysis, and effective
utilisation of available space in some of the underutilised schools.

To realise all these programmes, the planning and monitoring unit in the
Premier’s office is being strengthened. We believe that we do not need new
policies. We have enough policies in place and what remains is a strong
structure that needs to do monitoring and evaluation, and assess the impact
of our own programmes in so far as it relates to ordinary people on the
ground.

Mudzulatshidulo, ri a livhuwa tshifhinga tshe ra newa tshone na uri zwothe
zwe ra amba hafha namusi, ri khou fulufhedzisa zwauri zwi do itea. Li do da
duvha. Ha khensa. Re lebogile. [Uvhanda zwanda.] [Chairperson, thanks for
the time we have been given, we promise that all that has been raised here
today will happen. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr O M THETJENG:  Thank you, Chair and the hon members in the House today,
the President of this country addressed a Joint Sitting of the Houses and
the public at large on 11 February 2005. The purpose was to inform the
public of the government’s plans for the 2005-06 financial year, and the
successes and failures of the previous financial year. As in any other
institution, action plans are reviewed and remodelled where possible.

We commend the intentions to improve the service conditions for the police,
educators and the health professionals. This country needs more
professionals in these sectors to improve on safety and security, skills-
based training and to reduce the mortality rate. It is our hope that the
morale of these professionals will be enhanced by this gesture and will
improve their performance. This has to go further in recognising the
excellent performances of those individuals that put more effort beyond the
requirements into their daily duties.

We heard too little or nothing on the successes of the Expanded Public
Works Programme implemented in 2004 to provide more job opportunities for
the unemployed. One wonders if, at some stage in the 2005-06 financial
year, we will be privileged to hear the number of permanent jobs this
programme has created for the poor, in particular. Our interest is in those
people who are very poor whom this programme was intended to assist to
become employed. We didn’t hear anything in the President’s speech about
this.

It is obvious that many South Africans would like an improvement on the
following front: increased roll-out of antiretrovirals to the 53 000 Aids
patients as promised in 2004, a promise that has not been met. Nothing was
said during the President’s address about this particular promise that was
made in 2004. I think many South Africans would want to hear about what has
happened to the roll-out of antiretrovirals. Also, more proper houses, and
not the half-built houses or structures seen all over the country, need to
be in place.[Interjections.] No ways! This is a joke, I tell you. No, this
is a joke, I tell you! No ways! [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Watson, I will take your point of
order.

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, on a point of order: My member had three
minutes to speak. I really don’t think you allowed him his three minutes.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Yes, it is your assumption, but that
strikes a very serious note. I am assisted by the Table Assistants. That’s
a very bad reflection on me. You are questioning my integrity and I am not
going to debate that. I am doing my work.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Voorsitter, die President het in sy toespraak agt
spesifieke doelwitte uitgespel of uitgelig, wat hy gesê het hy nog moet
verbeter ten einde te sorg dat Suid-Afrika waarlik aan almal wat daarin
woon, wit en swart, behoort.

Die nabye toekoms sal toon of dit bloot propoganda-lippetaal was en of die
regering en die owerheid ernstig was daarmee. Ek wil net enkele aspekte
uitlig. In die eerste plek, is daar nog plek en ‘n toekoms vir blanke
regsgeleerdes op die regbank, in die hoër en die laer howe? Met dit wat ons
in Suid-Afrika tans waarneem, is die antwoord daarop ‘n baie duidelike,
“nee”. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, the President in his address indicated or identified eight
specific target areas, in which he said improvement was required in order
to ensure that South Africa truly belongs to all who live in it, white and
black.

The near future will show whether he was merely paying lip service for
propaganda purposes, or whether the government and administration really
mean it. I only want to highlight a few aspects. In the first instance, do
white lawyers still have a place and a future on the Bench, both in the
higher and in the lower courts? Judging by what we are seeing in South
Africa at the moment, the answer is a very clear, no.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: We cannot hear what the member is saying,
but if there is no interpretation, we’ll end up misinterpreting and
misunderstanding the actual message he wants to convey to us.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Can you . . .

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, if not, I will address the Chamber in
English, if you will excuse my broken Free State English.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): You can proceed.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: In that case, will you allow me then to start afresh? I
will proceed.

I’ve asked the question whether there is still a future for white lawyers
in South Africa on the bench. Yes or no? [Interjections.] The answer
clearly, according to what is happening now, is “no”, a definite “no”.
There is no future any longer for white people, white lawyers, to become
judges, as things are going now.

There are many people, well-educated, well-experienced, who are simply
overlooked from being appointed as judges for the simple reason that they
are white. Another example is that the President also indicated that he
would like to entrench democracy. I go along with that. That is a very good
thing.

Mr J B TOLO: Is the hon member prepared to take a question?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Are you prepared to
take a question, hon member?

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: You know that I have two minutes. I will take a
question after my two minutes, but not before my two minutes are over.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Take your seat. The
hon member is not ready to take a question. Dr Van Heerden, you are left
with 30 seconds.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: In that case, let the gentleman ask his question. I
can’t go any further. Let him ask his question.

Mr J B TOLO: Does the hon member know that we have more white judges in
this country than black ones? Does he not believe in equalisation of the
system, and that the judges must reflect the demographics of this country?
Does he not believe in that? Thank you.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: I am very aware of this, but the point is, does it now
mean that, in the near future, white people aren’t going to be appointed as
judges? [Time expired.]

The PREMIER OF THE NORTH WEST (Ms E B B Molewa): Thank you, hon
Chairperson. Hon Minister - if she’s still here. No. Hon colleagues and hon
members of the House, may I also express gratitude for being able to
participate in this important debate on the state of the nation address.

In the North West province we have also had an opportunity to deal with the
state of the province address, and I would like to indicate to this august
House that, indeed, we have taken all the programmes on board that the
President announced. But, over and above that, we also had the provincial
direct programmes that we have adopted, and I wouldn’t like to take much of
this august House’s time to deal with those specific issues that we raised
in the state of the province address, but I would like to indicate to hon
members and, indeed, request that we look for that state of the province
address - to look at it. It will be expected of us of in this House to do
oversight on that programme, which is an implementation of the President’s
programme.

I would also like to just touch on two issues that were raised by the hon
members here today. Of course, I will not be responding, but will just be
reminding hon members of some of the important issues that go on around us
and that we may not be aware of. There is what is called the Human
Settlement Strategy in this country, which has been tabled, and which is
actually intended to address the whole question of the informal
settlements. I heard one hon member raising this issue as a concern, and I
think that that strategy is exactly intended to deal with that problem and
challenge.

I also do know, and I think that all of us are aware, that all Ministers
will be tabling their budget speeches, and in future we will be dealing
with issues, details of, for instance, the Expanded Public Works
Programmes, the number of jobs that would have been created or that would
have been created through the programme, the roll-out of ARVs; so, that
will follow. I don’t think we need to expect the President to stand there
and give figures on those issues.

Having said that, out of the ruins of an unjust and inhumane society
emerged a caring government, based on the ethos and values of the Freedom
Charter. The policies and programmes that we have adopted and pursued over
the last decade are aimed at ensuring the progressive realisation of the
vision of the people of South Africa, as articulated in this historic
document, the Freedom Charter.

As we make progress in improving the quality of life of our people, we dare
not lose sight of the deep-seated nature of the legacy we seek to
eradicate. We remain mindful of the reality that the full meaning of
freedom will only be realised once all our people are freed from the legacy
of ignorance, deprivation and poverty.

The building of a nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and prosperous South
Africa is central to the commitment we made to our people. And these
commitments are deeply rooted in the Freedom Charter, and given further
concrete expression in the reconstruction and development programme of our
democratic Constitution.

In his state of the nation address the hon President assured the people of
our country that the democratic state will not walk away from its
obligation to come to the aid of the poor; bearing in mind available
resources, of course. Indeed, any government that is based on the will of
the people has no option but to remain responsive to the needs of the
people, many of whom are poor, as it is in our case in this country. And,
if we have to continue turning the tide against centuries of poverty and
deprivation, we must remain resolute and unwavering in our undertaking to
expand access to basic services and to make available economic
opportunities to all our people in this country. This also requires that we
work increasingly towards a sustainable and growing economy to enable us to
meet the most basic and urgent needs of our people in a much more
sustainable way.

For millions of our people who remained trapped in conditions of poverty
and underdevelopment, the delivery programme and message delivered by our
hon President on 11 February 2005 gave them hope and confidence that indeed
tomorrow will be better than today and yesterday. This democratic
government has sent them a clear and unequivocal message that South Africa
belongs to them too.

I am not speaking for myself when I say these things. I’m merely conveying
the message of ordinary people that echoes loudly and persistently
throughout the towns and villages of the North West province. Our people
are saying that they have seen concrete evidence that increasingly a better
life for all is beckoning on their horizons; this is a testament of what a
democratic government acting in partnership with its people can accomplish
despite formidable resource constraints.

The people of our province welcome the President’s announcement relating to
the practical interventions in the second economy, and for us, who are
grappling with this challenge of a largely underdeveloped and rural
economy, these interventions will go a long way in improving our people’s
lives. In particular, we appreciate the funds allocated for programmes
aimed at assisting those who were historically marginalised.

When the hon President said, that “As South Africans, we are set to make a
determined effort to speed up broad-based black economic empowerment and
small business development”, he was echoing the hopes of many of our people
who are yearning for an opportunity to create a better life for themselves
and their fellow citizens.

The successful implementation of this programme will contribute to the
attainment of the goal of ensuring that the people share in their country’s
wealth. And, indeed, the national wealth of our country, which is the
heritage of South Africans, must be restored to the people. As we ensure
that our people derive maximum benefits from our programmes, which are
aimed at ensuring that we open economic opportunities for all the people
and support emerging businesses, we must also guard against a new tendency
that seeks to undermine black economic empowerment, and that is something
called “fronting”.

Fronting frustrates all efforts aimed at the economic transformation of our
country, especially with regard to the empowerment of those who were
historically excluded from the mainstream of the economy. If we believe
that the growth of the emerging sector will contribute enormously towards
economic empowerment, poverty reduction and job creation, then fronting
serves to defeat all those – and it must be fought against all odds.

The realisation of bold programmes and policies that we have introduced
since the dawn of our democracy require that we build adequate capacity in
the Public Service. Accordingly, we must, and we will, continue to make
determined efforts to build a Public Service that has the capacity to
deliver. We acknowledge that we need public servants who have the necessary
technical skills to deliver on the mandate we received from our people. To
this end, we in the North West province shall respond to the President’s
call and address capacity constraints and skills shortages that hamper our
efforts to accelerate service delivery. At the same time, we must also
acknowledge that many of our public servants have not yet understood their
critical role in the reconstruction and development of our country.

We will continue to confront the poor work ethic of some of our public
servants, and of course it is not all of them, many of them are actually
good. As we strive to build a Public Service cadre that personifies and
epitomises a new society that we are trying to construct, we will also
demonstrate our increasing intolerance for mediocrity in the Public
Service. We acknowledge that we need the public servants who have
internalised the values and ethos of Batho Pele, and we will work hard
towards achieving this.

In the same vein, we will continue to thank and recognise those who work
hard, and those who really do a little bit more beyond their normal call of
duty. As we strive to deepen democracy, community participation and
accountability at local level we will need to continue paying particular
attention to the central roles of ward committees and multipurpose
community centres; and the community development workers must also play a
role in the achievement of our objectives.

We will use these and other structures and programmes to ensure that,
amongst other things, our people are adequately informed about the
opportunities brought about by our own democracy, and how they can access
such opportunities. Indeed, an informed public is critical of the process
of effective governance and the consolidation of our democracy. We must,
and we will, give our people information that they can use for purposes of
their empowerment and socio-economic development.

We welcome the commitments to ensure that the community development workers
will be deployed in each local municipality by March 2006, and in the North
West province we have already begun with this process – 120 of those
community development workers will already be deployed by March 2005. We
will ensure that we do our little bit to meet this national target.

During the course of this year all of us must ensure that we entrench and
consolidate democracy at local level, and this we must do because we have
made a pledge that the people shall govern. In our province this 2005
financial year will see the implementation of Project Consolidate gaining
momentum, with a municipal-specific implementation plan. Initially, we will
concentrate on the 15 identified municipalities that are said to be weak in
our province. We will also focus largely on the municipal debts and billing
system. We remain grateful for the support and commitment we are receiving
from the national government in this regard. Let us roll up our sleeves and
work.

Once again, we also want to call upon this House to really do their
oversight and public participation work, and we appreciate the work done
thus far by this House. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Rev E ADOLPH: Hon Chairperson, distinguished members of this House, we have
to give credit to the President of this country, hon Thabo Mbeki, for
setting the scenario and levelling the playing field. He delivered a
professional and highly business-like state of the nation address.

However, we are concerned as the ID as he set the scenario straight: We are
not through with our economic revolution. We are still all prisoners of
poverty. We have to admit that.

And then, I am a little confused. You are talking about colours today -
this is the Black Rod - we are talking about white and black, even the
President must begin to start thinking out of the box. We have to talk
about South Africans, the browns ones, the pink ones, and the not-so-brown
ones. The bottom line is that we are all children of the soil of Africa. We
have to work together, and maybe we have to rephrase our questions
differently to get the outcomes that we want for South Africa.

Therefore, I am challenging you, on behalf of the President’s speech, what
are you going to do to change the lives of those who are suffering from
poverty? Now, just recently we have met with people who are suffering and
dying of hunger. It is greater than the tsunami. Is it because it is so-
called black people who die of poverty - millions of them? Why is the
international world not so worried about Africans who die in their millions
of poverty? Poverty is still our prison, and we need to be liberated.

As the ID we give our support to the ruling party because they have
achieved a lot, we have to admit that. Together we can build this country
irrespective of our political background. We need to work together if we
want to make this a vibrant country. We can do it; we can show the world.

Another concern came up when I spoke to grade seven learners who cannot
spell and cannot read. It’s disgusting. Thank you. [Time
expired.][Applause.]

Dr Z L MKHIZE (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, KwaZulu-Natal would like to
salute our stalwart, the former Premier of the Eastern Cape, Oom Ray, who
was also the former Ambassador to Uganda. It is a very sad loss, and South
Africa appreciates and pays tribute to this hero of our struggle as he
takes his last journey.

Hamba kahle ndoda! Hamba kahle qabane! Hamba kahle nkokheli! [Rest in
peace, man! Rest in peace, comrade! Rest in peace, leader!]

We hope you will rest in peace, satisfied that the struggle you dedicated
your life to has indeed resulted in the true liberation of South Africa!

On behalf of the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal, Comrade S’bu Ndebele, we would
like to congratulate our President for a clear vision for the country and
the very inspiring speech. As the people of KwaZulu-Natal, we wish to
commit ourselves to the achievement of the vision and the objectives and
the targets outlined by the President.
The province of KwaZulu-Natal enters the dawn of the second decade of
freedom with a new spirit of hope and optimism. We look back to the past
ten years of freedom and acknowledge the role played by the maturity of our
leaders in the establishment of peace in the province. The very fact that
in the KwaZulu-Natal province, with its history of conflict, there could be
a change of government from the IFP to ANC without that threatening peace
is a proof of how deep democracy has taken root.

KwaZulu-Natal is the most populous province, but ranks amongst the poorer
of South Africa’s provinces. The internecine violence that continued well
into the first decade of our freedom has created a destruction that
siphoned our energies and focused our attention away from the real essence
of our liberation struggle. Now, the people of KwaZulu-Natal, as I say,
enter this second decade of freedom with optimism. We are committed to the
acceleration of service delivery to our people and the realisation of the
vision of the Freedom Charter.

The backlog due to apartheid neglect allows us no time to spend fighting
and looking at all the issues of the past political conflict. A new
government led by our Premier S’bu Ndebele is focusing on speedily
resolving the problems of children going to school under the trees, the
large numbers of schools that are without toilets, clean water, roads,
electricity or laboratories.
Steps have been taken to sort out the bottlenecks that resulted in the slow
rate of expenditure in the capital projects. We are also committed to
resolving the social welfare challenges of large uptake of the social
welfare grant. This approach is focused on eradication of fraud to reduce
over-expenditure.

We are also committed to strengthening the programmes to build roads and
the empowerment of our people, particularly ordinary people in the rural
areas, through our programmes of Expanded Public Works Programmes such as
Zibambele and Vukuzenzele, which have a strong impact amongst the poorest
of the poor, empowering rural people and small macro and medium
enterprises, especially women.

We are committed to expanding our comprehensive management of people living
with HIV/Aids, another preventable cause of mortality engaging at the
moment about 40 hospitals in the use of  antiretroviral treatment involving
about 20 000 people of which 10 000 are already on the antiretroviral
treatment.

We are committed to extending our successful programme of slum eradication,
which has been most successful in the area. This is so despite the untimely
loss of our colleague, the MEC for Housing, Local Government and
Traditional Affairs, hon Dumisani Makhaye.

We also suffered a bit of a setback where many rural villages and peri-
urban settlements have recently been hit by floods and storms and
tornadoes. These occurred to co-exist with severe droughts that are
affecting other parts of the province.

We have also established intergovernmental forums where the provincial and
local governments interact. This is to strengthen our co-operation and
improve our capacity to deliver services.

We hold regular public meetings, imbizos, led by the Premier – which have
strengthened the bond between our government and our people, improving the
understanding of our people of how government works.
Our provincial growth and development strategy, which was launched late
last year, has identified the priority of fighting poverty and creating
jobs. We have also noted the steady economic growth, yet not matched by
similar growth in job opportunities. In some sectors we have lost jobs.

We have, therefore, identified sectors of our economy that offer
competitive advantages such as agriculture, tourism, textile, transport and
logistics, etc. Major programmes will be announced to give meaning to these
priorities involving, for example, the issue of acceleration of the Dube
Trade Port focusing on integrated government investment in social
infrastructure and other job-creating projects to maximise job creation.
The establishment of a growth fund to facilitate private sector investment
in the first economy and the promotion of black economic empowerment,
establishment of poverty alleviation fund to promote co-operatives and
SMMEs focusing on youth, women and disabled are but a few we can mention.
We now concentrate on the restructuring of government and improvement of
capacity of government to deliver services.

There is no more time to spend nursing past political differences that have
calcified and ossified. This is now time for peace. The violence of the
scale and proportions that we have seen in the past is gone forever. We
cannot run a government on the basis of grudges and perpetual
disagreements. We need to strengthen our efforts to reduce crime and
improve security.

Sadly, we still experience murders of prominent leaders, as we sadly note
the death of Mr Thomas Shabalala, former IFP member Mr Bhengu mayor of
Mbabazane, a member of the IFP in Estcourt, Councillor Chetty and an ANC MP
in Estcourt. We make a distinction, though, between political violence and
petty crime. Even if both of them are unacceptable, they are different. We
need to assist police to crack these cases and apprehend the perpetrators.
It is therefore irresponsible for any leader to point fingers at any party
when no proof exists for the accusation. We call on the Minister of Police
to give this matter urgent priority. Swift action by the police will assist
us in preventing misconceptions and wrong perceptions leading to the
upsurge of violence and negatively impacting on reconciliation.

As instructed in the interim constitution, a draft constitution to define
the role and the status of the monarch has been tabled. We have also tabled
the Traditional Leaders Governance Bill. But colleagues, as you know we in
the province of KwaZulu-Natal have strong views and we express them without
fear. Hence the ANC and the Premier have defined the role and status of the
monarch as a constitutional monarch who presides over the ceremonial
opening of the legislature, ceremonial installations of amakhosi, maintains
a neutral apolitical public stance on all issues and is a symbol of unity,
peace and development. He is a custodian of our culture and tradition. Of
course, the ANC disagrees with the IFP on the issue when it comes to the
inclusion of uNdunankulu waKwaZulu, since it was not part of all the
legislation passed by the IFP for the past 30 years when it was in charge
of both the KwaZulu Government and the KwaZulu-Natal. We therefore believe
in the robust debates, which are raging about the matter of traditional
leaders, again where the IFP and the ANC are differing markedly on the
approach. But we are not threatened by this debate, as long as we allow
democracy to take its course. You will notice if you were in the province
you will have some of these headlines where there is even a possibility
that a matter like this might end up in court.

But nevertheless we think that the people of KwaZulu-Natal are mature
enough to resolve all these issues. This has been proven by the fact that
we are now having a multiparty inclusive government that has got no problem
irrespective of the differences in political parties. Therefore, similarly,
we the people of KwaZulu-Natal can now say also without any hesitation, as
the Freedom Charter has said and proclaims, that South Africa belongs to
all who live in it, black and white. That is irrespective of whatever
political party they belong to.

We want to thank you very much, Madam Chair, for the opportunity to come
and express our views in this House, which we consider a very, very
important House to regulate, assist and support provinces to be able to run
their programmes, being in touch with the situation in the national forums.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you very much, Chairperson. The hon
Chairperson of the NCOP, the Deputy Chairperson in absentia, the premiers
present here, the Deputy Speakers who are here, all provincial Chief Whips,
leaders of political parties, the only representative of Salga still left
in the Chamber, hon members, it is a great pleasure also to participate in
this debate.

It’s just unfortunate that Mr Thetjeng didn’t practise too well how to use
three minutes effectively. The Rev Adolph knows how to use two minutes
effectively. The problem is that if you use watches that go very slowly,
you end up being in such a predicament. We will not be using these watches
in bringing delivery to our people. That’s  why in terms our people’s
contract we are going to accelerate service delivery.

If you don’t know that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, you will
not understand that no racial grouping is more important than the other.
It’s very good that Mr Sinclair clearly said that no one had an overall
mandate to speak for all Afrikaans-speaking people.

The disabled people of South Africa have a saying: nothing about us without
us. There are people who now project that they speak for the Afrikaans-
speaking community when just yesterday, or a few hours ago, they were
speaking for the English-speaking people and the elite. This confirms what
a former member of this House said: Now things are changing in the DA. They
have just removed those of us with a liberal background from their list and
put on more people with right-wing connections. I think the DA proves this
in the way it is conducting itself. [Interjections.]

We must say that as much as we balance the issue of language, it should
also be obvious that our silence with regard to the previously
disadvantaged language speakers becomes very important. If we don’t say
anything about that, it means the person who does not speak about that . .
. it’s still racial. That is the definition you will have. It’s
unfortunate, Dr van Heerden, I have to respond that . . . uma ubase umlilo,
ubozimisela ukuthi uzowotha. [If you have started a fire, you must be
prepared to face its heat.]

You know, Dr van Heerden, that transformation is necessary to redress the
racial imbalances that were caused by three and a half centuries –  nearly
350 years of racial domination. When you have to redress that, you have to
have a transformation agenda to deal with it. This is because when we speak
of the judiciary it’s not a matter of changing colour, but also of the
collective and individual mindsets, which have to be transformed in line
with the democratic era that we live in. We must accept that we are in a
democratic era.

What the hon member said raises a question for me as the Chief Whip and
also as a member of this House, because he is the member designated to
serve on behalf of this collective in the Judicial Service Commission. The
question that arises is: Whose agenda is he pushing there, if he still
utters such statements to such a House? Because this House is united in
that South Africa must be transformed.

On 8 January 1980, the year of the 25th anniversary of the Freedom Charter,
Comrade O R Tambo said the following:

   The Freedom Charter is not merely the Freedom Charter of the ANC and its
   allies. It contains the fundamental perspective of the vast majority of
   the people of South Africa of the kind of liberation that we, all of us,
   are fighting for.

In the year in which we celebrate 50  years  of  the  Freedom  Charter,  our
President correctly alerted us to the importance  of  the  fact  that  South
Africa belongs to all who live in it, both black and white.

In his address to the nation on the 11 February 2005, the President
thoroughly emphasised the notion of a united nation that works together to
realise the vision of the Freedom Charter. The President’s address
specified that we are working towards a united nation of winners,
especially in terms of economic and social development. He made a direct
link between the vision of the Freedom Charter and the Constitution through
which this democratic government is implementing changes to better the
lives of all South Africans.

During the first decade of freedom we laid the foundation for us to improve
our system of governance to ensure that it served the people of South
Africa even more effectively and efficiently. Through a system of
participatory governance, it must also reflect the translation into reality
of the vision expressed in the Freedom Charter that, “the people shall
govern”.

The President made a strong declaration that the next decade was not merely
the second decade of freedom, but that it was indeed the second decade of
democracy. This is a legitimate state that authoritatively bases its
programme of action on the will of all the people who live in the country.
In this second decade of democracy, the programme of action that was
released in May 2004 is being implemented. It’s just unfortunate that
people will expect the President as he addresses the nation to speak as if
he is a Minister delivering a departmental policy budget speech, which
makes us think that other people misunderstand what a president of a
country needs to say. We must say that the vision of the people, as
expressed in the Freedom Charter, is that this South Africa is a
developmental state that will move forward - it will never move backwards -
in terms of realising what we committed to as the people of this country
when the Freedom Charter was drafted.
I must hasten to say, Chairperson – and please don’t be reluctant to stop
me when my time is up – that, in the words of our President, the successes
of the first decade of democracy assist us.

    . . . to move even further forward towards the consolidation of national
    reconciliation, national cohesion and unity, and a shared new patriotism
    born of the strengthening of the manifest reality of a South Africa that
    belongs to all who live in it.


We have entered the second decade of democracy, during which particular
institutions of government must play their role, focusing on the goal of
real change. It is in that manner as we enter the second decade of
democracy that the NCOP, through Vision 2009, is going to enhance its
oversight role from 30% to 70%.

We must say, in conclusion, that true to the African spirit of collective
existence, we do not selfishly and individualistically work at developing
our own nation alone. We must also work hard at achieving the goal of a
better life for the peoples of Africa and the world. I will have to quote
another leader of the movement, Comrade Pixley ka Izaka Seme . . . [Time
expired.] Chairperson, I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, in my limited time I would like
to concentrate on the state of the nation address, as delivered by the
President on 11 February 2005. But let me start by saying first and
foremost that I would like to thank those who participated so effectively
in this debate, because it enriches the debate in the NCOP and that allows
us the space to function properly and to do our job as we are expected to
by the Constitution.

Secondly, I would like to thank you and congratulate those people who have
congratulated the NCOP for the hard work it has been doing in fulfilling
its constitutional obligation, because that is where we draw our obligation
from. And also I would like to say thank you for the progress reports that
have been given by different provinces here, because these assist us as the
NCOP when we do our oversight function and assist us when we have the
interests of the provinces at heart. That is what we have to do.

It seems some of us have forgotten what our job is. The job of the NCOP is
to take a keen interest in the provincial sphere of government and deal
with those issues, assist the provinces in achieving those things. That is
what we should be doing and we should precisely do that. And I would like
to thank all those provinces that have been here, particularly our mothers
who have been here, and the mother Premiers who have been both standing
here and really advising us. And I really take the advice of the Premier of
the Northern Cape – she is gone now – because I had forgotten that the
mothers are here and they are grooming the children and children are
walking perfectly at eight years, but they are still very young. That is
what I am trying to say. We need also to be nurtured and assisted in
dealing with those things.

The one thing I just want to do before I come to my speech, which I think I
need to say, is that we need to be very serious in what we are doing when
we are tackling the most important issues of the country. There are
sensitive issues that people do not want to talk about. I was one of the
persons who chaired at Codesa and at the Multiparty Forum during the
negotiations. I know what this means. We took that process very seriously,
all of us, all stakeholders in the entire country of South Africa. People
could not believe us. We reached what we called an interim constitution, we
formed what we called the Transitional Executive Council, and we then came
to a Constituent Assembly where we drew up the Constitution. We finally
came out with the most wonderful Constitution that is praised by the whole
world which comes to South Africa to come and copy it. They ask themselves
a question: How did we do it so peacefully that we managed to find each
other and deal with such sensitive matters?

And I am very surprised today, when there are issues raised and put on the
table for a debate that we want to run away from them. We can’t. There are
issues that we have to raise; there are topics that we have to raise which
are important topics for the country. Whether they are about racialism or
whatever the case may be, they have to be put on the table for a debate.
You can’t run away from that, you cannot. If you run away from that then
you are running away from the issues that you have to solve. George Bush is
not going to come to South Africa to deal with those issues for you. He is
not. He is definitely not going to do that. It is we again, the people of
South Africa, who have to put these things on the national agenda and say
to ourselves: How are we going to solve these things? So we don’t have to
fear to discuss these things because they live with us on an everyday
basis. They are here and it is we who have to attend to those problems and
deal with them. But let me come back to what I want to say today.

I wish to point out that today is a very important day. We have never as
the NCOP debated the state of the nation address. It is for the first time
today that we do that. [Applause.] And you should ask yourself the question
why we called for this debate. We did not call for this debate merely to
call for a debate, but in order to look at our programme of action.
Chairperson, please remind me when my time is over, I haven’t checked my
time. But we have called for this debate because precisely what we want to
say and what we want to do is to say: Here is the programme of action that
the President has isolated, that the Premiers in the provinces have
isolated. We waited until today because we know that most of the Premiers
have already done what you will call the state of the province addresses,
except for KwaZulu-Natal - I think they will do theirs next week.

The important issue there was to combine the two and look at what the
President has said in terms of the provinces and listen to what the
Premiers have said in terms of their own provinces. As I have heard here
today when I was sitting and listening very carefully to what the Premiers
are saying to us today, the job of the NCOP is then to draw from the state
of the nation address, draw from the state of the provinces address and put
those things together. Together with the provinces we have to put up a
programme of action as we have said we are going to do in our Vision 2009
and say these are the things that we are going to do in 2009. That is a
critical point that we need to do. And we have to go there, assist wherever
we can assist and play our oversight role the way we are supposed to.
Perhaps let me put my speech aside.

But there are issues that people raised as I was listening. Here is the
President of the country who says to us last year, 2004, that we have
identified these problematic issues and we set ourselves the targets that
we are going to achieve these things. Executives, let’s go and work,
parliamentarians go and work, there is the budget to achieve these things.
We sometimes have budget constraints and sometimes we have skills
constraints and we have constraints on our capacity and we need to address
all of it.

But here is a President of the country again coming to us as Members of
Parliament to report to us and he says to us this is what we have achieved
in terms of the targets that we have set. This is what we couldn’t achieve
in terms of the targets that we have set and I am calling again that we are
resetting the programme of action. We are setting some new targets because
we have to achieve these things, because they are very important for us as
Members of Parliament, as the executive, to achieve in order to make the
lives of our people better on the ground.

But, surprisingly, we come to this podium and say: No, why should the
President say that. How do we function? Every one of us has a target,
whether you like it or not, in your house, in your small family. Problems
do arise; let’s us agree that you may not achieve the target, that you may
have some constraints. But all the President is saying, being very honest,
is that these are the things that we have achieved, whether it is in terms
housing, whether it is in terms of health, whether it is in terms of
education, whether it is in terms of everything that we have set. But these
are the backlogs that are still remaining. These are the things that we
still have to achieve. Let us continue, we cannot fold our arms and say
therefore, because we have constraints, we are not going to continue and do
those things.

The issue is we should then begin to find out what the backlogs are - I
mean where the gaps are - and then as members of Parliament close those
gaps. Let me give one example, which I was very much impressed about. You
see, as members of Parliament we are the people who are best placed to do
the work. There is nobody else. Those people who elected us there on the
ground cannot all come here and talk for themselves. We are here because we
can talk on their behalf, we are here because we know what the problems are
because they tell us when we are down there, we see these things when we
are down there. One Premier raised it here and these are the things we
should be saying. For example, why has this bridge not been built for the
past eight years? You drive past there everyday, you see it but you say
nothing. You see there is a problem in a school. For the past ten you see
that there are problems in the school, but you walk past that school and
you say nothing.

And the President has been fair enough to us to say these are the things
that we should follow, these are the things that we should do and these are
the critical things that we, as the NCOP particularly, should go and check,
and make sure that they are happening. The President is saying to us there
are a critical 14% of things that we have not done and he goes on to
mention them. He goes on to mention that those things are schools,
infrastructure, and they are found in the local government sector. He
directs us. He said it also in KwaZulu-Natal when we were there. He did not
hide at the back and say no, I am not going to talk about these things,
because these are the things that we have to talk about because they have
not happened.

Therefore we cannot sit and not raise them. Again, the work that we should
be doing goes back to the executive, when we will be debating, as somebody
said here, our Budget Votes. We need to raise these questions and find out
what were the problems and see, as the NCOP ourselves, what is our job. I
think the critical question that we should be asking ourselves is: What is
our work; what can we do as the NCOP to make sure that those things that
have not happened should happen? That is the question we should be asking.
What are we going to do, rather than to say what have they done. The
question should come back to us: What are we going to do? We accept that
those things have not happened but what are we going to do as the NCOP?
That is the thing that I would like us to see we are going to do in the
year 2005.

The President in his speech on 11 February - just to quote a little bit of
what he said - indicated to us that the targets which were set by the
government were not able to be met within the set timeframe. He has been
very open to the public, as I have indicated earlier. It is an attestation
to the immensity of the task of the government that has to be taken into
regard. Our challenge now as the NCOP is to make sure that we assist
government - I want to repeat that - that we assist government, not just
criticise. It is very easy to sit on the fence and criticise, but we have
to assist government to deliver on the important aspects, to improve the
learning environment of our children - this is one of the things I am
quoting.

We must make sure that the government has the resources, that the
government has the capacity to deliver and through our oversight role we
should be able to identify - that is the point, again, that is very
critical - the weaknesses in the process of delivery, so that we can fine-
tune our system to respond to the call to ensure that our people have a
better life on the ground. That is the most important thing. I wish to
thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.


                       VISION STATEMENT FOR PARLIAMENT


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr SULLIMAN: On behalf of the Chief Whip of the Council, moved:

  That the Council, pursuant to the decision taken by the Joint Rules
  Committee at its meetings on 18 November 2004, adopts the following Vision
  Statement:
    To build an effective people’s Parliament that is responsive to the
    needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a
    better quality of life for all the people of South Africa.


                DEBATE ON THE VISION STATEMENT FOR PARLIAMENT


THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, I will be very brief again. The
process of coming up with the vision of Parliament started towards the end
of the Second Parliament. Members of the NCOP who were here at that time
will recall that both Houses of Parliament began looking at a possible
vision of Parliament early in 2003. The NCOP held its workshop in 2003 with
a view to contributing towards the drafting of the Vision Statement of
Parliament.

At our workshop, which was held in Rondebosch, we agreed that coming up
with a vision would not be a one-day event but a process that should
culminate in a Vision Statement for Parliament that we all subscribe to.

The process which followed and which gained much impetus at the beginning
of the Third Parliament involved a process of consultation with the
Presiding Officers, members of Parliament and the management of the
institution. Following a vision summit, which was held in July last year,
the Secretary to Parliament made a presentation to the Joint Rules
Committee on 4 August 2004, in which the Vision Statement we have in front
of us was then proposed.

In crafting this vision an attempt was made to remain within the confines
of the Constitution and in line with the government’s commitment to the
people’s contract. The vision was aimed at establishing a people’s
parliament whose aim is to create a better life for all. The committee
agreed that parties would take the proposed Vision Statement to their
caucuses for discussion. Secondly, party Whips and the Secretary to
Parliament would meet to discuss the proposed Vision Statement. Thirdly,
the deliberation on the Vision Statement had to be finalised by 31 August
2004 and, fourthly, a special meeting of the Joint Rules Committee would
then be convened to adopt the Vision Statement.

At a special meeting of the Joint Rules Committee two options of the
proposed Vision Statement were presented. The first option is that the
vision should read as follows:

    To build an effective Parliament that is responsive to the needs of the
    people and that is driven by the ideal of realising an important quality
    of life for all of the people of South Africa.


The second option is:
    To build an effective people’s Parliament that is responsive to the
    needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a
    better quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

After looking at the two options, there was broad agreement among political
parties with regard to option two, save for differences in terms of
wording. We therefore made an appeal to all parties to continue talking to
one another in order to reach consensus before the matter was put to the
House for decision. After a lengthy discussion, the proposed Vision
Statement was again put before the Joint Rules Committee on 18 November
2004. All the parties present at the meeting, with the exception of the DA,
supported the Vision Statement as set out in option two of the first report
of the Joint Rules Committee dated 21 September 2004, which reads as
follows:

    To build an effective people’s Parliament that is responsive to the
    needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a
    better quality of life for all people of South Africa.

It was then agreed that the preferred Vision Statement, option two, would
be put before both Houses. This is what we have done this afternoon. The
vision clearly outlines our vision as Parliament, which is to ensure that
we become a Parliament for the voices of our people and a Parliament that
plays an effective role in the creation of a better life for all of our
people in South Africa.

Parliament plays a central role in ensuring the improvement of the lot of
our people on the ground and our Vision Statement captures this important
aspect. We are a people’s Parliament and we need to be responsive to the
needs of the people. We are here on the mandate of the people to serve
their interests. I put this vision before the House. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms J TERBLANCHE: Hon Chairperson, the DA is opposed to the use of party
slogans, especially election slogans such as, “people’s Parliament” and ``a
better life for all’’ - even if the words, “quality of life” are added in
the vision for Parliament.

The Joint Rules Committee decided to bring the matter to Parliament to
debate because parties could not reach consensus. However, the ANC is
determined to abuse its majority in both Houses to force through their
choice of wording. [Interjections.] We had hoped that greater consensus
could be found, but it is clear that consensus-seeking is not part of the
ANC’s agenda.

The ANC has shown the same stubbornness on the vision for Parliament as
they do when addressing subjects such as the link between HIV/Aids and the
high rate of rape in this country. It is the same stubbornness that leads
to the ANC calling critics of the government unpatriotic. [Interjections.]
It is the same stubbornness that creates division rather than unity, and
that is where we are today over the issue of a vision for Parliament.

To include one’s party slogan in a vision for all South Africans is
divisive and, in reality, an abuse of power by the majority party. That is
the main reason why the DA has steadfastly refused to accept the vision as
prepared by the ANC, even with its slight amendment today as it appeared on
the Order Paper.

A vision should pay more attention to the founding principles and
intentions of the Constitution. It should set out that Parliament’s main
role is that of an effective legislature which represents citizens, makes
laws and provides effective oversight over the executive.

All South Africans should be able to associate with the vision for
Parliament. They should feel that Parliament works in their best interests,
regardless of which party they voted for. A vision of Parliament should be
something that unites people and not something that divides them.

The DA wants to propose an amendment to the resolution before the House:
Remove all the words after ``to build and replace them with:
    an effective Parliament that is responsive to the needs of citizens
    protected equally by law, which provides a national forum for public
    consideration of issues and which scrutinises and oversees executive
    action.


[Interjections.]

We are proposing a Parliament that provides citizens with access to
decision-making by promoting public participation in the legislative
process; a Parliament of freely elected representatives that considers and
debates national issues resulting in legislation that enhances the quality
of life of citizens; a Parliament that fearlessly maintains its
independence from other branches of government and, in so doing, plays a
crucial role in holding the executive to account.

Now, on a matter of procedure: I have established that the DA in the North
West legislature was not consulted on the province’s mandate for this
vision. In addition, as a member of the North West delegation in this
House, I’ve not been consulted. A number of my colleagues have also
confirmed that they were neither consulted nor called to a meeting on this
subject.

Any mandate from my province does not reflect the views of all North West
voters. Since this is a vision for Parliament, it would be logical to
consult all the members of this Parliament before any vote is cast. The gap
in the Rules of this House governing mandates is being consistently
exploited by the ANC to the detriment of democracy. It must be urgently
addressed.

I place on record here that the DA does not support this vision because we
will not have an opportunity to vote on this. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Watson, are you going to raise a point
of order? It was your party’s member who was participating in the debate.

Mr A WATSON: I know she was participating in the debate, and that is why I
didn’t want to rise and waste her time. I ask the Chair to please present
protection to our members when they speak. It is her right to speak.
[Interjections.] I won’t listen to that member. I am addressing the Chair.
He has no right to make an interjection while I am addressing the Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Hon Watson, can you
please take your seat? Order, hon members! I call on Mrs Mchunu, who will
be delivering her maiden speech.

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would first like to congratulate
the hon Chairperson on taking the hot seat. I always remember my friend,
Joyce Kgoali, with whom we shared a lot of jokes. We support you. It’s not
an easy place to be in.

I would also like to mourn the loss of our father, hon Mr Mhlaba, Oom Ray.
I met him in Uganda in 1996, and he was so fatherly and he treated us so
well.

On the issue of the debate that we are having, on the vision for
Parliament, the first decade of our democracy ushered in political freedom
that inspired hope in all South Africans, in that our hard-earned
liberation promised peace and prosperity for all who live in South Africa.

The National Assembly and the NCOP, at a joint meeting on 14 September
2004, met to consider a proposed vision for Parliament, as our hon
Chairperson stated. Of course, according to the Minutes, one statement
stated:


  To build an effective, democratic Parliament that is responsive to the
  needs of the people, and that is driven by the ideal of realising a
  better quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

The other version stated:


  To build an effective people’s Parliament that is responsive to the needs
  of the people, and that is driven by the ideal of realising a better life
  for all people in South Africa.

The two visions are almost identical, except for the words “democratic
Parliament” and “people’s Parliament”. Also, there is the difference of “a
better quality of life” and “a better life for all”.

The one version is more qualitative in embracing democracy than the other
one. A democratic Parliament is ideal. Even President Mbeki’s state of the
nation address mentioned “democracy” or “democratic Parliament” about eight
times. So, I think our vision should include that part which will make
everybody happy about our vision. The use of “people” or “people’s” tends
to be abused at times. The people participated very well in the struggle
for liberation to create a democratic government. Let us agree, by
consensus, to include the “democratic” part so that it states:

    “to build an effective, democratic people’s Parliament that is
    responsive to the needs of the people, and that is driven by the ideal
    of realising a better quality of life for all the people of South
    Africa.”

Now, including “democratic” in our vision will make the three tiers of
government accountable to all the people of South Africa, above party
political affiliations. Government is led by human beings, who are apt to
err. It might be easy to present the vision as being solely owned by a
certain party, and one that does not augur well for other parties,
especially if shouted as slogans that are not walking the talk.

Members of the NCOP, especially, have been tasked with the duty of spending
70% of their time with the people on the ground, working with provincial
and local government leaders. The NCOP has to ensure the use of local
community development workers who are accountable to the local leadership,
because they are going to be tied to the delivery of the services under our
vision.

Community workers should not be perceived by communities as being party
agents who are garnering votes for certain parties. Good intentions and
good policies are there in our country, but people are ill and dying in
their droves. Denominators are needed to guide our actions, be it health,
social welfare or financing of programmes. There must be a way of
determining our problems. Who, where, when and how? We speak of the ill and
dying, so we need to know who they are, where they are, and how old they
are. In the case of HIV/Aids, names may not be used, but figures will help
to determine the worst affected areas.

Yes, indeed, people have to govern in their country. We want to govern as
people in South Africa. The NCOP then, as the custodian of the people’s
needs, has to make sure that people govern while they’re alive, not dead in
the cemeteries. It is astounding how our people are dying, especially of
Aids. Almost all homes have somebody who is ill or on the verge of dying.
Poor rural women are doing home-based care with their bare hands, and in no
time will be governing their country from the grave.

Our vision, therefore, should ensure a better quality of life for people
who are alive. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr F ADAMS: Agb Voorsitter van Komitees en Voorsitter van die Nasionale
Raad van Provinsies. [Hon Chairperson of Committees and Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces.]

Let me begin by quoting one sentence from the January 8 statement. I would
like the DA members, if they haven’t got it, to ask my ANC colleagues to
please give it to them so that they can learn. I want to ask the DA, and I
want to give them some good advice: Please keep quiet, sit still, listen
and learn. [Interjections.]

The January 8 statement says:

  We must base our vision, programmes and actions on that historic
  manifesto of the people of South Africa, the Freedom Charter.

Dit lyk vir my dat die DA hunker nog na die ou dae van apartheid, want, as
ek dit reg verstaan, is dit wat ‘n parlement vir die mense beteken. [It
seems to me that the DA is still yearning for the old days of apartheid, if
I understand them correctly, because that is what a parliament for the
people means.]

It’s a “people’s Parliament”. Parliament has to be understood as a product
of constitutional and democratic change. In our Constitution it is mandated
to build democracy and ensure good governance. [Interjections.]

I want the hon Terblanche to listen. Please keep quiet, listen and learn.
The South African Constitution provides the necessary structure for the
legislative sector to transform, since it is founded on the values of human
dignity, the achievement of equality, the advancement of human rights and
freedom, amongst other things.  These values provide a framework for the
kind of society that we aspire to and seek to build. The legislative sector
broadly, and Parliament specifically, are meant to play particular roles in
the bringing about of this society.

Ek wil graag die DA ‘n vraag vra. Ek maak die onderstelling dat hulle
terugverlang na die “fight back/fight black” dae. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek wil
vir hulle vandag sê . . .  (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I would like to ask the DA a question. I am making the assumption that
they are hankering after the days of  “fight back/fight
black”.][Interjections.] I want to say to them today . . .]

I’ve got news for you, my DA friends. Those days are over. We are here to
govern. We are here to rule. [Interjections.] [Applause.] As the Deputy
President said, “the ANC is here to rule forever”. [Applause.] My friends
in the DA, please understand that for a long time our people have been
denied access to Parliament, and for a long time our people have been
denied the right to be in Parliament. [Interjections.]

I want to say to the hon Lamoela: Please be quiet, listen and learn,
because democratic changes have happened in South Africa. If you are afraid
of change, like the DA, you will act like that. [Interjections.] The ANC,
as I have seen, is not afraid of change. They are not afraid of change
because the change is for the betterment of our people of South Africa.
[Applause.]

As ‘n wetgewer moet ons voortdurend strewe om ons potensiaal vir sukses te
verbeter, en dit is wat ons doen – verbeter die potensiaal vir sukses. Die
opbou van demokrasie en transformasie van die instansie, publieke deelname
in die wetgewende proses, en effektiewe parlementêre oorsig is belangrik as
Parlement sy konstitusionele mandaat wil vervul.

Die tyd het aangebreek dat ons demokrasie aktief nastreef; nie soos die DA
met lippetaal nie, maar dit aktief nastreef. In die hoop vir ‘n beter
toekoms vir ons kinders moet ons die mandaat opneem en ons geskiedenis
omhels. Daardeur sal elkeen van ons vry wees om alle geleenthede aan te
gryp wat die demokrasie aan ons bied. Suid-Afrika is ons land. Ons sit nie
met twee paspoorte soos sommige van ons Suid-Afrikaanse burgers nie. Ons is
gebore Suid-Afrikaners, en ek wil sê, soos die volkslied van die land sê:
``Ons vir jou Suid-Afrika.’’ Ons sal vir jou sterwe en vir jou lewe.
Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[As a legislator we must continuously aim to improve our potential for
success, and that is what we are doing – improving the potential for
success. Building democracy and achieving the transformation of the
institution, public participation in the legislative process and effective
parliamentary oversight are important if Parliament wishes to fulfil its
constitutional mandate.

The time has come for us to pursue democracy actively, not like the DA by
paying lip service, but actively pursuing it. In the hope for a better
future for our children we must take up the mandate and embrace our
history. In so doing all of us will be free to seize every opportunity
democracy presents. South Africa is our country. We do not have two
passports like some South African citizens. We are born South Africans, and
I want to say, in the words of the national anthem: “At thy will to live or
perish, O South Africa, dear land.” We shall die for you and live for you.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Chairperson, hon members,
distinguished special delegates, hon Premiers, leaders and representatives
of organised local government, fellow friends and comrades, I know that 20
years ago if you called somebody a comrade you would go to jail, because
somebody somewhere would say you’re purporting to be a communist.

This debate is very critical in the history of our Parliament, in the
history our people and in the history of country, because it takes place on
the 50th anniversary of the adoption of the Freedom Charter, a document
that is a road map to a destiny in which there will be nonracialism,
nonracism, democracy and prosperity.

I rise on behalf of the ANC to move that this august House adopt the vision
statement of Parliament as presented, namely to build an effective people’s
Parliament that is responsive to the needs of the people and that is driven
by the ideal of realising a better life for all the people of South Africa.
That is the position of the ANC, and we are not apologetic about it.

I want to put it on record that it is a distortion of fact that the ANC
hastened to conclude the process of finalising the conclusion of this
particular vision and mission statement of Parliament.

I think hon members of the Joint Rules Committee, including members of the
DA, would agree with me that we actually took longer than expected, because
the ANC - with more than 90 years of experience of a democratic culture,
with more than 90 years of experience of leadership, with more than 90
years of moral authority to unite the people of this country - was very
patient in listening to and accommodating the views of all other political
parties that participated in the Rules Committee, including the DA.

In fact, it must also be stated for the record that in the last very same
meeting of the Joint Rules Committee with the Chairperson of the NCOP, as
alluded to, the ANC actually moved three steps of the way in trying to
accommodate the IFP, to accommodate the DA, and the FF Plus. And, with
every step of the way, when we compromised as the ANC, the DA wanted more.

I must put it on record that in the very same meeting of the Joint Rules
Committee we as the ANC had to become more arrogant, especially when the
spokesperson of the DA the hon Douglas Gibson said that when we talk about
a people’s government, we are actually reminiscing about the dictatorial
communist regime of the former Eastern European countries. Initially, when
we were debating these issues as the ANC, we were open to - and we were
frank about it- being persuaded by other parties. We thought that we were
only differing in as far as the choice of words were concerned, but the
statement by Douglas Gibson convinced us beyond any reasonable doubt that
their opposition as the DA was nothing but ideological.

I think that in the previous debate the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration outlined the kind of ideology the DA was pursuing. But the
people of this country have voted for the ANC with more than a two-thirds
majority; and it was the people who voted for the ANC, who had also voted
for us, clearly understanding our language, clearly understanding our
slogans; slogans that many of our people died for, slogans even though many
of our people do not even have the same benefits we have, some of us, here
today.

Our people have followed the legacy of Vuyisile Mini, a person who was
involved in the drafting of the Freedom Charter in 1955, and also the
legacy of Raymond Mhlaba, when we said what kind of parliament we needed in
1955, and we said we wanted a people’s parliament. Today our friends are
telling us that when we talk about a people’s parliament, we are dividing
this country. It is quite important to ask one fundamental question in this
House today: Where does the DA get the moral authority to question the
morality of the ANC to unite and lead this country?

United in our diversity as a nation and a country, we have defined for
ourselves through the supreme law of the land the fundamental principles
and values that should shape our socio-economic and political destiny.
Cognisant of our past, we have defined for ourselves that kind of state,
which is developmental in character and orientation.

I think there was a good lecture here by the Minister for the Public
Service and Administration on the developmental state - that is what we are
for - because we are for the poor and we are for the weakest in our
society. All these developments never unfolded in a vacuum or through the
coincidence of history, but as a product of relentless struggles of the
masses of our people under the leadership of the ANC over a period of more
than nine decades.

Today, as we present the vision and mission statement of Parliament for
debate and adoption by this august House, we do so mindful of our history
and future, which is defined in the Freedom Charter. We will continue to
talk about the Freedom Charter, because our people died for the Freedom
Charter. The Freedom Charter is our future; the Freedom Charter is our
life. At the heart and centre of our existence as Parliament and MPs are
our people.

The key litmus test of the work of MPs and Parliament in particular cannot
be measured against any mathematical formula, but in the extent to which it
impacts on the material conditions of life of the masses of our people.
Accordingly, the core constitutional functions of Parliament are as
follows: to pass laws of the land, to oversee and scrutinise executive
actions, to facilitate public participation, to facilitate international
participation and, lastly, to facilitate co-operative governance. It is no
discovery on the part of the hon member from the IFP to tell us what the
key task of Parliament is. I think our Constitution is clear on that, and
we have adopted this Constitution.

These five principal tasks will be devoid of any substance, even their
execution will not be responsive to the needs of the people of South Africa
at large if our presiding officers, through the Joint Rules Committee, had
not appointed a task team to look into the best-practice models for
parliamentary oversight. These will go a long way in consolidating the
effort of building an effective people’s Parliament that will be responsive
to the needs of the people.

The path traversed by the Joint Rules Committee in the drafting of this
vision and mission statement that we are debating this afternoon was not
smooth, as I said earlier on. It was characterised by robust and frank
debates and discussions amongst political parties and, as a result, went
through many stages of drafting to arrive at formulations that could
accommodate our unity in diversity.

Our adversaries tell us that the words “people’s Parliament” are synonymous
with communist dictatorial regimes, which undermined a culture of human
rights in the former Eastern European countries. This is what Douglas
Gibson said. But the same people who are telling us this are arguing
further that the Vision Statement of Parliament, as presented today, is
borrowing too much from the language of the ruling party, which is the ANC.
This is clearly an insult to the people of this country, because . . .
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, I want to say very briefly, as
I’ve indicated, the time is due that we pass the motion put before you in
terms of the vision and mission statement of Parliament. We have debated
this very vigorously in the decision-making body, which is called the Joint
Rules Committee, and it is now for the House to decide what to do. I’ve put
the option before the House; an option that I have put to the House to vote
for and to go for, and we are putting the motion before the House as it is.

Let me perhaps just share one thing with you. We now have, whether we like
it or not, a vision of Parliament, because we get pressure from the
Treasury and they say that Parliament keeps on spending money without
strategic plans and because the strategic plans need to be designed in line
with a vision and mission statement. Therefore, we have given enough time
for this vision to be debated. I now put the motion and we can go through
to voting on the motion. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, hon member. That concludes the
debate. I shall now put the question, and the question is that the motion
be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their province’s vote. Are all delegation
heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
the voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they
vote in favour of, or against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Eastern Cape fully supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Ms B MARSHOFF: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: We support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Dr Z L MKHIZE (KwaZulu-Natal): Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Mr T A MUFUMADI: We support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Mr J L MAHLANGU (Mpumalanga): Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr K SINCLAIR (Northern Cape): Northern Cape supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Ms E B B MOLEWA: We support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr N MACK: We support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon members! Hon Lamoela, would you
please listen. All provinces have voted in favour. I will therefore declare
the motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.
[Applause.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, it’s unfortunate that some
members think that we are representing our political parties. During the
drafting of the Constitution public hearings were held throughout the
country and the people of South Africa aired their views. That’s why we are
here in this House today. I think we must always remember that we are not
representing ourselves here, but we’re representing the provinces.

The Council adjourned at 17:56.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                          FRIDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 18 February 2005 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


         (i)           Minerals and Energy Laws Amendment Bill [B 1 - 2005]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)

         (ii)    Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 2 - 2005] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)

         (iii)   Intergovernmental Relations Framework Bill [B 3 - 2005]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)

         (iv)    Co-operatives Bill [B 4 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec
              75)

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail
              Commuter Corporation Limited (SARCC) for 2003-2004, including
              the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              for 2003-2004 [RP 105-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 - Department of
              Transport for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2003-2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
              Aviation Authority (CAA) for 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 164-2004].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
              Intellectual Property Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2003-
              2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (b)     The National Industrial Participation Programme for 2003-
              2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Trade and Investment
              South Africa (TISA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
              [RP 164-2004].

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial
              Development Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for the
              year ended June 2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 2004.


         (e)     Sustainability Report of the Industrial Development
              Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2004.

         (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency
              Affairs Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.

         (g)     Bilateral Trade Agreement between the Government of the
              Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
              Croatia, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.

         (h)     Explanatory Memorandum of the Bilateral Trade Agreement
              between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
              Government of the Republic of Croatia.


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises:

         Strategic Plan of Government Communication and Information System
         (GCIS) for 2005-2008.


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Social Services:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of
              Pension Funds for 2003.


         (b)     Exhange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
              of South Africa and the Government of the People's Republic of
              China concerning the provision of water supply materials [No
              198], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution of
              the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (c)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
              the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
              Government of the People's Republic of China concerning the
              provision of water supply materials [No 198].

         (d)     Exhange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
              of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
              Germany concerning the decentralised development planning
              programme [No 141], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108
              of 1996).

         (e)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Exhange of Letters between
              the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
              Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
              decentralised development planning programme [No 141].

         (f)     Exhange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
              of South Africa and the Government of the People's Republic of
              China concerning the Implementation of a Human Resources
              Project [No 579], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108
              of 1996).

         (g)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Exhange of Letters between
              the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
              Government of the People's Republic of China concerning the
              Implementation of a Human Resources Project [No 579].

         (h)     Programme Grand Agreement between the Global Fund to Fight
              Aids, TB and Malaria and the Government of the Republic of
              South Africa: Strengthening national capacity for treatment,
              care and support related to HIV and TB, building on successful
              behaviour change initiatives in South Africa (SAF-102-G02-C-
              00) [No 480], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108
              of 1996).

         (i)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Programme Grand Agreement
              between the Global Fund to Fight Aids, TB and Malaria and the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa: Strengthening
              national capacity for treatment, care and support related to
              HIV and TB, building on successful behaviour change
              initiatives in South Africa (SAF-102-G02-C-00) [No 480].

         (j)     Programme Grand Agreement between the Global Fund to Fight
              Aids, TB amd Malaria and the Government of the Republic of
              South Africa: Enhancing the care of HIV/Aids-infected and
              affected patients in resource - constrained settings in
              Kwazulu-Natal (SAF-102-G03-C-00) [No 462], tabled in terms of
              section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
              Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (k)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Programme Grand Agreement
              between the Global Fund to Fight Aids, TB and Malaria and the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa: Enhancing the care
              of HIV/Aids-infected and affected patients in resource -
              constrained settings in Kwazulu-Natal (SAF-102-G03-C-00) [No
              462].

         (l)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Germany
              concerning financial co-operation for 2001-2002 [No 612],
              tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution of the
              Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (m)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Germany concerning financial co-operation
              for 2001-2002 [No 612].
         (n)     Programme Grand Agreement between the Global Fund to Fight
              Aids, TB amd Malaria and the Government of the Republic of
              South Africa: Strengthening national capacity for treatment,
              care and support related to HIV and TB, building on successful
              behaviour change initiatives in South Africa (SAF-102-G01-C-
              00) [No 479], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108
              of 1996).

         (o)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Programme Grand Agreement
              between the Global Fund to Fight Aids, TB and Malaria and the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa: Strengthening
              national capacity for treatment, care and support related to
              HIV and TB, building on successful behaviour change
              initiatives in South Africa (SAF-102-G01-C-00) [No. 479].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Proclamation No R.49 published in Government Gazette No
              26905 dated 18 October 2004: Referral of matters to existing
              Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of
              the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
              1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).
         (b)     Proclamation No R.50 published in Government Gazette No
              26912 dated 20 October 2004: Referral of matters to existing
              Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of
              the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
              1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

         (c)     Proclamation No R.51 published in Government Gazette No
              26912 dated 20 October 2004: Referral of matters to existing
              Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of
              the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
              1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

         (d)     Proclamation No R.52 published in Government Gazette No
              26912 dated 20 October 2004: Referral of matters to existing
              Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of
              the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
              1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Land and Environmental Affairs:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Veterinary Council for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.
         (b)     Annual Financial Statements from the National Agricultural
              Marketing Council on the Statutory Levy Administrators on
              Agricultural Products for 2001-2002 and 2002-2003, including
              the Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2001-2002 and 2002-
              2003 [RP 1-2004].


     (7)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Local Government and Administration for consideration and report:


         (a)     African Union Convention on the Prevention and Combating
              of Corruption, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
              Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the African Union Convention on
              the Prevention and Combating of Corruption.


     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises:

         The Employment Equity Report of the Independent Electoral
         Commission for 2003, tabled in terms of section 22 of the
         Employment Equity Act, 1998 (Act No 55 of 1998).
     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration for consideration:

         Municipal Investment Regulations and Municipal Public-Private
         Partnership Regulations, in terms of section 168 of the Municipal
         Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).



                          MONDAY, 21 FEBRUARY 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Limited for the year ended
     June 2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
     Financial Statements for the year ended June 2004.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     Report to Parliament on the Strategic Industrial Projects (SIP) for
     April 2002 to March 2004.



                          TUESDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Precious Metals and Diamonds General Amendment Bill, 2005,
         submitted by the Minister of Minerals and Energy on 7 February
         2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy
         and the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs.


     (2)    Convergence Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of
         Communications on 11 February 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Communications and the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises.

2.    Membership of committees


     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
         Committees, namely:

         Budget:

         Appointed: Manyosi, Mr A T (Alt); Mkhaliphi, Mr B J; Robertson, Mr
         M O.
         Discharged: Nyanda, Ms F.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of committees


     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of Select
         Committees, namely:

         Education and Recreation:

         Appointed: Mkono, Mr D G (Alt); Qikani, Ms A N D; Robertson, Mr M
         O.

         Economic and Foreign Affairs:

         Appointed: Mkono, Mr D G; Qikani, Ms A N D (Alt).

         Finance:

         Appointed: Manyosi, Mr A T (Alt); Mkhaliphi, Mr B J; Robertson, Mr
         M O.
         Discharged: Nyanda, Ms F.

         Labour and Public Enterprises:

         Appointed: Mkono, Mr D G; Qikani, Ms A N D (Alt).

         Land and Environmental Affairs:

         Appointed: Dlulane, Ms B N; Le Roux, Mr J W (Alt).


         Local Government and Administration:

         Appointed: Nyanda, Ms F; Manyosi, Mr A T; Le Roux, Mr J W (Alt).


         Discharged: Mkhaliphi, Mr B J.

         Public Services:

         Appointed: Dlulane, Ms B N (Alt); Le Roux, Mr J W.

         Security and Constitutional Affairs:
         Appointed: Le Roux, Mr J W (Alt); Manyosi, Mr A T; Nyanda, Ms F.


         Discharged: Mkhaliphi, Mr B J.

         Social Services:

         Appointed: Mkono, Mr D G (Alt); Qikani, Ms A N D; Robertson, Mr M
         O.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Social Development


     (a)    Report of the Central Drug Authority for 2003 [RP 16-2005].

     (b)    Report of the Central Drug Authority for 2004 [RP 17-2005].


