---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 25 August 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-08-25
---

THURSDAY, 25 AUGUST 2005
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:05.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                                 NEW MEMBER


                               (Announcement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, I would like to announce
that the hon Mr L H Fielding has been appointed to fill the vacancy that
occurred in the delegation of the Northern Cape. The member was sworn in in
my office this morning, 25 August 2005. I would like to take this
opportunity to welcome the hon member and say: Welcome to the working
House. Could you stand up so that members can see you? [Applause.] Thank
you.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move, on
behalf of the IFP, at the next sitting day of the Council:

  That the Council-

     1) notes with shock that David Masimong of Munsieville in Krugersdorp,
        who is the father of five and the sole breadwinner, spent almost
        two years in prison for a crime that he did not commit after he was
        falsely arrested in September 2002;


     2) further notes that having been released a year ago, Mr Masimong has
        yet to be compensated for his ordeal and that little headway has
        been made as the prison authorities have not yet released the
        records of his incarceration;

     3) urges the relevant authorities to deal with this issue as a matter
        of urgency so that Mr Masimong can be compensated for his ordeal
        and move on with his life;

   (4)      acknowledges that Mr Masimong was not treated in an appropriate
         manner and did not receive the necessary support that he needed;
         and


   (5)      therefore calls upon the relevant authorities to investigate
         this matter and take the necessary action against the officials
         responsible for this gross negligence.

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting day of the Council:

  That the Council-


  (1) notes the economic-fear politics instilled by the leader, Mr Tony
        Leon, in US companies wanting to invest in South Africa;


  (2) notes that, while addressing a DA regional meeting in KwaZulu-Natal,
        he was quoted as saying, ̀No foreign company wants to be told that it
        must give up 25,1% of its equity on arrival, nor does it want to be
        told whom to hire and fire, especially when the US demographics is
        quite different to South Africa’s.́ . . .;


  (3) further notes that this statement smacks of racism and unpatriotism
        and confirms the DA is anti Black Economic Empowerment and further
        confirms the DA is anti the wealth redistribution programme of the
        country;

  (4) further notes that, to the contrary and to his embarrassment, on the
        same day that he said this to South Africans and in particular the
        economically marginalised, the US computer company Unisys struck an
        equity deal in South Africa by placing 30% of its shares with a
        black South African company called CyberKnowledge Systems (CKS);


  (5) therefore calls on Tony Leon to stop misleading South Africans and
        international investors who are interested in investing in South
        Africa; and


  (6) acknowledges that this furthermore confirms Tony Leon’s great dislike
        of the South African Economic Transformation Programme.



   CONGRATULATIONS TO CHAIRPERSON ON ROLE HE PLAYED IN OVERSIGHT VISIT AND
                   CONDOLENCES ON THE LOSS OF HIS BROTHER


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council-

   (1)      congratulates the hon Chairperson on the role he played in
        relation to the oversight visits to the Kwambonambi, Ntambanana and
        Umhlathuze Municipalities in KwaZulu-Natal together with his NCOP
        team;

   (2)      acknowledges that despite the upsetting news about the loss of
        his brother, he stayed and completed his mission; and


   (3)      therefore conveys a message of condolence and sympathy to his
        family. May God be with you in this time of mourning.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    CONSTITUTIONAL MATTERS AMENDMENT BILL

      (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Select Committee thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, hon members and delegates, comrades and friends, ladies and
gentlemen, I want to start by conveying Minister Mabandla’s regrets and
apologies for not being able to be with you today as we consider this
important Bill. The Minister is currently abroad. I commence by thanking,
in advance, all the members and delegates who support the passing of this
Bill.

Hon members will recall that the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
Constitutional Development as far back as the year 2003 in its report on
the crossing-of-the-floor legislation recommended, amongst other things,
that the department and other relevant role-players:
   . . . review the laws pertaining to the funding of political parties, in
   particular parties represented in a legislature, and to take such steps
   as may be necessary to ensure that those provisions are aligned with the
   changes effected in terms of the above legislation . . .;


and

   . . . consider all legislation which may need to be amended in order to
   be brought into line with the new laws referred to in paragraph 1, and to
   make recommendations regarding such changes as may need to be effected.

In other words, this Bill is really trying to deal with the injunction from
the portfolio committee to deal with all consequential amendments flowing
from the crossing of the floor. So it does not deal itself with the
principle of crossing – that has been dealt with - it only deals with
consequential amendments in other legislation that are needed.

Therefore the Bill before the House addresses the consequences of the floor-
crossing legislation as was passed already in 2002 and 2003. Specifically,
this Bill deals with matters relating to the funding of political parties
represented in Parliament and the provincial legislatures and the
determination of the delegates to this House of Parliament.
Therefore the Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill is intended to amend
the Determination of Delegates (National Council of Provinces) Act of 1998;
and to amend the Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act of
1997.

Schedule 3 of part B of the Constitution indicates the formula to be used
in determining the number of delegates to the National Council of Provinces
that each party represented in a legislature is entitled to. The
Determination of Delegates (National Council of Provinces) Act provides the
formula that is utilised to determine the number of special and permanent
delegates to the NCOP.

The floor-crossing legislation amended section 61 of the Constitution in
order to regulate the allocation of delegates to the NCOP in the event of
changes of party membership, mergers between parties, the subdivision of
parties or subdivision and merger of parties within a provincial
legislature.

The delegates Act was, however, not amended accordingly in order to address
the possibility of extreme changes that may occur in legislatures during
the floor-crossing window periods. In this regard, clause 11 of the Bill
seeks to amend the delegates Act so as to make provision for the
redetermination of certain delegates of a provincial legislature that has
been reconstituted on account of changes of party membership, or because of
mergers and subdivisions of parties during the floor-crossing period.
The floor-crossing legislation has introduced a scenario in which, during
the window period for floor-crossing, extreme changes in terms of the make-
up of parties represented in the legislatures can take place. Represented
parties can gain new representatives, and some parties can become weaker as
they lose representatives to others. The scenario also allows for the
emergence of completely new parties that have not contested any elections
and for the likelihood that some parties may completely disappear.

The Bill therefore addresses all these consequences and scenarios that the
delegates Act did not previously provide for. Therefore the amendments take
into consideration the possibility of these extreme changes that may take
place in these legislatures after a floor-crossing period. Previously, if
there was a deadlock over the determination of the number of permanent and
special delegates, the deadlock-breaking mechanism was to resort to the
number of votes cast for a party in the preceding election.

However, this mechanism does not take into consideration that completely
new parties, that had not contested elections before, may have emerged
during the floor-crossing period. Mindful that our electoral system is
essentially based on the proportional representation model and that votes
are cast for a party and not an individual, the portfolio committee and the
select committee have provided that a nil or zero vote be recorded for such
new parties in the deadlock-breaking mechanism.
The other extreme is the possibility of two parties that have contested
elections, each one of them recording votes, merging in their entirety. In
such a case, as long as there remains no single member representing such
parties and that the merger was not a subdivision and merger, the combined
number of votes cast for each party will be considered for the purposes of
the deadlock-breaking mechanism.

However, if there remain further deadlocks, that is if two parties record
exactly the same number of votes at the polls or two completely new parties
each record zero votes, the Act now provides that the legislature
determine, in accordance with the principles of democracy, the question of
which party will receive the permanent delegate.

Turning to the matter of funding of political parties, section 236 of the
Constitution necessitates the enactment of national legislation that must
regulate the funding of political parties represented in the national and
provincial legislatures on an equitable and proportional basis.

The funding Act was therefore enacted to give effect to that constitutional
requirement. The Act, amongst other things, established the Represented
Political Parties’ Fund with a view to making provision for the funding of
political parties participating in Parliament and provincial legislatures;
and it regulates the allocation of moneys from the fund to political
parties.

In terms of section 5(2)(a) of the funding Act, allocations from the fund
must be made and paid to each of the political parties concerned in
accordance with a prescribed formula based, in part, on the principles of
proportionality and equity.

As a consequence of the floor-crossing window period, a need has arisen to
regulate, in the year in which floor-crossing is allowed at provincial and
national levels - for example this year - the reallocation of moneys from
the fund to which parties are entitled. In order to address that need it is
necessary to amend the funding Act and the regulations made under that Act.

The Bill now obliges the Independent Electoral Commission, the IEC, to
reallocate funding to qualifying political parties in recognition of the
changes brought about by the floor-crossing window periods. The Bill
requires the IEC to reallocate 50% of the funding available to parties, in
a year in which floor-crossing takes place, in a manner that recognises the
changes in party representation as a result of the floor-crossing.

This is so because payments from the fund are made in four equal
instalments payable in April, July, October and January each year.
Therefore if a party’s representation in the National Assembly or a
provincial legislature has been affected as a result of floor-crossing, the
allocations for the third and fourth instalments – in other words, October
and January – would have to be reallocated on the basis that those parties
that gained seats would be entitled to increased funding and those that
lost would have their allocations reduced.

At the same time, political parties that are no longer represented in any
of the national or provincial legislatures will no longer be entitled to
funding and will have to pay back unspent moneys. Political parties no
longer represented in any of the national or provincial legislatures will
be required to submit to the IEC their financial statements and supporting
documents which the IEC will use to determine, at its discretion, the
amount of unspent moneys.

These unspent moneys, once determined by the IEC, will be repaid to the
IEC, and will go into the fund and be distributed accordingly among the
remaining parties that qualified for funding in the following financial
year.

The new section 6A also places some obligations on the accounting officer
or leader of a political party that has to repay the IEC its unspent
balances. Provision is further made that an accounting officer or leader of
a party who fails to comply with these obligations will be guilty of an
offence in certain circumstances when they do not do so.
To conclude, I want to take this opportunity to thank the select committee,
especially its chairperson, Kgoshi Mokoena, and the portfolio committee for
a job well done under tremendous time pressure. [Applause.]

I also want to thank the leaders of other parties for making it possible
for us to process this matter in the timeframe that we could. I also want
to thank the department and particularly Mr Johan Labuschagne for really
working very hard to make sure that these amendments were put on the
Statute Book before 1 September. I thank you for supporting this Bill.
[Applause.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, we agreed with the wonderful and dynamic
Deputy Minister that at some point I would only emphasise what he has just
said.

In seven days’ time a window period will be opened to allow members of
Parliament and of the provincial legislatures to join a party of their
choice. The Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill amends the Public Funding
of Represented Political Parties Act, Act 103 of 1997. It also amends the
Determination of Delegates Act (National Council of Provinces) Act, Act 69
of 1998.

Let me also try to simplify these two amendments as much as I can. In the
principal Act, that is the Public Funding of Represented Political Parties
Act, provision is made that all parties that are represented in Parliament
qualify for funding from the IEC. Just to assist my colleagues, I would
like to say that these payments are made every three months. That is, there
are four payments per year, as the Deputy Minister said, in the months of
April, July, October and January.

When this Bill was enacted in 1997, we did not make provision for parties
that may cease to qualify to pay back moneys immediately after floor-
crossing. Let’s face it: there may be parties that will not qualify for
funding immediately after this coming floor-crossing period. We are now
putting in place a mechanism that must be followed when the time arises for
parties to repay those unspent balances to the commission.

In this Bill provision is made that these payments be made 21 days after
the party ceases to qualify. Some people are still wondering at what stage
a party ceases to qualify. Let me give three instances that may cause a
party not to qualify for funding: one, if a party loses an election; two,
immediately after a floor-crossing if a party loses all its members; three,
if a legislature or a parliament is dissolved, all parties will cease to
qualify for any funding, because there won’t be any party in that
parliament.

In the same breath, there are instances in which parties will not be
expected to repay the unspent balances to the commission. Let me give an
example of a party that has, say, 10 members. Of those 10 members, let’s
say nine members cross to another party. Only one member remains with that
party and that member retains the name of that party. That one-member party
will not be expected to repay any money to the commission, because he or
she is still the leader of that caucus of that party. What will affect that
party, if I may elaborate, is only the payment, because now the number of
members of that party is reduced. That party will get a smaller amount when
the next allocation is made. As you are aware, payments for these parties
are done proportionally.

Another example is in the case in which a party subdivides, and one
component retains its original name. That party cannot repay any unspent
balances. There are other examples that one can give, but I think members
have got the gist of what we are talking about.

What is good about this Bill is that it allows parties that may be required
to repay those unspent balances time to close their books and submit
audited statements to the commission. As my dynamic Minister said, failure
to comply with these requirements will be an offence and that party can be
prosecuted. Here we are referring to the accounting officer. If the
accounting officer is not there, the leader of that party will be expected
to do exactly that. By this, I think, we have tried to clarify the stage at
which parties are expected to submit audited statements.

I hope members are aware that all Speakers in either provincial
legislatures or here in the National Assembly are expected to publish a
list of names of all parties immediately after the window period. This will
have to be done on 22 September 2005 – this year, for example. Let me not
bore you with this, because these are just administrative issues. Members
can follow what will happen thereafter.

Let me deal briefly with the amendments to the Determination of Delegates
(NCOP) Act. This clause affects us directly as permanent delegates.
Whatever movement happens in the province, it will affect us. It means our
fate as members, as we are seated here, depends on what will be happening
from 1 September to 15 September. I am not trying to scare members here,
but let’s face it: the possibility is that come 15 September some members
may be compelled to be redeployed to civil society . . . [Laughter.] . .
.that is, to be on permanent leave. Simply put, they might not come back.

This clause 11, which amends section 2 of the principal Act, provides for a
mechanism or formula that will be used to determine how parties are to be
represented in the legislature, or how permanent delegates are to be sent
to represent that particular party here in the NCOP.

Rev P MOATSHE: [Inaudible.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: More than serious, Rev Moatshe. Some of those
calculations will be done by the IEC and the legislature. It is the normal
process. Again, this mechanism outlines all processes that need to be
followed in a case in which parties get the same number of votes after an
election or floor-crossing. Some of the things that need to be followed are
just technical and administrative. I won’t dwell much on them. This clause
took up most of our time as the committee.

Concerns were raised about how we were going to treat new parties that had
not participated in any election, but come 15 September that party or those
parties would have members in the legislature. In this Bill we have come up
with a mechanism in order to see how we can do the calculations to enable
those new parties to have some representatives here in the Council.

There were those who said, “Let’s treat them equally,” as though they had
also run and participated in an election, but there were those who said,
“Let’s give them a nil vote”, because they hadn’t participated in any
election. Guess what? All parties agreed that they start with a nil vote,
because they hadn’t participated in any election. [Laughter.]

The two versions, I think, are self-explanatory. Let me appeal to our
respective members from all our provincial legislatures and here in the
National Assembly to carefully and correctly choose soberly. This is your
chance to walk with pride and join the masses. This is your chance to
belong to a party with a vision. This is your chance to be part of history
in the making. The doors are open; come home. You are going to be warmly
welcomed.

Let me take this opportunity to thank our committee members for once again
showing their dedication and commitment to bettering the lives of all South
Africans. You are really serving your country with distinction. Let me also
thank the one and only “Lappies” Johan Labuschagne. If we had only five
Lappies in this country, let me tell you this country would move.
[Applause.]

Let me stop here and allow my colleagues to take over where I leave off.
They will also assist in giving “umrhabulo” [political education] about
what this Bill is all about. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr J W LE ROUX: Hon Chair, hon Deputy Minister and colleagues, I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank our chairman, Kgoshi Mokoena and the
very hard-working Johan Labuschagne for guiding us through this difficult
Bill. It was wonderful that at the end of the day we could get consensus on
every single clause. Thank you very much for that.

Dit is nou duidelik dat die reg om van een party na ’n ander oor te loop só
misbruik word dat die demokrasie en die wil van die kiesers totaal
geïgnoreer word. Die ANC was nog nooit so verdeeld soos nou nie en dis
duidelik dat die party alles in sy vermoë doen om op elke moontlike wyse
lede van ander partye af te rokkel, veral in die Wes-Kaap.

As gevolg van hierdie toedrag van sake het die federale raad van die DA nou
besluit dat slegs persone wat die beginsels van die DA onderskryf, aanvaar
sal word. [Gelag.] Jy weet natuurlik nie wat beginsels is nie, dis dié dat
jy so lekker lag! Tweedens is daar besluit dat geen persoon deur beloftes
of aanbiedings oorreed sal word om by die DA aan te sluit nie; en derdens,
dat die DA die Parlement sal versoek om die hele oorloopkwessie weer in
oënskou te neem in die lig van die probleme wat nou ondervind word.

Die wetsontwerp, soos die Adjunkminister baie duidelik vir ons uitgespel
het, het twee hoofoogmerke: die een is die befondsing van politieke partye
ná afloop van die oorlooptydperk, en die ander is die aanwysing van lede
van die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies, waarin ons natuurlik die meeste
belangstel.

Wat die befondsing van partye betref, ná die oorlooptydperk word die
toewysing gedoen asof ’n verkiesing plaasgevind het. Indien ’n party al sy
lede verloor, sal so ’n party nie geregtig wees op befondsing nie en sal
ongebruikte fondse terugbetaal moet word. Wat die kontrolering van hierdie
fondse betref, is daar streng ouditvereistes en die hoof-uitvoerende-
beampte of die leier van die party sal aanspreeklik gehou word.

Tweedens maak die wetsontwerp voorsiening vir die aanwysing van lede van
die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies - dis nou ons. Die wetsontwerp is nou
gewysig om voorsiening te maak vir veranderinge van die samestelling van
die provinsiale parlemente ná afloop van die oorlooptydperk. Weer eens word
die NRVP saamgestel asof ’n verkiesing plaasgevind het.

Waar daar egter met die samestelling van die NRVP ’n gelyke uitslag tussen
partye plaasvind, word daar na uitgebragte stemme in die vorige verkiesing
gekyk om ’n uitslag te bepaal. In die geval van ’n nuwe party wat dus nié
aan die vorige verkiesing deelgeneem het nie, sal so ’n party gesien word
as ’n party wat geen stemme verwerf het nie. Die DA steun die wetsontwerp.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It is now clear that the right to cross the floor from one party to the
next is abused so much that democracy and the will of the voters are
totally ignored. The ANC has never been as divided as it is now and it is
clear that it would do everything in its power to lure away members of
other parties in any which way they can, particularly in the Western Cape.

As a result of this situation, the federal council of the DA has now
decided that only persons who subscribe to the principles of the DA will be
accepted. [Laughter]. Of course, you do not know what principles are, that
is why you’re having such a good laugh! Secondly, it was decided that no
person would be persuaded by means of promises or offers to join the DA;
and, thirdly, that the DA will request Parliament to review the whole
crossing-the-floor issue in the light of the problems that are now being
experienced.

The Bill, as the Deputy Minister clearly spelled out, has two primary
objectives: the one is the funding of political parties after the
conclusion of the floor-crossing period, and the other is the appointment
of members to the National Council of Provinces, in which we are, of
course, the most interested.

With regard to the funding of parties, after the floor-crossing period the
allocation is done as if an election had taken place. If a party loses all
its members, such a party will not be entitled to funding and the unused
funds will have to be paid back. There are strict auditing requirements
concerning the controlling of these funds and the chief executive officer
or the leader of the party will be held accountable.

Secondly, the Bill makes provision for the appointment of members of the
National Council of Provinces - that would be us. The Bill has now been
amended to make provision for changes in the composition of the provincial
parliaments after the conclusion of the floor-crossing period. Once again
the NCOP is composed as if an election had taken place.

However, where the composition of the NCOP reflects an even result between
the parties, the votes cast in the previous election are looked at to
determine a result. In the case of a new party that did not participate in
the previous election, such a party would be regarded as a party that had
not won any votes. The DA supports the Bill. [Applause.]]

Mnu Z C NTULI: Sihlalo – Mabhoko, bahlonishwa nabahlonishwakazi bale Ndlu
yoMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe, Phini likaNgqongqoshe, Johan
Labuschagne, njengenhlangano ye-ANC, silokhu siqhubeke njalo ngokugxilisa
izimpande zombuso wentando yeningi eNingizimu Afrika, e-Afrika nasezweni
lonkana.

Lapha sikhuluma ngalo Mthethosivivinywa obizwa ngokuthi i-Constitutional
Matters Amendment Bill. Phela sikhuluma ngokwabiwa kwezimali yi-IEC emuva
kokuba amalungu ePhalamande elandele onembeza bawo, aya kuleyo nhlangano
emele ukushintsha izimpilo zabantu eNingizimu Afrika ukuze zibe ngcono.

Siyazi ukuthi kukhona labo lo mthetho asebewuphe amagama awukwehlisa
isithunzi njengegama elithi “umthetho wokugcogcoma”. Thina-ke kwaKhongolose
sithi ungumthetho wokulandela unembeza. Bona laba abathi ukugcogcoma abasho
njalo uma bemukela amalungu avela kwezinye izinhlangano. Baye benze
imicimbi bejabulela ukuthi kuhle kwabo, kodwa uma umuntu elandela unembeza
wakhe eya kwaKhongolose bakhala kudume izintaba nezihosha, begxeka besho
wonke amaganyana ayiziswana.

Abantu bayohlale njalo belandela onembeza babo beya kwaKhongolose ngoba le
nhlangano igcina labo abangaphakathi besese, nalabo abangaphandle
behehekile ukuthi bayijoyine le nhlangano. Phela nemfuyo yakho uyiphatha
kahle ukuze izalane yande. Ngiyazi ukuthi ukuba uMthethosivivinywa
uyasivumela lapha kuMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe ukuba silandele
onembeza bethu, ngabe nathi senze njalo. Mina-be bengizolalela unembeza
wami ngisuke kwi-ANC ngiqonde kwi-ANC! [Ubuwelewele.]

Siyazi ukuthi laba abafuna ukulandela onembeza babo babhekene nobunzima
obungakanani ngenxa yezindlela ezingasile ezisetshenziswa ondlovu
kayiphikiswa abangabaholi babo. Okufanele sikwazi lapha ukuthi
asiwushintshi uMthethosisekelo kodwa senza ukuthi uhlelo lokwabiwa
kwezimali emuva kokuba amalungu eguqukele kwezinye izinhlangano lube
ngoluhambisana nentando yeningi.

Siyakuphika ukuthi lo mthetho uphambana nezinhloso zabantu – lokhu okubizwa
ngokuthi i-voter betrayal. Mina ngifuna ukubuza ukuthi bangasho yini ukuthi
yi-voter betrayal lokhu okwakwenziwa yi-IFP ne-DA KwaZulu-Natal ngenkathi
behlangana benza uhulumeni wokubambisana? Akuzange kushiwo ukuthi
baphambana nezinhloso zabantu ngoba abazange babatshele abantu ukuthi
sebayahlangana, sebezokwakha uhulumeni wokubambisana.

Futhi-ke siyakuphika thina lokho ngoba umphakathi uyakwazi ukuthi phakathi
kwale minyaka emihlanu uzikhethele ukuthi uya kuliphi iqembu. Akukaze
kushiwo ukuthi ngukugcogcoma lokho. Baye bajabule bathi, “Hhayi,
sesijoyinise amalungu awukuthi,” esikhundleni sokuthi bathi ukugcogcoma.
Mina-ke futhi ngiyakuthemba ukuthi kuyasebenza ukulandela unembeza ngoba
sikubonile ngo-2004 ngenkathi kuvulelekile ukuguqukela kwelinye iqembu.
Batshengisile abantu baKwaZulu-Natali ukuthi, cha, balandela labo abaguquka
ngoba nabo bavotela i-ANC.

Futhi sikubonile lokhu okhethweni lokuvala isikhala, i-by election, laphaya
KwaMbonambi lapho umkhandlu kade uphethwe yi-IFP khona. Kuthe ngenkathi
kwenziwa lolo khetho, ingakapheli iminyaka emihlanu, bakwazi ukuvota futhi
bavotela i-ANC. Kusho ukuthi balandele onembeza babo.

Kuhle sazi ukuthi abantu bayakwazi ukubona ukuthi umnyama ongenafu lona
bese belandela onembeza babo ingakapheli le minyaka emihlanu. Futhi le nto
ihleleke kahle ngoba leli thuba lokuguqukela kwenye inhlangano livela emuva
konyaka sekudlule ukhetho, abantu sebebone kahle ukuthi bazoya ngaphi.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson Mabhoko, hon members of the National Council of
Provinces and Deputy Minister Johan Labuschagne, as the ANC, we continue to
deepen the roots of democracy in South Africa, Africa and the whole world.

Here we are talking about the Bill called the Constitutional Matters
Amendment Bill. We are talking about a budgetary allocation by the IEC
after the members have followed their conscience by joining the party that
changes the lives of South African people for the better.

We know that there are those people who have given this law names that
undermine it, like the “floor-crossing Bill”. We in the ANC call it the
“conscience-following Bill”. Those who are saying it is a floor-crossing
Bill do not say that when they welcome members from other parties. They
throw parties, delighted to have new members. However, when the person is
following his conscience by joining the ANC, they wail, criticise and utter
all sorts of provocative words.

People will always follow their conscience by joining the African National
Congress, because this party always keeps its members happy. Those who are
not members are always interested in joining this party. In fact, you have
to take care of your livestock in order for it to multiply. I know if the
Bill were allowing us to follow our conscience here in the National Council
of Provinces, we would have done so. Personally I was going to do that by
defecting from the ANC to join the ANC! [interjections.]

We know how hard it is for those who want to follow their conscience
because of unacceptable ways used by their autocratic leaders. What we must
know is that we are not changing the Constitution, but we are adjusting the
system of budget allocations after members have defected to other parties
in order to be in line with democracy.

We deny that this law is contradictory to the will of the people, what we
call “voter betrayal”. What I would like to know is whether they could call
the alliance between IFP and the DA in KwaZulu-Natal to form a coalition
government “voter betrayal”? They did not say that it contradicted the will
of the people, because they did not inform people that they were merging to
form a coalition government.

We also reject that because in these five years the public have been able
to choose a party to join. They did not call that floor crossing. They were
happy, saying we have welcomed so many members instead of calling it floor
crossing. Personally I feel that it does work to follow your conscience,
because we witnessed this in 2004 when the floor-crossing window was
opened. People of KwaZulu-Natal have showed that they are following those
who defected because they voted for the ANC.

We have also witnessed this in the by-election in KwaMbonambi, where the
council was headed by the IFP. When that election was held within five
years people were able to vote, and they voted for the ANC. That shows that
they followed their conscience.
It is important to know that people see if there is a future and they
follow their conscience within these five years. This thing is also well
organised, because the chance to defect from one’s party comes a year after
the election, when people have decided which party to join.]

Chairperson, hon members, comrades and friends, without fear of any
contradiction let me stress that the ANC believes that floor-crossing does
not constitute betrayal of voters as previously suggested by some political
parties. Floor-crossing does not only occur within the confines of the
Constitution, but it also strengthens democracy in our country. This is a
view, which was expressed by the Constitutional Court in the United
Democratic Movement vs President of the Republic of South Africa case in
2004.

However, the opposition we have in this country has the tendency to
deliberately cloud political interventions, which purport to deepen and
advance democracy. Hence I am not surprised that even in today’s debate
some view the amendment as nothing else but the changing of our
Constitution and the undermining of democracy and constitutionalism through
legislation.

The fact of the matter is that this Bill does not purport to amend our
Constitution as some have always believed and wanted South Africans to
believe. Instead, this Bill addresses the consequences of floor-crossing by
amending the legislation that deals with the funding of represented
political parties and the determination of delegates to the National
Council of Provinces. Therefore the amendments proposed in this Bill should
be viewed and understood within a broader context of advancing, deepening
and consolidating democracy in our country. The ANC supports this Bill. I
thank you.

Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo ohloniphekile neSekela likaNgqongqoshe namalungu
ahloniphekile. [Hon Chairperson, Deputy Minister and hon members . . .]

Chairperson, I find it difficult to believe that after three years of the
floor-crossing Bill, which was passed, debated and passed by this
Parliament, I am yet again to take part in a debate on a Bill that arose
from the Bill that, as I describe in Afrikaans: “Dit gee my grys hare.” [It
gives me grey hair.] [Laughter.]

The good thing about this Bill that we are debating today is that it deals
with funding of political parties and accountabilities of parties regarding
the funds.

Noma kunjalo Sihlalo, ukuxhaswa ngemali kwamaqembu anamalungu lapha
ePhalamende akusho ukuthi sesiyawabusisa futhi samukela ukuthi kuhle
ukugcogcoma nezihlalo zeqembu elizizuze kubavoti ngesikhathi wonke amaqembu
ekhankasa ejuluka ukukhanda nokuthola amavoti, bese kuqhamuka nje abantu
esingathi ngesiXhosa bathi “into yomuntu ngeyami”. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Be that as it may, Chairperson, supporting the funding of parties with
members in Parliament does not mean that we support and condone the floor-
crossing of members with positions as chairpersons that had been gained
during vote-sweating campaigns of parties and all of a sudden people came
from nowhere, claiming what we would express in Xhosa as “what belongs to
another person is also mine”.]

 . . . climbing on a band wagon and claiming to be representing the voters,
when he or she did not contest the elections.

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Mhlalingaphambili, akulunganga ukuba ilungu xa lisoyika
lisebenzise isiXhosa ngokungekho mthethweni.[Kwahlekwa.] [Chairperson, it
is not right that a member should speak improper isiXhosa when she or he is
afraid of something. [Applause.]]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, masikwemukele ukuthi iyazalwa ingane kungesiyo
ingane ezalwa ngumnumzane wekhaya. Leyongane-ke iyivezandlebe. Ngokomthetho
wakwantu leyo ngane ayibulawa, ayikhishwa inyumbazana kodwa yenzelwa konke
okwenzelwa ezinye izingane zakulelo khaya.  (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, let us admit that a child could be born in a
particular home, not necessarily of the man of that home. That child is
illegitimate. Naturally that child is not killed or discriminated against,
but it receives all the benefits enjoyed by the rest of the children in
that home.]

Chairperson, because we are dealing with section 5 of Act 103 of 1997,
which is a funding Act of political parties, the IFP will support the
Amendment Bill. “Feela modulasetulo, tseba ke hona hore re tshehetsa tjena,
re ja dikgobe le majwe.” [But, Chairperson, you must know that although we
support, we are not satisfied.]

I hope one day we will find the time to have a debate about the new
political party or parties formed after the floor-crossing. “Sihlalo,
selidumela emansumpeni, imisindo iyezwakala. Lafa elihle kakhulu.”
[Chairperson, the time for things to happen has arrived, noises can be
heard. Our beloved country is perishing.]

Mnr F ADAMS: Voorsitter, agb Minister en kollegas in dié Huis, ek wil vir
ons voorsitter van die komitee baie dankie sê vir sy harde werk, asook vir
die amptenary en veral vir “die agb” Lappies. Dis jammer Lappies kan nie
vir die Springbokke speel nie, anders het ons al lankal die Drienasies-
reeks gewen en was ons nommer een in die wêreld.

Ek gaan nou afwyk van my toespraak, maar ek wil graag oor die beginsels
praat waaroor my agb kollega Wilhelm le Roux hier gepraat het. As my geheue
my nie in die steek laat nie, wil ek net vir my kollega Le Roux sê hy moet
asseblief met sy provinsiale leier gaan praat oor beginsels, want sy
provinsiale leier het mense in die Wes-Kaap poste belowe as hulle sou
oorloop na die DA toe. [Tussenwerpsels.] Sy leier het mense poste belowe.

Die DA praat van beginsels, maar hulle skuif mense in wetgewers rond. Toe
hulle in die wetgewer hoor die man gaan loop, skuif hulle hom NRVP toe. Die
agb lede moet die waarheid praat. Hulle moet praat oor beginsels.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Dan wil ek vra, wat is beginsels dan by hulle? [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues in this House, I want
to say thank you very much to the chairperson of our committee for his hard
work, including the officials and especially “the hon” Lappies. It is a
pity that Lappies cannot play for the Springboks, or we would have won the
Tri-Nations series long ago and we would have been number one in the world.

I am now going to deviate from my speech, but I should very much like to
speak about the principles that my hon colleague Wilhelm le Roux has spoken
about here. If my memory is not failing me, I would just like to tell my
colleague Le Roux please to go and speak to his provincial leader about
principles, as his provincial leader promised posts to people in the
Western Cape if they crossed the floor to the DA. [Interjections.] His
leader promised people posts.

The DA talks about principles, but they shift people around in the
legislatures. When they heard in the legislature that the man was going to
leave, they shifted him to the NCOP. The hon members must speak the truth.
They must speak about principles. [Interjections.] Then I want to ask, what
are principles to them? [Applause.]]

Mnr A WATSON: Agb Voorsitter, die lid is besig om hierdie Huis te mislei
met blatante leuens, en ek vra u om hom tot orde te roep. Hy praat van goed
waarvoor hy geen bewyse het nie. Hy is besig om mense hier te beswadder. Hy
skuil agter sy privilegie as ’n lid, en ek vra u om hom tot orde te roep.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, the member is misleading this House with
blatant lies, and I am asking you to call him to order. He is speaking
about things of which he has no proof. He is besmirching people here. He is
hiding behind his privilege as a member, and I am asking you to call him to
order.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, that is not a point of order. Continue,
hon member.

Mr F ADAMS: Dankie, Voorsitter. Nou vra ek, waar is beginsels nou?
[Tussenwerpsels.] Thank you, Chairperson. Now I am asking: Where are
principles now? [Interjections.]]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon Lamoela, can you give the hon
member a hearing, please.

Mnr F ADAMS: Is dit reg dat mense poste belowe word? Die NNP, vir die DA se
inligting, loop op een 1 September na die ANC toe oor sonder voorbehoude.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Daar is geen beloftes gemaak van poste nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Ons werk al van 2001 met die ANC saam, want ons sien Suid-
Afrika is besig om op ’n pad te gaan . . . [Tussenwerpsels.] Hierdie land
van ons is besig om op ’n pad te gaan wat geen keer sal duld nie.

Al gaan die DA en maak ons land in die buiteland sleg, was dit verblydend
om nou die dag te lees dat ons ekonomie teen 7,3% groei. [Tussenwerpsels.]
Agb Watson, waar kan die DA ooit getuig van ’n konstruktiewe bydrae tot
hierdie land? [Tussenwerpsels.] Waar is daar getuig van ’n konstruktiewe
bydrae? Beginsels! Mense wat in glashuise woon, moenie met klippe gooi nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Mense wat in glashuise woon, moenie kritiseer nie.

My agb kollega praat van beginsels; as daar beginsels was, het die NNP ’n
beginselbesluit geneem om by die ANC aan te sluit om ’n beter lewe vir ons
mense uit te kap, want geen ander party, geen ander politieke beweging kan
dit doen nie. [Applous.] Dis nie ’n party wat regeer word deur een mens wat
besluit daardie een gaan hiernatoe of daarnatoe nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Is it right that people are promised posts? The NNP, for the DA’s
information, is crossing the floor to the ANC without reservation on 1
September. [Interjections.] There were no promises concerning posts.
[Interjections.] We have been working with the ANC since 2001, because we
see that South Africa is embarking on a course . . . [Interjections.] This
country of ours is embarking on a course that will not tolerate any
resistance. Even though the DA goes along and disparages our country
abroad, it was heartening to read the other day that our economy is growing
at 7,3%. [Interjections.] Hon Watson, how could the DA ever testify to
having made a constructive contribution to this country? [Interjections.]
Where has there been evidence of a constructive contribution? Principles!
People who live in glass houses should not throw stones. [Interjections.]
People who live in glasshouses should  not criticise.

My hon colleague speaks about principles; if there were principles, the NNP
has made a decision in principle to join the ANC in order to carve out a
better life for our people, because no other party, no other political
movement, can do it. [Applause.] It is not a party that is ruled by one
person who decides who goes where.]

As they say in English, it is the people’s movement. We as the people, the
NNP, have joined the people’s movement. [Interjections.]

Dit lyk my die DA is kwaad omdat die NNP hom voorgespring het om die
“people’s movement” te “join”. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit lyk my dit is waarom
hulle kwaad is! [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die NNP steun hierdie wetgewing. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[It seems to me as if the DA is cross because the NNP has stolen a march on
them by joining the people’s movement. [Interjections.] It seems to me this
is why they are cross! [Interjections.]

The NNP supports this legislation. [Time expired.]]

Mr A L MOSEKI: Chairperson, Freddie has done the work. I am not going to
repeat what he has said. Thank you very much, Chairperson. Deputy Minister
. . .

 . . . re a leboga. Modulasetulo wa komiti o setse a buile gore bothata jo
re neng re kopane le bona ke ba mofuta mang. Kgweetlo e re neng re lebagane
le yona ke efe fa re ne re dira ka Molaotlhomo o o leng fa pele ga rona.
Sengwe se se botlhokwa fa re dira ka Molaotlhomo o ke go lebelela gore a
Molaotlhomo o, o dumalana le molaotheo wa Aforika Borwa. Molaotheo wa
Aforika Borwa kgaolo 2 karolo 19. (Translation of Setswana paragraph
follows.)

[. . . I thank you. The committee chairperson has already explained just
what type of problems we encountered. He also spoke about some of the
challenges we faced when dealing with this Bill. One important factor that
we took into account whilst dealing with this Bill was to ensure that it
aligned itself with the Constitution. The South African Constitution,
Chapter 2, section 19, talks about . . .]

 . . . freedom of speech, freedom of association, freedom of political
rights, and all those important facets of our democracy. Our understanding
. . .

 . . . ke gore, fa re tsaya kgang ka Molaotlhomo o gompieno re be re
lebeletse fela mo molaotheong wa rona. Maitlhomo magolo a Molaotlhomo o ke
go tiisa demokerasi ya rona gore e gole e re ka moso, re sa tlhole re
tshela, bana le bana ba rona ba fitlhele boswa jono jwa demokerasi jo re
tlaabong re ba agetse jona.

Fa re lebile 1 Lwetse, go bonagala gore go na le batho ba e rileng fa reya
kwa ditlhophong, mo ngwageng yo o fetileng, ba tsaya ditshwetso tsa gore ba
tsene ka makoko a a rileng a sepolotiki. Fa ba ntse ba tsamaya mo tseleng,
re kopana re buisana mo Ntlong e le mo dipolatefomong tse dingwe, batho ba
ba simolola go elelelwa gore ditshwetso tse ba di tsereng ka nako ya go nna
bontlhopheng ba makoko a a riling ga di a siama. Ba simolola go fetola
megopolo ya bona ka gonne ba bona tshedimosetso, ba bona lesedi kwa
bofelong.

Molaotheo ware re na le tshwanelo ya gore re ikamanye le mekgatlho e re e
batlang kgotsa re simolole mekgatlho e re e batlang, rona re le baagi ba
Aforika Borwa. Fa molaotheo o bua jana, ga o fe fela baagi ba naga e natla
le tshwanelo eo. Maloko a Ntlo e re leng mo go yona e, a eleng maloko a
makoko gotswa kwa diporofenseng, le maloko a Kokoano Bosetšhaba le bona ba
fiwa natla ka kutlwisiso ya gore ke baagi ba Aforika Borwa mme le bona ba
na le ditshwanelo tse ba bangwe ba nang le tsona.

Molaotheo fa o bula letlhabaphefo le e tlaabong e le bula ka 1 Lwetse, ware
yo o iphitlhetseng ka mabaka a a rileng a tsere tshwetso ya gonna leloko la
lekoko la ga mme Louw fale, a nne fatshe a itlhokomedise gore a tshwetso e
a neng a e tsaya ka nako eo e tshwanetse na? Fa a fitlhela gore tshwetso e
a neng a e tsaya e fosagetse, a tseye tshwetso ya gore jaanong ke fetola
maikutlo a me ke ya go ikamanya le lekoko le lengwe. (Translation of
Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[ . . . is that when we deal with this Bill today, we have to ensure that
it aligns itself with our Constitution. The main intention of this Bill is
to develop and strengthen our democracy, so that tomorrow when we have
passed on, our children and grandchildren will inherit the benefits that
are brought about by that.

As we approach 1 September, it is becoming very clear that when we voted
last year there were some people who took decisions then to join certain
political parties. However, as we traversed this political path and started
debating issues in this House and on other platforms, these people realised
that their decisions to contest the elections under those parties’ banners
were not the right ones. They started changing their minds after getting
more information and in the end saw the light.

The Constitution gives us, as South Africans, the right to align ourselves
with parties of our choice or to form new political parties. The
Constitution does not just give that right to ordinary citizens of this
country. Members of this House –  who also happen to be members of
political parties from the various provinces – and members of the National
Assembly also enjoy that right on the basis of being citizens of South
Africa. They are also entitled to the same rights that other citizens
enjoy.

The Constitution says that when the window of opportunity opens on 1
September, members of Ms Louw’s party can sit down and re-examine the
decisions they took in the past. When they find that those decisions were
not the right ones, they should feel free to change their minds and join
other political parties.]

That is a fundamental constitutional right of our people in this country.

Re etse maemo tlhoko fa e sale re simolola go mametlelela molao o gore go
na le makoko, lengwe la ona ke laga rre Holomisa, a a simolotseng go lwa le
maloko a ona. Ba dirisa mekgwa e e neng e diriswa ke puso ya tlhaolele go
tshosetsa batho, go ba emisa le go ba pateletsa go ikgolola mo makokong ao.
Tlwaelo e ke e e ka dirisiwang ke batho ba dipolotiki tsa bona di tswang mo
lemoragong le le bodileng. Mongwe wa bona ke Holomisa a latelwe ke Tony
Leon. Ba batla go tlisa tlhaolele le mekgwa e e sa siamang mo morafeng wa
rona. Re lwantsha mekgwa ego.  (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[We have noticed that ever since the promulgation of this law certain
parties – one of them is Mr Holomisa’s party – have been fighting with
their members. They use tactics that were employed by the apartheid
government to intimidate people, forcing them to leave those parties. This
is the kind of thing that can be expected from people who come from a
rotten political background. One of them is Holomisa, followed by Tony
Leon. They want to bring back discrimination and other bad practices to our
country. We are fighting these practices.]

Chairperson, we want to stand in this House today and appeal to all of us .
. .

Ke ntse ke reeditse mme Louw are rre Mokoena o gwetlha maloko a makoko a
mangwe go ikwadisa. [I have been listening to Ms Louw saying that Mr
Mokoena is canvassing members of other parties to join his party.]

We want to stand here and appeal to members, especially people who are
public representatives. Our people have voted us into power so that we can
lead them, not to fear, not to be intimidated by those dictators, those who
want to remain in the political scrapyards of the apartheid regime. We want
to appeal to those who want to cross the floor and join the people’s
movement not to be intimidated by Holomisa, not to be intimidated by Tony
Leon. They must cross over and join the ANC.

Having discussed this Bill in the last two weeks, we are more convinced, as
we have said, that this Bill’s main intention is to entrench democracy and
ensure that we build a legacy that will remain there for our coming
generation. With those words, as the ANC we want to concur with the
Chairperson by saying that this Bill must find its passage and become part
of the law of this country. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mr Chairperson, it is quite clear that the hon Mr Le
Roux had the unenviable duty to do some damage control after Sheila
Camerer’s speech yesterday in the National Assembly and that is the reason
that Mr Le Roux said: “Die DA gaan vra dat die oorloopwetgewing weer
ondersoek moet word”. [“The DA will ask that the floor-crossing legislation
be looked at again.”]

Dis niks anders as weer ’n foefie van die DA nie. Hulle wil op hul
pamflette aan kiesers sê dat hulle teen die oorloopwetgewing is en dit stel
dat hulle dit weer wil laat ondersoek.

Ons sal die DA gebonde hou aan hulle stemming ten gunste van die
oorspronklike oorloopwetgewing, ons sal hulle gebonde hou aan hul steun vir
hierdie wetgewing, en as hulle reken dat hulle vorentoe die kiesers gaan
flous met dit wat die agb le Roux hier probeer doen het - in alle
billikheid hy het sy bes probeer, maar hy het nie geslaag nie – maak hulle
’n fout. [Gelag.]

Die DA gaan nie wegkom met dié foefie en met die poging om ’n  persepsie  te
laat ontstaan dat die DA sogenaamd die kiesers se  wil  weerspieël  nie.  Ek
wil baie duidelik  wees  ten  opsigte  daarvan.  (Translation  of  Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[It’s nothing but another trick by the DA. On their pamphlets they  want  to
tell voters that they are against the floor-crossing legislation  and  state
that they want to have it re-examined.

We shall keep the DA to their vote in favour of the original  floor-crossing
legislation, we shall keep them to their support for this  legislation,  and
if they think that they are going to mislead the voters in future with  what
the hon Le Roux has tried to do here - let us be  fair,  he  has  tried  his
best, but he has not succeeded - they are making a mistake. [Laughter.]

The DA will not get away with this trick and with the attempt to create a
perception that the DA supposedly reflects the will of the voters. I want
to be very clear in this respect.]

The Deputy Minister said, and he is quite correct, that this Bill does not
deal with the principle of crossing the floor, but one cannot get away from
that, because the floor-crossing issue will always arise whenever any
legislation that is linked with the crossing of the floor is being debated
again.

The FF Plus voted against the floor-crossing legislation, and we will again
vote against this legislation. We understand the necessity of having this
Bill in place. In fact, I took your point yesterday in the committee, hon
Mokoena, and I understand the situation. But it goes against our
principles, although we understand that it needs to go through. But in
spite of the fact that it is a necessary situation we cannot support it,
because it unfortunately again involves the whole principle of violating
the will of the people. We cannot support anything like that. But we
understand the necessity, and we feel offended by the different viewpoints
that were taken up by the DA yesterday in the NA, and today here in the
NCOP.
As far as FF Plus is concerned I just repeat: We will not support the
legislation. Thank you.

Mr S SHICEKA: Hon Chairperson of the Council, Deputy Minister, Deputy
Chairperson of the Council, Acting Chief Whip, Mr Sulliman, and hon
colleagues, you can see that the Acting Chief Whip takes “acting” very
seriously. He even sits in the Chief Whip’s seat. [Laughter.]

The principal Act raised fundamental principles that are entrenched in our
Constitution, in particular the principle of freedom of association. In
this country we are living in interesting times, in times where in our
country the motive forces are in a state of permanent motion. That period
is characterised as a young, developing democracy, pregnant with many
possibilities of building a better life for all.

In a period of transition the situation is fluid, therefore the mechanism
in this country was created to allow men and women to choose which party
they want to belong to. One year after the elections, and one year before
the elections, that is what we call the crossing of the floor. The ANC, Mr
Willem Le Roux, to give you a lesson in history - because I think at that
time you were not part of the DP - during negotiations at Codesa at Kempton
Park was very reluctant to allow this clause in our Constitution. However
the DP insisted on this issue, particularly Mr Colin Eglin. You would have
been aware of this if you knew the history.

That clause was then called the antidefection clause. The ANC reluctantly
agreed to it. Therefore, you must know that we implemented this clause and
the laws that are subsequent to that reluctantly, because we knew that the
ANC is a parliament of the people and that the ANC is an organisation that
is loved by the people of this country. The ANC is the only organisation in
the world that gains a majority after elections. In countries across the
world parties decline when they conduct elections, but the ANC grows
further and further with each election. It is the only party that we have –
the ANC.

Therefore, when you, Mr Le Roux, say that the ANC is divided at the moment,
you are not correct. The ANC is an organisation that allows differences
because it believes that differences are healthy, but we are able to manage
those differences, and we are able to ensure that the party emerges out of
those differences as more united than ever before. Even now this movement
is going to emerge much stronger than ever before. [Applause.]

Hon member Le Roux, you say the ANC wants to gobble up members of other
parties. That is not the intention of the ANC. People come to the ANC
voluntarily. They join the ANC and they sign on as members, because they
believe in its policies and they believe in its principles. They come to
join these organisations as individuals. Therefore, Baba Mzizi, when you
talk about this party as a party that allows . . .

 . . . ukugcogcoma. Uyabona Baba uMzizi . . . [ . . . moving from one spot
to another. You see, Mr Mzizi . . .]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Kunjalo impela! [Yes, that is how it is!]

Mr S SHICEKA: . . . I think you must go down memory lane. In this country
the ANC is loved by the people. If you will remember, in 2003 when the
floor-crossing came, your party held a night vigil, a day before the floor-
crossing kicked in. Its intention was to ensure that you had a hold on the
members so that they did not cross the floor. [Applause.] Some of them were
dismissed, but the eventual decay, when last year’s elections were held,
set in when you lost the only province that you governed. That province,
today, as I speak, is governed by the ANC.

We know that your fear is that we will gain a bigger majority in that
province. You are panicking. [Interjections.] The situation is being
compounded by the fact that a new party is being created, led by Mr Ziba
Jiyani. The situation is more complex now. You are not only faced by the
ANC, but by your own child.

When we move to the issue of the UDM, we have a situation where the UDM . .
.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: The member is so honest
about other parties, will he take a question?

Mr S SHICEKA: Yes.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, it is common knowledge that the ANC is the political
lucky packet of South Africa, will you tell us what part of that lucky
packet you come from? [Laughter.]

Mr S SHICEKA: Chair, what the member is saying is a figment of his
imagination. There is no truth in what he is saying. [Applause.]
[Interjections.] When you go down memory lane, the UDM led only one council
in this country - it was in Umtata. When the time for floor-crossing
arrived last year they panicked, they dismissed councillors, even ward
councillors were dismissed, because they were hoping that they were going
to hold on to that council, so that they could display their own policies.

They thus dismissed them, by-elections were held, and the ANC emerged
victorious. It took that council. That council is now under ANC leadership.

The DA had one province that it led in this country - which is the province
in which we are. When it was the time for floor-crossing it panicked, and
after panicking the eventuality came last year that the people of this
province chose to elect the ANC to take charge of their affairs.
[Interjections.] Today the people back the ANC because they believe the
policies of the ANC are the good policies.

The question that we must ask ourselves is whether there is any party in
this country that has not been given an opportunity by the people of this
country. The IFP, the UDM and the DA all failed to show policies that are
sustainable and that will build a better life for all. The people have
chosen to say that there is only one party in this country, and that party
is the ANC. [Interjections.]

The ANC has a vision; it has a plan and it has programmes to ensure that
the quality of life of the people of this country is improved. Therefore,
members, when people choose to cross the floor, they will choose a party
that has a plan, a party that has a vision, a party that has programmes to
ensure that . . . [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! They are wasting your time. Order!

Mr S SHICEKA: Chair, on that note we must accept that we entered this
terrain of struggle reluctantly, but the people of this country are saying:
“We want you; you are the only organisation that can lead us to a land of
promise.” [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon
Chairperson and hon members, I am tempted to “gooi kole” [heap coals].
[Laughter.] They say I have to be much calmer now. May I start by thanking
everyone who participated in the debate? We did not say too much about the
Bills but we said a lot about other things, which in its own right makes it
a very interesting debate that we have had. I have listened very carefully
and if there are any issues that people have raised which we have to follow
up, we will do so. The portfolio committee and the select committee have
suggested in a resolution the matters that we have to look at. We will do
so and try and tighten up issues. I think it is important and I think it
has come out in the speeches that these Bills have not really got anything
to do with principles and politics, and so on. They are really about good
governance. These are the issues that flow out of the floor-crossing.
People may differ about it and have differences of opinion, but the
legislation itself, now that the principle is there, just makes things work
better; the funding works better and how we decide how delegates should
come to Parliament also.

I want to thank everyone for their inputs. I want to thank everyone that
has worked hard. Again, Mr Johan Labuschagne – I didn’t know you were so
famous and maybe what you should do is look at this chance of floor-
crossing and see with this kind of popularity if there isn’t a space
somewhere in a party for you, Mr Labuschagne. There may just be
opportunities. I just want to comment on two people. Dr Van Heerden, I
really am sorry that the FF Plus has not been able to see their way clear
to support this legislation like other parties. As I say, it is very
technical.

There is a more important reason and that is, as I said yesterday to Dr
Mulder, when we passed the floor-crossing legislation and you opposed it at
that stage as a party, it was him who came and raised the issue about
consequential amendments and other legislation, particularly the funding
issue. We brought this legislation here because of the FF Plus. We pass
this legislation because of the FF Plus. And now they don’t want to support
it. They are the only party that is not supporting it. It is so sad. It
really makes my heart so sore that when we help opposition parties and when
we work for their resolutions and things that they ask for, that they
cannot support it. It is a really sad day for me on this occasion that you
couldn’t support us. Baba Mzizi, let me just say this: I know you said a
few years ago that: “Die wet gee jou grys hare.” [“This Act gives you grey
hair.”]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, I hate to interrupt the Deputy Minister,
but is he willing to take a question?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I didn’t give you the floor.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mr Deputy Minister, would you grant that it is a
consequence of the “oorloopwetgewing” [floor-crossing legislation] that
this particular legislation . . .

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Van Heerden, why are you rising? Is it a
point of order or what?

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: I apologise, Chairperson. I was not granted permission
to stand up and put a question.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Do you want to put a question?

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Yes, I want to put a question.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy Minister, would you like to take a
question?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: No, it was
all said in jest. It is fine.

Dan, Baba Mzizi, sê jy dat jy grys hare het oor hierdie wet. Maar ek kyk na
jou kop, en jy het geen hare nie! [Gelag.] Nou kan ek nie verstaan wat
aangaan nie. Lyk my die hare het eers grys geraak en toe val dit uit. Ek
dink jy het op die oomblik ’n siviele eis teen die regering vir jou min
hare. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Then, Mr Mzizi, you say that this Act gives you grey hair. But I am
looking at your head and see that you have no hair! [Laughter.] Now I don’t
know what is going on. It looks as if your hair first turned grey and then
fell out. I think you have a civil case against the government for your
little hair at the moment.]

Obviously, the issue that has really been discussed is the issue of
crossing the floor and I think it is important that we remind ourselves of
these things, especially now that elections are coming closer. We get every
excited and we forget things and we become very “ahistorical”. I think
members have already pointed out that the history of floor-crossing in this
country is well-recorded. The governing party very strongly resisted the
issue of floor-crossing, particularly in the first years of this country.

There were reasons for it and not because of some big principle. The reason
for it was that at that stage our politics were very fluid. We were just
moving out of the apartheid system and we were trying to create a new
democracy. We felt at that stage that it would be very difficult for us to
create a mechanism in the Constitution that would prevent that fluidity
from maybe getting out of hand. The first few years we were very strongly
opposed to it in order to make sure that until we became a settled
democracy and had started creating institutions, that we try to keep things
as inflexible as possible. Therefore, parties like the DP and members such
as Mr Eglin, Mr Ken Andrew and others very strongly fought for the crossing
of the floor, which we did not agree upon. Then at a stage a few years down
the line, they again tried to introduce the matter and a committee of this
Parliament was appointed to look at the issue.

I remember that the hon Yunis Karrim was the chairperson. Again Parliament
felt that the time was not yet ready and the ANC argued that we were still
trying to consolidate our democracy and that we should be careful. And then
something happened which was called the marriage of the NNP and the DP and
they became a democratic alliance to fight a local government election. And
then things went very wrong. They did not like each other. They wanted to
get divorced and they could not stand each other.

Enormous pressure built up in the body politic of South Africa to deal with
this issue. It was becoming a circus. And at that stage we as the governing
party felt that things had been consolidated and that our democracy was
strong enough to withstand it and then we were prepared to look at this
issue, and deal with that issue which was being argued very strongly,
openly and not so openly, with the governing party to please let this thing
happen where they can have a divorce. We then, on that basis, introduced
it. It has got nothing to do with us and has nothing to do with any . . .

 . . . verdeeldheid in die ANC. Dit het niks daarmee te doen gehad nie. Dit
het niks met enigiets anders te doen gehad nie, want as jy kyk na die
geskiedenis van die ANC tot nou toe, in elke verkiesing doen ons beter. Ons
het nie oorlopery nodig om sterker te word nie. Ons het dit nie nodig nie.
Daarom het ons toe die Grondwet gewysig en die wetgewing ingedien om
hierdie saak te hanteer. En laat ek vir julle sê, hier is ’n klomp mense in
dié Huis – en mev Camerer in die ander Huis – wat toe daarvan gebruik
gemaak het en oorgestap het. Toe was dit nie meer ’n beginselsaak nie. As
julle nou argumenteer dat dit ’n beginselsaak is en dat julle teen
oorlopery gekant is, wat sê dit oor julle aksies in daardie stadium? Daar
is party mense wat so gereeld oorloop, hulle loop meer gereeld oor as wat
hulle hul onderklere ruil. [Gelag.] Dit is hoe beginselvas party mense is.
Dit sê natuurlik niks oor hoe gereeld julle jul onderklere ruil nie, maar
ek dink dit is belangrik dat as jy sê jy staan op beginsels, dan moet jy
jou hou by jou beginsels. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[. . . division in the ANC. It had nothing to do with that. It had nothing
to do with anything else, because if you look at the history of the ANC up
to now, we are doing better in every election. We do not need floor-
crossing to become stronger. We do not need it. That is why we amended the
Constitution and introduced the legislation to deal with this matter. And
let me tell you, there are many people in this House – and Mrs Camerer in
the other House – who then used it and crossed the floor. Then it was no
longer a matter of principle. If you are now arguing that this is a matter
of principle and that you are opposed to floor-crossing, what does it say
about your actions at the time? There are some people who cross the floor
so often that they cross the floor more often than they change their
underwear. [Laughter.] That is how principled some people are. This, of
course, doesn’t say anything about how often you change your underwear, but
I think it is important that if you say you are standing on principles,
then you should adhere to your principles.]

A principle, if you look in the dictionary, is a fundamental tenet of who
and what you are. A principle is immutable and fixed. You don’t play with
principles. Therefore, when Mrs Camerer yesterday and Mr Le Roux today said
to us this is a principle and we will now change our stance - and anyone
who wants to walk across from us to another party, we will punish them, if
anyone wants to walk to us, we will accept them - how can that be a
principle? How can that be a principle? That is opportunism of the worst
kind. If you have a principle, then you say: I will not accept anyone else
into my party. Then one can say one respects that. That is good. You stand
by your principle. But you can’t like the DA and the ACDP say it is a
principle that we don’t accept it, but if someone walks over to us, we
accept them. That is wrong. That can’t be a principle. That is opportunism.

You go even so far, Mr Le Roux, as to say the following:
“Ons het besluit dat ons van nou af net mense sal aanvaar wat aan ons
beginsels glo”. [We have decided that from now on we will only accept
people who believe in our principles.] We will only accept people who
accept our principles into our party. What do we accept by that? Until now
have you accepted people who don’t accept your principles? That is the only
conclusion that one can come to because that is the corollary of it. I can
say to you, for example: The ANC only accepts people who accept its
principles. The NNP have now gone and said that they accept the Freedom
Charter, they accept the principles that we stand for and on that basis we
accepted them. [Interjections.] Well, Mr Watson, people in glasshouses
should not speak. You are one of the people who crossed the floor.
[Laughter.] Yes, you were a NP member. [Applause.] You are one of those who
change your party more often than your underclothes. You are one of them.
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, order! Mr Watson, why are you rising? A
point of order?

Mr A WATSON: On a point of order, the Deputy Minister is deliberately
misleading the House. I have never, ever crossed the floor as an elected
politician. I resigned from the NNP and I was without a job for more than a
year and then I joined the DP. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: How often
do you change your underclothes? That principle is “stay where you are”. I
want to remind you about this issue of betrayal. You really should take the
chance to go and read a little bit. Go and look at the principle of
crossing the floor anywhere in the world. Most democracies – and the ones
that you all aspire to – have the principle of floor-crossing as part of
their constitutions and dispensations.

I try, and I really try, to understand this difficulty. Where do we find
that this is the most terrible and obnoxious principle, and where do we
find that it is something that is kind of foreign to the rest of the world.
Firstly, this is an established principle in almost every democracy.

Secondly, our Constitutional Court has had a challenge about crossing the
floor. They look at all the values in the Constitution, and not a single
value could be found in the Constitution that actually says that crossing
the floor is unconstitutional; and therefore the Constitutional Court found
that it’s in line with our Constitution and the values in the Constitution.

Why is it betrayal? How is that possible? This Constitution that we attach
so much value to - and we say it’s such a wonderful Constitution - why do
we do it? It is because of the values that are enshrined in it, and nothing
in those values says there is anything wrong with regard to the principle
of crossing the floor. And the Constitutional Court says so, not me; and it
said so unanimously.

Then I want to remind you that I agree with people who argue that we must
be careful of crossing the floor in the sense that it can corrupt our
politics. Of course we know that, everyone knows that. I mean, the parties
that are actually saying yes know it better than the lot of us, because
they have used it more often. [Laughter.] But, that is why, even when we
argue, we said that we’d only allow with the first crossing that each one
could individually decide what they wanted to do. However, from then on we
put in place a 10% threshold. As from this crossing of the floor, if you
want to cross you can’t do so just on your own; at least 10% of your party
have to go with you.

Why did we do that? Exactly to try and stop, to try and minimise the kind
of corruption that can take place; that is why. So that you won’t get big
changes, because you’d have to get big groups of people that actually
decide to go with you. In this legislature, for example, if the ANC or a
group of ANC-people want to cross the floor, at least 10% of that House
would have to do so. The DA in the other House would have to do so, 10% of
their party as it exists there would have to do so.

There are very few countries in the world that actually have that
principle. In the rest of the world individuals can do what they want; we
have said no, from now on . . .  [Interjections.] . . . Exactly because we
don’t want this to be used as something that you can wave, and wake up in
the morning and say, come over to us and we will give you something -
exactly not to do that, we’ve introduced a 10% threshold. Somehow
everyone’s forgotten about that, but it’s in the Constitution, it’s in the
law, for now.

And also, one has to be careful. You see, you shout and “maak beloftes in
die Wes-Kaap, u maak beloftes”. [make promises in the Western Cape, you
make promises.] We haven’t made a single “belofte” [promise]. I’m part of
the Provincial Executive Committee of the Western Cape and not a single
promise has been made in this province. But what I can tell you is that I
read in the newspapers that promises are being made to other opposition
parties by the DA. [Applause.] That’s there; it’s being said.
[Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: Not true.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: If you want
to look at the truth of it, look at this: They need a few people to be able
to take over the province. How are they going to do it other than with
promises? How will they do it otherwise? Already two of the NNP people that
are coming over to us are already MECs; we don’t have to promise them
anything. The other member already has a position; there doesn’t have to be
any promises about it. [Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: What about the one you’re going to make ambassador? You don’t
even know.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I don’t
know who we’re going to make ambassador. Who? Who are we going to make
ambassador?

Mr A WATSON: That other gentleman.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Who? Piet
Meyer! Piet Meyer has never . . . [Interjections.] . . . Piet Meyer is
going to form his own party. You don’t read the newspapers!
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, order! Mr Deputy Minister!

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: So what has
that got to do with anything?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, order, Deputy Minister! Order, order! I
will not allow a dialogue between two people in this House. It’s a debate;
respond to the debate. Mr Deputy Minister, no dialogue, please.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Sorry,
Chair.
The promises emanate from people who want to take over, and we must look at
ourselves. “This is a principle for us, but we’ll accept others . . .” “You
make promises, but they make promises . . . ”. And they’re blaming everyone
else. So I think we should be very careful.

Let me tell you what the truth is. Let me tell you what the truth is. If
you go and speak to DA people, softly, they’ll tell you what it is. When
the crossing of the floor took place last time, at national level things
worked out for them. People walked over here and they got quite a few
people, but at local government level they lost out. That was the problem.
They lost out big time.

In this province, where do they govern in this province? Where? They lost
out big time in this province, and suddenly it became a principle. It had
nothing to do with people feeling there’s something wrong with this, but
they realised that they are in trouble. They did not get what they wanted
last time, and they definitely won’t get it this time. So, suddenly we make
a policy change and from now on we are not going to be crossing the floor,
but we will accept people from other parties. Now, you see, that is
opportunism.

And as the hon Dr Van Heerden says, the problem is people are not stupid,
man. The people out there in our communities are not stupid. They are not
stupid. They see a thing for what it is. And when you come to them with
these things, when you try and make out that you stand for principles and
you are opportunistic, people will absolutely despise you and you will see
the results in the elections. You’ll see it. What it is, is you think
people are stupid and you can lie to them.

The one thing the ANC has always done, and that is why . . . Even when we
go through difficulties in this country we’ve always been open and honest
with our people. Even when we have difficulties we admit those
difficulties, we say we haven’t done things wrong and we move on, and for
that reason people respect you and will vote for you. But when you twist
things and are opportunistic it will come back and it will bite you, it
will bite you big time . . . [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Deputy Minister, you have one minute to
wrap up.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I think
that it would be important that in our own parties we see as we move
forward on these issues, that the issue of what the principle is, is not
the problem, it is the way in which we conduct ourselves. That is what
people don’t like and what they despise out there - not this thing about
betrayal, because there is no betrayal. There is nothing wrong with this
principle. It is how people sometimes implement it.
And if there is someone in the ANC that uses the crossing of the floor to
promise people things, and do things that are not in our party policy, you
must please tell us about that. We would like to deal with that, because it
is unacceptable in the ANC to which I belong to use positions and use
promises, and use money to entice people. We do not need that; we get 70%
of the vote out there. We do not need those types of things.

So, if anyone makes the allegation that this party that I belong to does
that, we would like you to tell us about that. But, equally, if you’re
really principled, look at yourself and go and do the same thing in your
party, then we wouldn’t have this debate and this discussion. Thank you
very much.

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The House adjourned at 15:37.

                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          WEDNESDAY, 24 AUGUST 2005

ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Referral of Bill to National House of Traditional Leaders:


    The Secretary to Parliament has, in accordance with section 18(1) of
    the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No.
    41 of 2003), referred the Repeal of Black Administration Act and
    Amendment of Certain Laws Bill [B 25 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
    76) to the National House of Traditional Leaders, which must, within 30
    days from the date of this referral, make any comments it wishes to
    make.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

          a) International Plant Protection Convention, tabled in terms of
             section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996)


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Plant Protection
             Convention.

    2.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises:

          a) Recommendation of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) –
             Recommendation No 195 concerning Human Resource Development:
             Education, Training and Lifelong Learning, adopted by the
             Conference at it’s 92nd Session – Geneva, 17 June 2004.

    3.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:

          a) Proclamation No R.26 published in Government Gazette No 27719
             dated 27 June 2005: Referral of matters to existing Special
             Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal in terms of the Special
             Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74
             of 1996).


        (b)      Proclamation No R.27 published in Government Gazette No
             27719 dated 27 June 2005: Referral of matters to existing
             Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal in terms of
             the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
             1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


        (c)      Government Notice No R.614 published in Government Gazette
             No 27719 dated 27 June 2005: Amendment of Regulations in terms
             of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3
             of 2000).

4.    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Education
      and Recreation for consideration:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Umalusi – Council for Quality
             Assurance in General and Further Education and Training for
             2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

5.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Land and
      Environmental Affairs for consideration:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Johannesburg World Summit
             Company for 2002-2003, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003.

      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Johannesburg World Summit
             Company for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

6.    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Economic
      and Foreign Affairs:

      (a)   Report on Information and Update Workshop for Pan-African
             Parliament Standing Committee on Cooperation, International
             Relations and Conflict Resolution, 1-2 April 2005.

7.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Finance
     for consideration and report:

     (a)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
             and the Government of the Republic of Malaysia for the
             Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
             Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms of
             section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Double Taxation Convention between
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Republic of Malaysia.


  8.  The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Finance:
     (a)    Proclamation No R.32 published in Government Gazette No 27766
             dated 8 July 2005: Appointment and Re-appointment of members
             of the Tax Courts in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No
             53 of 1962).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Defence

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation of
           South Africa Ltd (ARMSCOR) for 2004-2005, including the Report
           of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-
           2005.

2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Escom Holdings Limited
           (Escom) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
      on the Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill [B 22B - 2005] (National
      Assembly - sec 75), dated 24 August 2005:

           The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs,
           having considered the subject of the Constitutional Matters
           Amendment Bill [B 22B - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75),
           referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


                          THURSDAY, 25 AUGUST 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Health


          i) Nursing Bill [B 26 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76) [Bill
             and prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 27904 of 12 August 2005.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Health
             of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
             Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
             Rule 160, on 24 August 2005.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

     1) Precious Metals Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of Minerals
        and Energy on 25 August 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee
        on Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on Economic and
        Foreign Affairs.


     2) Diamonds Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of
        Minerals and Energy on 25 August 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
        Committee on Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs.


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council:


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 25 August 2005 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


          i) South African Abattoir Corporation Act Repeal Bill [B 21 –
             2005] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Land and
          Environmental Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

2.    Membership of the Council

      The vacancy in the representation of the province of the Northern
    Cape, which occurred owing to the resignation of Ms S J Loe on 15
    August 2005, has been filled with effect from 16 August 2005 by the
    appointment of Mr L H Fielding.

3.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

      (1)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
            Finance and the Select Committee on Local Government and
            Administration:

            (a)  General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit
                  Outcomes of Local Government for the financial year ended
                  30 June 2004 [RP 73-2005].

      (2)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
           Economic and Foreign Affairs:

            (a)  Report of the South African Delegation to the Third
                 Ordinary Session of the Pan-African Parliament, 29 March
                 2005, held at Gallagher Estates, Midrand.


3.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Finance:

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
         Bank for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.
     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
         Southern Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
         for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 51-2005].


     (d)    Activities Report of the Development Bank of Southern Africa for
         2004-2005.


     (e)    Development Bank of Southern Africa – Footprints of Development
         2001-2005.


     (f)    Government Notice No 1114 published in Government Gazette No
         27773 dated 15 July 2005: Amendment of the list of public entities
         as contained in schedule 2 and 3 of the Public Finance Management
         Act, 1999.


4.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Labour
    and Public Enterprises:

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Broadcasting
         Corporation (SABC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


      b) Report and Financial Statements of Escom Holdings Limited (Escom)
         for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

5.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Security
    and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

     a) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
        Mr K Sulliman, an additional magistrate at the Durban Magistrate
        Court.


     b) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
        Mr M S E Khumalo, magistrate and Head of office at the Amsterdam
        Magistrate Court.

     c) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
        Mr M F Mathe, an additional magistrate at the Pinetown Magistrate
        Court.

6.    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Security
    and Constitutional Affairs:

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation of
        South Africa Ltd (ARMSCOR) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

 7.   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Finance:

      (a)   Proclamation No R.32 published in Government Gazette No 27766
          dated 8 July 2005: Appointment and Re-appointment of members of
          the Tax Courts in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 53 of
          1962).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


2.    The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for Conciliation,
        Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2004-2005, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
        2005 [RP 54-2005].

3.    The Minister of Education

     a) Report and Financial Statements of South African Council for
        Educators (SACE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

4.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2004-2005,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005.




