---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 June 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-06-08
---

WEDNESDAY, 8 JUNE 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES – see that book.


                             NOTICES OF MOTIONS


Mr J SELFE: I give notice that I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That this House -

      1) Debate measures to relieve overcrowding of prisons that will
         neither undermine the criminal justice system, short-change the
         victims of crime nor trivialise the deterrent effect of
         imprisonment.


I thank you.


Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: I shall move:

   That the House –


   (1)      Debate the links between economic growth, job creation,
         alleviation of poverty and augmenting this with social programmes.




Thank you.

Ms E NGALEKA: Thank you, Chairperson. I shall move:

   That the House -

   (1)      Debate that land reform be managed in a positive way as an
         integral element of national reconciliation, job creation and
         eradication of poverty.

Thank you.

Adv Z L MADASA: Thank you, Mr Chair. I hereby give notice that I shall move
on behalf of the ACDP:

   That the House -
     Discuss the role of Parliament in strengthening democracy and
     accountability in South Africa.


Thank you.


                        TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: [Applause.] Is that the only applause I get? Thank
you, Chairperson. Hon members, five past five in the afternoon, when
members to my left have spent some time in the little room not far from
here, is exactly the right time to come with the details of the Taxation
Laws Amendment Bill. It always works.

The Taxation Laws Amendment Bill contains some of the tax proposals that we
tabled in the Budget in February. This Bill includes a variety of matters,
such as changes to personal income tax brackets and rebates, changes to the
corporate income tax rates, the introduction of the various tax and
administrative relief measures for small business, changes to the deemed
method for calculating fixed business travel costs with regard to motor
vehicle allowances as well as technical refinements to the existing
legislation.

The tabling of the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill is an annual event. I shall
not bore members with the details here this afternoon. I wish to place it
on the Table of this House and express our appreciation to the Chairs and
members of the portfolio committee and select committee for their
constructive engagement with the National Treasury and Sars with regard to
this Taxation Laws Amendment Bill. Thank you very much, Chair. [Applause.]

Bill referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
report.

  THE ENVIRONMENT BELONGS TO ALL WHO LIVE IN IT, WITH REFERENCE ALSO TO THE
                      KYOTO PROTOCOL AND CLIMATE CHANGE

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Ms E THABETHE: Ke a leboha, Modulasetulo, maloko a hlomphehang, matona le
batlatsi ba matona. [Thank you, Chairperson, hon members, Ministers and
Deputy Ministers.]

We are celebrating National Environment Week, with our theme being “The
environment belongs to all who live in it,” which is the same as the
preamble to our document of wisdom, the Freedom Charter, the 50th
anniversary of which we celebrated this year. The Freedom Chatter says:
  South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white, and no
  government can justly claim authority unless it is based on the will of
  all the people.

Ke ka tsela eo ke emeng mona ho tla bua ka tsa tikoloho kajeno, hobane
mmuso wa rona o bontshitse hore o hlokomela batho haholo hobane o tseba
hore batho ba tswa kae. Ka dilemo tse fetileng ho ile ha ba le dipuisano
hore mafatshe ohle a saenele tse lokelang hore batho ba phele ka
bolokolohi, ba phefumolohe moya o lokolohileng, empa ho ile ha fumaneha
hore, tjhe, ka nnete, ho ne ho tshwanetse hore ho tshwarwe kopano e kgolo
mane ho la Amerika. Empa ho ile ha thwe e ke ke ya tshwarelwa moo hobane
Amerika ha e a saena Kyoto Protocol, e ileng ya kena molaong ka kgwedi ya
Hlakola selemong sena.(Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[The government has shown that it cares very much for all people, because
it knows where they come from, and that is why I am standing here today to
speak about environmental affairs. Over the years, international
conventions were held to persuade countries to sign treaties that would
enable people to live healthy lives and breathe clean air. One such
convention was supposed to have been held in the United States of America,
but the host country was changed because the United States of America is
not a signatory to the Kyoto Protocol, which was ratified in February this
year.]

The greatest challenge facing our country, and also the rest of the world,
is to improve the quality of human life for both present and future
generations, without depleting the country’s natural resources. This can
only be achieved through a healthy natural environment, which supplies raw
material, absorbs waste products and maintains water, soil and air quality.

I am proud to stand here today and state that this ANC-led democratic
government, for the past 11 years that it has been in power, has been
ensuring that all citizens of this country, present and future, have the
right to a decent quality of life, through sustainable use of resources.
The government is further continuing to work to ensure that an equitable
access to natural resources is achieved, people have safer and healthier
living and working environments, and also that participatory decision-
making processes around environmental issues prevail that also empower
communities to manage their natural environment.

Hon members, it is extremely pleasing to look back and think further back
to where we come from. We come from an era where the apartheid legislation
distorted access to natural resources, denying the vast majority of our
people, in particular those of my colour, the use of land, water,
fisheries, minerals, wildlife and clean air.

Food security, water provision and climate stability depend heavily on
having properly functioning ecosystems, stable levels of biodiversity,
sustainable rates of resource extraction, and a minimal production of
waste. Our government has taken several steps to implement and utilise all
the global strategies, including the reforming environmental policies,
which I will not bore you with because you were part and parcel of those
laws when they were passed.

Our country ratified this Kyoto protocol also because it is tasked to
protect the environment through reasonable legislative and other measures.

I would also like to venture into the question of the invitation of the
Minister on Monday, when he was addressing the imbizo at Boipatong. The
imbizo was discussing air quality.  It was a very good meeting that we
attended, and I thank the Minister for the invitation, because many people
in that meeting agreed that it was true that we have all these measures but
the fact of the matter is that the pollution and the emissions still exist
in the areas where they live. It is not the Minister’s fault, but it is due
to the industries that pollute that particular place.

The Minister assured them very well that it is a process, and that it
cannot just happen overnight. Last year we passed the Air Quality Equality
Bill in this House, which is part of the issues that this government is
committed to making sure that it listens to the people, and they act. The
government believes that there will be other good laws coming forth to
strengthen that, as well as the implementation of the Air Quality Bill.

The former Minister of Environmental Affairs ensured that the term
“sustainable development” is a buzzword in today’s environment lexicon in
South Africa. The same applies to our current Minister, who is also
ensuring that the most vulnerable areas are rid of insensitive activities
of our industrial concerns. We therefore call on you, hon members, to
really support the department in its endeavours, to make sure that we live
in a much healthier environment.

This is why we were given an award this year, through our President. We
were chosen amongst the best industrialised countries to receive the
champion of the awards, which the Minister went to accept on behalf of the
President, because they can see that we are doing a very good job in this
country, led by the President and the Minister, in particular. We hope that
they will accelerate more work.

Hon Minister, unleash the green scorpions, because they have to do their
work. For those who don’t want to listen to the legislation, make sure that
the Scorpions deal with them.

Mr M J ELLIS: They should deal with everybody.

Ms E THABETHE: Yes, yes, hon Ellis. We are talking about the Green
Scorpions, because we are talking of the environment here. We are talking
about the Green Scorpions that work within the environment areas and the
marine protected areas. You should know because you are a member of the
committee. Yes, so, I mean the Green Scorpions. I am sure the Minister will
make sure that the Green Scorpions deal with those employers, because they
have to adhere to the legislation.

This environment week was officially launched by our Minister and Deputy
Minister, and to those who joined them, we say, good work. We also want to
understand that dealing with the bigger picture issues of the environment,
not only concerns the Department of Environmental Affairs, or the Minister,
but involves all Members of Parliament, communities, and even industries,
because this should be a partnership.

As we celebrate this 50th anniversary, we are very proud that our people
now have rights. They have the right to influence the discussions, the
EIAs, etc. We are happy that it is through the leadership of the Minister.
Minister, press on; we will support you in all the good things that you do.
We will make sure that all the people of this country enjoy this
environment, because indeed it belongs to all of us. Whether it is ANC, Mr
Ellis, or not, but everybody now enjoys the environment of this country,
whether they are white, green, black or yellow.

It has never happened before, and we hope that we will be able to
accelerate that to make sure that everybody can further be part and parcel
of the processes, making sure that sustainable development takes place. I
thank you.

Mr G R MORGAN: Hon Chair, hon members, the Department of Environmental
Affairs’ slogan for environment week, which doubles as today’s topic before
the House, that being, “Our environment belongs to all who live in it”, is
quite simply bizarre. Does this topic imply that the environment does not
belong to those who do not live in it? Well, it surely cannot imply that
because, naturally, we all live in this so-called environment.

The topic seems somewhat redundant, no doubt a result of an ANC desire to
create a Freedom Charter-like clause, for mere sloganeering purposes.
Regrettably, it is a misrepresentation of what this environment is, and the
relationship of humans to it. The environment is all around us, and we are
an integral part of it. It is not confined to our parks and reserves. It
includes this country’s farms, industrial areas, townships, and even the
hot air in this Chamber.

We should not be talking today about the environment belonging to us. We
should be talking about our responsibility to it, and following that, to
each other.

The environmental legislation adopted since 1994 is indeed laudable, and
goes some way towards realising section 24 of the Constitution, being that
everyone has the right to an environment that is not harmful to their
health and well-being, and that everyone has the right to have the
environment protected for the benefit of present and future generations.

Passing laws is the easy part. Implementing them is far more difficult.
This country, in all three spheres of government, simply does not yet have
the capacity to implement all these laws. The residents of Richards Bay,
who were exposed to an ammonia leak from the Foskor plant last week, will
no doubt support that view, Mr Minister. This is the third hazardous leak
from that factory in recent years. They want to see action, not rhetoric.

Further, environmental monitoring and reporting remains patchy. How can it
be that reporting on the state of the environment is not mandatory? Yes,
the national department is preparing such a report at the moment, and has
done so before, and a few municipalities have done so in the past as well.
But monitoring and reporting, using established environmental indicators,
must be extended across the municipalities of South Africa.

In preparing its fifth report on economic and social rights, with special
focus on the environment, the Human Rights Commission regarded the response
to the questionnaires it sent to various organs of state as not
satisfactory.  Even the national Department of Environmental Affairs,
missed the deadline by six weeks. Environmental monitoring and reporting
needs to be treated seriously.

Co-operative governance also needs to be addressed. The Minister’s
department may be the leading department on the environment, but the work
of virtually every department affects the environment. The DA believes that
regulations on the use of strategic environmental assessments must be drawn
up, and that all departments should be expected to perform such assessments
for their various policies and programmes.

The environment is not currently taken very seriously by many of the
departments in this country, an example of this being the Housing
Department’s desire to fast-track the EIAs of some housing developments.
This shows contempt for this important process.

Further, the DA believes that every province should have an environmental
commissioner whose job would be to investigate complaints about
environmental administration, including flawed EIA processes, and to
recommend courses of action to any department or municipality under
investigation. No matter how good our legislation is, the establishment of
environmental commissioners would be a positive step, and would check
against political decision-making in environmental matters.

Also before this House today is the issue of climate change. Indeed climate
change is a reality, but it is also an ongoing phenomenon that has
challenged the adaptive abilities of humans and other species over
millennia. It will test the world and this country’s science, science
policy relationships, the economics of response, and most importantly,
individual lifestyle choices.

What can we really do to mitigate anthropogenic climate change? Can we
afford the costs of mitigation? Already, very little can be done to reduce
the expected effects of climate change over the next century, which include
biodiversity loss, and an increase in extreme events. South Africa will be
affected, and we should be worried, but we must respond with measures that
are reasonable for a developing country that is striving for economic
growth and poverty alleviation, and that is already dealing with the Aids
pandemic and a service delivery backlog.

Government’s climate change response strategy is a good first step.
Departments must start talking to each other. Minerals and Energy must tell
us how it intends to reduce our reliance on fossil fuels without
compromising growth, and how it intends to promote energy efficiency. The
Department of Transport must tell us how it intends to provide safe and
reliable public transport that will reduce our reliance on cars.

Let’s get the science right by developing effective climate models, and let
us abide by the precautionary principle. Let us not act rashly and let us
certainly not panic. It may be the case that economic, social and
technological change will be faster, and have a greater direct impact on
human populations and climate change. If so, let’s make sure these changes
are integrated into the climate change response strategy.

The most difficult thing to change will be people’s lifestyle choices. All
of us in this House are frequent flyers. But when we fly we are responsible
for contributing to CO² emissions. Mr Minister, you recently travelled to
Germany on business. I took the liberty of calculating your individual
contribution to carbon emissions on your return flight. It totalled 2,7
tonnes of CO². That is a lot of gas even for you. [Laughter.]
We are all guilty. Most MPs take 70 flights a year, each averaging two
hours in duration, making them responsible for the emission of 19,46 tonnes
of CO² each. And that is not to mention the emissions from driving around
our constituencies. Are we prepared to pay to offset these emissions by
planting trees, or purchasing credits at $16 a tonne? Will Parliament pay?
Will you take the lead, Mr Minister? These are difficult issues, but if we
are serious about playing our part, then we need to talk about them. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Hon Chairperson and hon members, the environment belongs
to all who live in it. The importance of our environment and the need to
protect it cannot be stressed enough. Although these issues are recognised,
unfortunately, they only seem to get the attention they deserve when there
is a special event or occasion dedicated to the environment, after which
they take a back seat to seemingly more important and pressing issues.

We, in the IFP, do understand that there are many issues of great
importance that directly affect the lives of millions of South Africans
every day. We also believe that the environment and issues surrounding it
should be given constant attention. Climate change is a natural cycle which
takes many years to complete but, unfortunately, human interventions are
currently causing the climate to change too fast. This may result in plants
and animals not being able to adapt to these changes quickly enough, and
this will put our whole ecosystem in danger.

It has been suggested that the impact of climate change on Africa, in 30 to
40 years, will be as significant as that of malaria and Aids. This is a
frightening prospect that should serve as a warning and wake-up call that
this is a serious issue that affects all of us directly and therefore needs
to be treated as a priority.

The Kyoto Protocol, which became legally binding on its 128 parties on 16
February 2005, is a major boost in international efforts to reduce the risk
of climate change. The Kyoto Protocol offers powerful tools and incentives
for the various role-players to promote sustainable development. Under the
protocol, industrialised countries are to reduce their combined emissions
of certain gases to below 1990 levels during a five-year period. This will
be a major challenge for many of these countries, many of whom might need
new policies and approaches if they are to reach the set targets.

A combined global effort is needed, if we are to successfully address the
problem of climate change. Here in South Africa, much still needs to be
done, if we are to play our part and protect our precious environment for
generations to come. Although we do understand that development is
important and inevitable, it must not occur at the expense of the
environment.

There are still too many polluters who pollute at will and with little
consideration for the environment or the communities that live in areas
surrounded by the effects of their pollution. This must come to a stop, and
they must be held accountable and punished for their inconsiderate and
harmful actions.

We, in the IFP, were extremely encouraged by hon Minister Van Schalkwyk’s
announcement last month that Cabinet has approved two new action plans that
will help with the implementation of the climate change response strategy .
. .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: This includes a national conference on climate change
that will be held back-to-back with a meeting of all African Ministers.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member!

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, whilst there are still many
climate change detractors, the dangers of such a phenomenon deserve our
attention. It is therefore correct that the majority of the nations of the
world have accepted the wisdom of the Kyoto Protocol. The fact that the
Kyoto Protocol has seen the light of day is a major victory for
multilateralism.

Unfortunately, the United States does not accept the Kyoto Protocol, but
other major industrial nations have committed themselves to reducing
emissions. Change will happen irrespective of the resistance of some. The
major industrial nations, as the biggest air polluters, affect the
atmosphere and the environment of all nations, not just their own.
Pollution and climate change know no borders; therefore we are all
responsible.

The burden concerning responsible environmental behaviour might appear, at
first glance, to be skewed towards the developed world. But, in many
respects, the developing world faces a much bigger burden. The developing
nations of the world must still drastically expand their economies in order
to fulfil the legitimate expectations of their citizens.

This quest for economic equality on the world stage depends on breaking the
cycle of exporting raw materials and importing products manufactured at
higher cost. Of necessity, that means that the developing world now faces
the additional hurdle of industrial expansion within a stricter framework
of environmental and emission control. This is a hurdle that never faced
the developed world when they went through their major industrial
expansion.

Nonetheless, it is a hurdle that the developing world has accepted as a
moral obligation, because all right-thinking people realise that the
environment belongs to all who live in it, and that we are merely
custodians of the environment for our children. That is the core argument
at the heart of the philosophy of sustainable development, that we must
find ways of advancing economically without social and environmental
destruction.

As the host of the previous World Summit on Sustainable Development, South
Africa has already demonstrated its commitment to this ideal    . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: . . . and we must continue to be a leader in this area,
especially through the African Union . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member!

Mr G T MADIKIZA: . . . and the goals of Nepad. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon members, I want to appeal to
you. If you look at the clock, you will see that I tend to be generous. I
wait until you finish your sentence before I cut you off, but then you
continue and start a new sentence. I don’t think that’s fair. Otherwise I
must start chopping you off when you are still heading towards the end. And
I don’t think that’s fair either. So, please, assist the Chair.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: My humble apology, Chair. Thanks.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Both the hon Madikiza and the hon
Zikalala did the same thing. I don’t want to be unfair. We do give you some
grace but you seem to be taking the whole hand instead of just one finger.

Mr L W GREYLING: Hon Chair, I will try to speak fast. At the risk of being
controversial, I wish to object to the title of this debate. The
environment does not belong to us, but we belong to it.

For too long, the human species has taken the attitude that nature is
simply a resource for us to exploit for our own benefit. Recently, however,
we have begun to realise the limits and mistakes of this approach. We are
dependent on the environment for our survival and without these natural
processes we would not be able to live.

For too long our attitude has been to simply exploit nature in our quest
for unbridled economic growth. In a sense, we have taken the attitude that
it is the survival of the fittest and nature must yield to our demands.

However, the latest research into evolution has shown that the underlying
force of progress has not been competition but rather co-operation.
Organisms in ecosystems do not compete against each other but rather co-
operate to create the conditions for life to thrive. This applies to the
smallest ecosystems as well as our own human bodies and, in fact, to the
planet as a whole.

It is now time to find ways of co-operating with nature so that both our
own lives and those of other organisms can thrive for the benefit of all.
Unfortunately, we are currently in a destructive path, where humans are
responsible for the loss of biodiversity at a rate of up to 10 000 times
the natural average.

On our current course, we will destroy over a quarter of all the world’s
biodiversity in the next 50 years and be responsible for the sixth great
extinction in our planet’s history. Climate change is a leading cause of
this extinction and we have to undergo a rapid shift in our energy
production if we are to avoid this.

The Kyoto Protocol is merely a small first shift, but one that will,
hopefully, lead to greater international co-operation in the near future.
South Africa, as hosts of the previous world summit, can lead the world in
renewable energy technology, but we have to put resources and expertise
into doing that now.

We also need to change our current modes of production and consumption,
which we can do through full cost accounting and putting real economic
value on the services provided by the environment. In response to a letter
by a citizen who claimed in the Cape Times that the portfolio committee is
not economic minded, I would like to say that the challenge is for
economics to become environmentally minded. Our economic systems depend on
the environment . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge) Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

Mr L W GREYLING: . . . and not the other way round. It is time for us to
shift our thinking in that regard. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): Hon Greyling, you stretched it a
bit.

Ms C B JOHNSON: Chairperson, and hon members, South Africa is particularly
vulnerable to the threat of global climate change, especially through
droughts, desertification and coastal flooding. It has been projected that
average temperatures in South Africa could rise between 1% and 3% by the
middle of this century, and that the rainfall in the country could be
further reduced by between 5% and 10%.

Increased temperatures and reduced rainfall obviously have a major effect
on people’s lives, in the sense that they lead to health-related issues,
waterborne diseases and a decrease in food production. And, there is an
expected drop of up to 20% in grain production. We all know what the impact
of the decrease in production will be on food prices and security at large.
We cannot afford not to act on climate change, because it directly affects
the lives of so many South Africans.

We need to mitigate climate change itself and the way to do this is through
a transversal approach. We need intensive research and development into
renewable energy resources so that we can reduce our dependency on fossil
fuels. We need more energy-efficient transport and housing models. We need
less consumptive but more diverse agriculture, and a real transfer of
skills and technology from the developed to the developing nations.

Therefore climate change is not only a national issue but it is an
international challenge. This is why the Kyoto Protocol is of importance.
The recent ratification of the Kyoto Protocol by Russia is a major step in
the right direction. There are countries that are still outside of Kyoto
Protocol and this is where South Africa has a critical role to play by
engaging those countries that remain outside. This can be done through
various series of bilaterals and multilaterals.

In short, climate change is not only an environmental issue but also a
socioeconomic issue; and one that we must address in building a better life
for all. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Hon Chair and hon Minister, ke a le dumedisa [I greet you
all].

Climate change is affecting all countries, both rich and poor. While
greenhouse gas is formed naturally, energy is needed for cooling houses,
driving vehicles and getting power to industrialists. Countries around the
world have recognised the need to take action and reduce greenhouse gasses
in order to address the challenges of climate change.

Today, I am a proud member of this Parliament; a Parliament that never
hesitated to ratify the Kyoto Protocol, because we understand the effects
of global warming. We, in the ANC, salute Russia because, on 22 October
2004, the Russian Federation ratified the Kyoto Protocol, 90 days before
February when the Kyoto Protocol became effective.

After a long back and forth, the Kyoto Protocol finally entered into force
on 16 February, more than seven years after the conference in Tokyo in
Japan, where 160 countries around the world met on 11 December 1997 and
agreed to target the greenhouse gas emissions. For us in South Africa, it
is the most opportune time to say thanks.

With diligence and devotion, countries of the world have unselfishly
devoted their sterling services and willingness to ensure that, indeed, we
understand the effects of global warming. I say thanks because such
services are evidence of the appreciable progress that we have made, and
now we can boldly be proud of what we have achieved for our country and the
world as a whole.

As defenders of the Kyoto Protocol, we should point out that we have
negotiated and impressed the regulatory framework for protocols and various
mechanisms, thus laying an important foundation for new agreements.

In conclusion, in 1955, we gathered at Kliptown, and the Freedom Charter
looked like a dream. Today, it is a reality. No matter what happens, yes,
it is a reality. The people are governing, all nation groups have equal
rights, all are equal before the law, the doors of learning are open to all
and it will remain like that. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson and Minister, we are contributors to climate
change as well as recipients of its unpredictable outcome. Above all, we
need to think and act imaginatively enough. There is much talk of the
wonderful possibility for hydropower held out by damming the Congo River,
but it’s a very long way away.

However, we have two huge streams of water flowing close inshore on our
east and west coasts, the Benguella and Mozambique currents. These rivers
flow deep and wide at 10km per hour. They have over    1 000 times the
density of air or wind. Surely it is these great currents that lie inside
our territorial waters that we should be looking at harnessing. It would
make us the greatest country with clean air and energy in the world. We
need to explore it. These currents come close to shore, and that is why the
ships get wrecked off our coast, because they use those currents to pick up
speed and to save fuel.

We have the technology. We developed it on the Agulhas bank and in marine
diamond exploration. Power can be generated and brought close on shore, and
fed into our existing electricity grid. Power can also be built on oil
platforms. Most of the opportunity is in our territorial waters. Let us
seek to harness this vast, inexhaustible renewable energy resource that
could give us the energy source to also solve our fresh water problem,
because it would give us the power for desalination.

The ACDP calls upon the government to set up a task force between your
department, Eskom and the oceanographic research team of the Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research to see how we should set about things.
Perhaps huge submersible paddles or propellers and other techniques can be
used. This is an opportunity to use and develop existing technology that
will not only make us a great clean energy-rich nation and region, but will
be patentable and exportable as a green technology of the future.

Let us harness the great Benguella and Mozambique ocean currents for a
clean power future for South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr W D SPIES: Agbare Voorsitter, indrukwekkende projekte word aangepak om
gemarginaliseerde gemeenskappe in Suid-Afrika op te hef, maar nogtans is
daar een gemarginaliseerde gemeenskap wie se stem selde gehoor word,
alhoewel hierdie gemeenskap groter is as enige van ons huidige gemeenskappe
in die land. Dit is die toekomstige geslagte. As ons daarom sê dat die
omgewing aan almal behoort wat vandag daarin woon, mag ons nooit vergeet
van diegene wat oor 50 of 500 jaar hier sal wees nie.

Die natuur het ’n verbysterende vermoë om met besoedeling te handel.
Onsuiwerhede in die lug word vernietig deur die son, opgelos deur verskeie
organismes of doodgewoon in die veelvuldige sisteme van die aarde opgeneem.
Maar hierdie vermoë van die aarde het sy perke.

Groot hoeveelhede koolstof is die afgelope 200 jaar op die aarde verbrand.
Duisende jare gelede was daar soveel koolsuurgas op die planeet dat die
lewe vir die mens onmoontlik sou wees weens oormatige hitte en stoom. Die
Skepper het reuse woude laat opgroei wat koolstof uit die lug onttrek het
en ’n ewewig geskep het waarin lewe vir mense en diere moontlik geword het.

Deur die verbranding van hierdie woude en die fossielbrandstowwe wat
daaruit ontwikkel het, plaas ons koolstof terug in die atmosfeer teen ’n
tempo wat menslike lewe op die planeet onmoontlik gaan maak. In die verlede
het ons gevrees dat die fossielbrandstowwe kan opraak, maar vandag besef
ons dat die probleem veel dringender en veel groter is.

Die huidige ekonomiese bestel behels ’n toenemend gesentraliseerde en
energie-intensiewe globale stelsel. Die keersy hiervan is ’n kwynende
omgewing sonder enige kans op langtermynvolhoubaarheid.

Die VF Plus glo dat een deel van die oplossing ’n bestel is waarin alle
besluite op die laagste moontlike vlak geneem word. Dit behoort te lei tot
’n ekonomiese stelsel van lokalisme met die logiese gevolg ’n omgewing wat
deur die gemeenskappe gekoester en erken word as ’n kosbare gawe van God,
ontvang van ons voorouers en wat ons kan oordra aan ons kinders. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chairperson, impressive projects are being launched for
the upliftment of marginalised communities in South Africa, and yet there
is one marginalised community whose voice is seldom heard, although this
community is bigger than any of the present communities in our country. It
is that of the future generations. Therefore, when we say that the
environment belongs to all who live in it today, we should never forget
about those who will be here in 50 or 500 years’ time.

Nature has an astounding capacity to deal with pollution. Impurities in the
air are destroyed by the sun, dissolved by various organisms or simply
absorbed into the multiple systems of the earth. But this ability of the
earth has its limitations.

Large quantities of carbon have been burnt on the earth during the past 200
years. Thousands of years ago there was so much carbon dioxide on the
planet that human life would have been impossible as a result of excessive
heat and steam. The Creator caused vast forests to grow, which drew carbon
dioxide from the air and created a balance in which human and animal life
became possible.

By burning these forests and the fossil fuels that developed from them, we
are putting carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere at a rate that will
make human life on the planet impossible. In the past we feared that fossil
fuels might run out, but today we realise that the problem is much more
urgent and much bigger.

The present economic set-up comprises an increasingly centralised and
energy-intensive global system. The other side of this is a declining
environment without any chance of long-term sustainability.

The FF Plus believes that one part of the solution is a set-up in which all
decisions are made at the lowest possible level. This should lead to an
economic system of localisation with the logical result being an
environment that communities cherish and acknowledge as a precious gift
from God, received from our forefathers and to be left by us to our
children. I thank you.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. Our greatest challenge is
maintaining and developing our environment while, at the same time,
improving the quality of life for all South Africans. A functional
ecosystem, stability of biodiversity and a well-managed system of waste,
pollutants and resource extraction, are necessary to balance these two
commitments.

As Parliament, we have passed a number of Bills to ensure the sustainable
management of natural resources as well as international commitments, such
as Agenda 21, adopted at the United Nations’ general assembly conference on
environment and development.

South Africa is a beautiful country and we need to look after it. By
maintaining our environment, we are not only looking after our home, but
also reducing poverty through tourism, as many tourists flock to South
Africa to experience its beauty and way of life.

The South African revenue yields great dividends from tourism. Up to R800
million of tourism receipts alone was injected in South Africa, in December
2004. However, 1 300 scientists from 95 countries around the world confirm
that our environment is in danger.

The MF hereby conveys its concern to the people of South Africa to unite in
our fight to conserve and maintain a sustainable environment. Pollution is
not only harming our environment, but it is killing our people and killing
our nation. Cleanliness is next to Godliness, and I firmly believe that you
can be poor but clean. Go the extra mile; preserve your nation, your people
and your country.

The MF maintains that the environment is a responsibility of every South
African, young and old, for it is our environment. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Chairperson, thank you very much. The environment belongs
to all of us, and the reason why the environment belongs to all of us, is
that for so many years a lot of us have been denied the good aspects of the
environment. Now it is very important that we come here today and emphasise
this particular point, because I just need to say that I want to focus on
the human rights side of the environment.

Johannesburg is regarded as the leafiest city in the world, but can we say
the same thing is happening in Soweto? Can we say the same thing in
Nanceville? Can we say the same thing in Alexandra? Durban is a beautiful
city; can we say the same thing is happening in Umlazi? Let us come to the
beautiful Cape Town, the mother city, beautiful indeed, green, plush areas.
Can we say the same thing in Khayelitsha? We cannot.

Therefore, it is of paramount importance that we cannot stress the fact
more that the environment indeed belongs to us. Chairperson and hon
Minister, it is important that we have done a lot of things over the last
eleven years, as far as the environment is concerned. We have received
tremendous awards. We as South Africa are very proud of the kind of
achievements that we have achieved.

It is also important that we start to focus inwards into the development of
our own people. For many years the majority of our people have lived in
townships that are not so leafy, Mr Morgan and Mr Greyling, and therefore
it is important that we start developing these particular townships. Now it
is important that people come here and say that the members of Parliament
contribute to the emissions by flying. Last year we went on oversight
visits across the country, to look at the question of air quality in our
country. How could we get to Durban if we could not fly? So, that is the
kind of problems that we look at, for people to come and say that we
contribute to these things.

We live in a particular area where we do not fly; we are passengers. We are
passengers in these particular things. We are saying that it is utter
nonsense for these people to come here, in the Portfolio Committee they are
like angels, because they agree to everything we are saying, and when we
come here they say no, those are not the things that have been happening.
They demonise the Minister, the Portfolio Committee and all the good things
that we are doing. What are you trying to do; cheap politicking is not
going to help us.

We are saying that, Mr Minister, we strongly believe that there should be
sustainable development in the protection of the environment, because that
is very important. But we need to deal with that particular issue in a very
sensitive and sober manner. We want to ensure that this environment is
important for all of us, because our future, our lives, depend on it. We
want to support you, and want to say that what we are doing in the
Portfolio Committee is a very good job. You are part of the policies of our
country, and we want to salute and support you, because this environment
belongs to all of us. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Thank you Chairperson. I
would like to thank all the members for participating in the debate. I
would like to thank the hon Chairperson for requesting this debate. She was
also present at the imbizo that we had in Boipatong on Monday on the
implementation of the new Air Quality Act, and I would specifically like to
thank her and other members of Parliament who were present there.

That is, Chairperson, the first issue that I should react too.  We will
bring into effect on 1 September some essential parts of the new air
quality legislation, which will enable us to declare certain national
priority areas “the pollution hotspots”. What that will entail is, under
the leadership of the new Air Quality Control Officers that we are training
at the moment, we will draw up management plans for those areas, that will
enable us to make certain decisions in those areas.

We must understand that the result of the pollution in those areas is
accumulative over many decades. We will not be able to change that
overnight, but these management plans will be a start, and it will
definitely start to change the situation. I would like to agree with an
issue that some members raised here. We have very progressive legislation,
but what we need to do now is to make sure that we enforce what we have on
our Statute Book.

In that regard I would like to point out the first success of the Green
Scorpions just a week or two ago in Court in the so-called “Mandara Trust”
case. It was an issue that involved toxic waste and we got a guilty verdict
there, a suspended sentence of five years’ imprisonment, as well as a R100
000 fine. This is only the first of many cases that we will take to court.

Then on the climate change issue, I am glad that members raised that. A few
weeks ago we made public the results of the first comprehensive, really in-
depth research that we did. We now have for the first time a good body of
scientific knowledge on the table to start dealing with this issue.

What we basically said is what will happen in South Africa over the next 50
years. That was basically the scope of the research. We will see the
western part of the country becoming much drier, and the first signs are
already there. The members from the Northern Cape know the well-known
Kokerboom very well, but that well-known symbol of the Northern Cape is
already starting to die out. It is a change in temperature that we as
humans cannot yet feel and realise, but some of the plants are already
starting to experience that.

The eastern part of the country will become much more rainy. It is not all
good news, because it will change the landscape in the eastern part of the
country. It will be much more bushy, the grasslands will start to
disappear. This has huge implications for farming, but also for our
national parks in that part of the country, because wildlife will not be
able to move about as easily as they are now doing.

So, it will mean that we will have to consider where our national parks
will be in future. There are huge implications for agriculture, on the kind
of plants we can plant. There are huge implications for health. We pointed
out that the northern provinces, Limpopo, Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal and
Gauteng, may, in all probability, become a high risk malaria area, which,
of course, has huge implications for us.

Then, the hon Thabethe pointed out the climate change response strategy
that Cabinet decided on. We created a new interministerial committee. When
we are ready with our work, we will then start to involve all the different
and relevant role-players.

Chairperson, there are two important dates on the calendar. The one is in
the first week of July. As members may have taken a note, there is the G8
Heads of State Summit in Glen Eagles Scotland, to which our President has
also been invited. Apart from Africa and aid to Africa, the other issue on
the agenda is climate change. We will go there as government to play a
proper role in those discussions, because as a developing country we can
play a leadership role in building that bridge between the developed and
the developing world.

That will be followed in December in Canada. It will be the first
conference of the parties post-Kyoto, which will be an absolutely key event
in making sure that we endeavour to create a new international framework,
built and based on Kyoto - Kyoto Plus - and making sure that we start
bringing in more countries as part of that framework.

We are taking climate change very seriously. We will take those
responsibilities on board. In September or October, we will also, for the
first time, have an all African Ministers conference or convention, to
prepare for the Canada conference of the parties, the United Nations one.
And also, all the African scientists will come together for the first time,
to make sure that we take an African perspective as well.

Our country and our continent are vulnerable. I would like, Chairperson, to
thank hon members for committing themselves to this huge task. As
government we will make sure that this will continue to be high on the
agenda. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:56.
                                  ________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Message from President

      The Speaker and the Chairperson received the following message dated
     3 June 2005, from the President, requesting that a Joint Sitting of the
     National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces be convened:

        CALLING OF A JOINT SITTING OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE NATIONAL
        COUNCIL OF PROVINCES


        In terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of
        South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with Rule 7(1)(b) of
        the Joint Rules of Parliament, I hereby call a joint sitting of the
        National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces on Friday,
        10 June 2005 at 11h00, in order to bid farewell to the outgoing
        Chief Justice of South Africa, Arthur Chaskalson, and to welcome the
        incoming leadership of the judiciary, Chief Justice Pius Langa and
        Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang Moseneke.


        I further request hereby, that special arrangements be made, in line
        with the Joint Rules of Parliament, to enable retired Chief Justice
        Chaskalson to participate in the debates by way of a Reply.


        Yours sincerely


        Signed
        THABO MBEKI


2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2005] (National
                Assembly – sec 77)


         (ii)    Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 20 – 2005]
                (National Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill
                and prior notice of its introduction published in Government
                Gazette No 27663 of 7 June 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         8 June 2005.
         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

3.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      (1)   Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the
         Minister of Finance on 7 June 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.

4.    Translations of Bills submitted

     (1)    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

         (i)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op Deeltitels [W 10 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Sectional
         Titles Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Correctional Services

      Report of the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons for 2004-2005.

2.    The Minister of Science and Technology

      (a)   Statute of the Centre for Science and Technology of the Non-
         Aligned and Other Developing Countries, tabled on terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

      (b)   Explanatory Memorandum on the Statute of the Centre for Science
         and Technology of the Non-Aligned and Other Developing Countries.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
    Tourism on Consideration of the 2003/04 Human Rights Commission Report
    (Chapter on Education and Environment), dated 7 June 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism, having
        considered the 2003/04 Human Rights Commission Report (Chapter on
        Education and Environment) referred to it, reports that it has
        concluded the deliberations and adopted the findings contained in
        the report.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the filling of
    a vacancy on the Council of the Independent Communications Authority of
    South Africa, dated 8 June 2005:



      The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
        request to the National Assembly to recommend the appointment of a
        councilor to the President for the filling of a vacancy on the
        Council of the Independent Communications Authority of South
        Africa, referred to it, reports as follows:

      The Committee invited the public to nominate persons for consideration
           and recommendation to the President for the filling of a vacancy
           on the Council. Nominations and applications were received from
           31 candidates.

      The Committee met on 24 May 2005 to consider the nominations, and
        agreed that the following persons be shortlisted and be interviewed
        on 31 May 2005:

      Ms Marcia Wilson, Mr Gerhard Petrick, Mr Jethro Tshabalala, Mr
           Mthobeli M Zokwe, Ms Charlotte Mampane and Ms Blessing Ntlha.
           Out of the six shortlisted candidates, two withdrew.

      After having considered the shortlist and after having interviewed
        the candidates, the Committee recommends that the House, in
        accordance with section 5(1) of the Independent Communications
        Authority of South Africa Act (Act 13 of 2000), make a
        recommendation to the President that the following candidate be
        appointed as councilor to Icasa:

      Mr Mthobeli M Zokwe

     Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
    Tourism on Oversight Visit to Marine and Coastal Management, dated 31
    May 2005:

     1.     BACKGROUND

     As part of conducting an oversight function over the Branch Unit of the
     Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, a multi party
     delegation of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
     Tourism visited Marine and Coastal Management on the 18th of January
     2005.

     1.1    OBJECTIVE




     The main objective of the oversight visit was to examine and evaluate
     the progress made in respect of transformation, develop better
     understanding of operations within MCM and preparation made on
     publication of the new long- term fishing allocation policies to be
     launched by the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism on the
     1st of April 2005.





     1.2    DELEGATION


     A multi- party delegation from the Portfolio Committee under the
     leadership of the Chairperson Ms E Thabethe (ANC), included Mr. J
     Combrick (ANC), Mr. M I Moss (ANC), Ms N Khunou (ANC), Mr. J Arendse
     (ANC), Ms MM Ntuli (ANC), Ms R Ndzanga (ANC), Mr. A Mokoena (ANC), Mr.
     S J Maja (ANC), Mr. DAA Olifant (ANC), Mr. G Morgan (DA), Ms J Semple
     (DA), Ms C Zikalala (IFP) , Mr. LW Greyling (ID) and Committee
     Secretary Mr M Manele.

     2.     REPORTING

     Having conducted its oversight visit to Marine and  Coastal  Management
     (MCM) on  the  18th  of  February  2005,  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
     Environmental Affairs and Tourism wishes to report as follows:



     3.     INTRODUCTION


     On the 18th of January 2005, a multi party delegation of the Portfolio
     Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism visited the Branch Unit
     of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism known as Marine
     and Coastal Management located in Cape Town. The delegation was
     welcomed and briefed by the Chief Director, Mr. I Moolla. The briefing
     focused on Marine and Coastal Management’s commitments and
     achievements, 2005/06 strategic plans, organizational gaps and
     challenges.


     3.1    MCM 2004/05 COMMITMENTS AND ACHIEVEMENTS

     The briefing on 2004/05 commitments and achievements focused on
     preparation for rights allocation, institution of new fisheries,
     commissioning of new vessels, improvement of compliance, rehabilitation
     of fishing harbours and, finalization of coastal management bill,
     delivering of 2 patrol vessels (i.e. Sarah Baartman and Lillian Ngoyi),
     drafting of new policy framework for the white shark cage diving and
     boat based whale watching industry, promulgation of new marine
     protected areas, revision, amendments of 4x4 regulations and the
     hosting of Antarctic meetings.

     3.2    2005/06 STRATEGIC PLANS

     The 2005/06 Strategic Plans of MCM firstly, dealt with  publication  of
     19 policies to be published on the 1st of March 2005 to guide the  2005
     allocation of commercial fishing rights for public comments.  Secondly,
     publication  of  the  report  by  April  2005  on  options  for  future
     management of fishing harbours, and  the  allocation  within  the  next
     financial year 2006/07 rights in  further  3  new  fisheries.  Thirdly,
     publication of Coastal Zone Management Bill  for  public  comments  and
     the implementation of amended 4x4 regulations. Fourthly, publication of
     environmental  assessment  of  the   coastline   and   publication   of
     comprehensive regulations for aqua/mariculture. Finally, an increase in
     the number  of  blue  flag  beaches  and  implementation  of  ecosystem
     approach to fisheries management in line with the standard set by World
     Summit on Sustainable Development.

     3.3    ORGANISATIONAL GAPS AND CHALLENGES

     The organisational gaps and challenges refer to the institutional
     barriers related to lack of capacity to deal with poaching of abalone,
     allocation of rights of abalone, line fish, oysters, east coast rock
     lobster fisheries in the Eastern Cape, transfer of research staff to
     South African National Botanical Institute (SANBI), recruitment and
     retention of staff, and improvement of access to information in order
     to ensure credibility and acceptance of fishing rights outcome.

       4. 2005/08 MEDIUM TERM STRATEGY


     The 2005/08 medium term strategy of marine and coastal management
     focused on the development of management manuals and procedures for all
     commercial fisheries, rebuilding of fish stocks as per WSSD standards,
     increase of capacity to respond to oil and other types of pollution,
     strengthening of South Africa’s status as a marine research powerhouse
     in Africa, replacement of ageing research vessels, establishment of
     tourism development in the Antarctic and at Marion Island, initiation
     of poverty relief and coastal livelihoods projects with local
     authorities and provinces and , conduct a socio–economic study to
     assess the impact of rights allocation to historical disadvantaged
     institutions.


     4.     CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION

     Having conducted an oversight visit on the 18th of January 2005 on
     MCM, the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
     concludes and recommends as follows:



     4.1    RETENTION OF SCIENTISTS

     Noting that there is currently a high level of resignations in
     particular black scientists, it is recommended that the Portfolio
     Committee must during the second term of parliamentary program call
     Marine and Coastal Management to brief the Committee on retention
     strategies put in place to attract young scientist to stay and make
     contribution within the institution.

     4.2    SKILLS DEVELOPMENT

     Noting that skills development in our democratic country is a
     legislative requirement, it is recommended that MCM must be called to
     brief the Committee on its 2005/ 06 workplace skills plan and budget
     allocated for training and development of its workforce.




     4.3    APPLICATION FORMS FOR FISHING ALLOCATION

     Noting the absence or unavailability of forms related to the fishing
     allocation in the visitors centre, it is recommended that, once the
     new 19 fishing policies have been finalized, MCM must ensure that new
     application forms are simplified and made available in the visitors
     center and on its website.




     4.4    RIGHTS ALLOCATION PROCESS


     Noting the importance of the 2005/06 long term allocation process, it
     is recommended that the marine and coastal management appear before
     the committee to report on the public consultation processes, the
     readiness of the Rights Verification Unit to conduct its duties, and
     the finalization of fishing policies.


4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
     Tourism on Oversight Visit to Sea Harvest and Oceana Brands, dated 31
     May 2005:




     1.     BACKGROUND


     As part of conducting an oversight and monitoring functions related to
     the fishing industry in South Africa more especially in Western Cape
     Province, a multi party delegation of the Portfolio Committee on
     Environmental Affairs and Tourism undertook an oversight visit to Sea
     Harvest and Oceana Brands in Saldanha Bay, West Coast on the 9th of
     February 2005.


       1. OBJECTIVE


     The main objective of the oversight visit was to assess and monitor the
     progress made by Sea Harvest and Oceana Brands in respect of
     transformation, environmental management and, business operations
     related to fishing products, fishing plant processing and storage.


     1.2    DELEGATION


    A  multi-party  delegation  from  the  Portfolio  Committee  under  the
    leadership of the Chairperson  Ms  E  Thabethe  (ANC)  included  Mr.  J
    Combrick (ANC), Mr. M I Moss, (ANC), Ms N Khunou (ANC), Mr.  J  Arendse
    (ANC), Ms MM Ntuli,(ANC), Ms R Ndzanga (ANC), Mr. A Mokoena (ANC),  Mr.
    S J Maja (ANC), Mr. Mr. M Kalako (ANC), Ms C Zikalala (IFP),Ms J Semple
    (DA), Mr. LW Greyling (ID) and Committee Secretary Mr M Manele.


     1.3    REPORTING


    Having conducted its oversight visit to Sea Harvest and Oceana Brand on
    the 9th of February 2005, the Portfolio Committee on Environmental
    Affairs and Tourism wishes to report as follows:


    2.      OVERSIGHT VISIT TO SEA HARVEST AND OCEANA BRANDS


    On 9th of February 2005, a multi-party  delegation  from  the  Portfolio
    Committee visited Sea Harvest Ltd and Oceana Brands.


    2.1     VISIT TO SEA HARVEST


    The Managing Director, Mr L Penzhorn welcomed and briefed the delegation
    on the business operations of  the  company.  The  briefing  focused  on
    operational structure, environmental management, occupational health and
    safety, employment equity, skills development and social investment.


    2.2     OPERATIONAL STRUCTURE


    Its operational structure is composed of two trawlings i.e. sea and
    inshore. The deep-sea hake operation, has one processing plant for fresh
    fish, one processing plant for adding non-fish ingredient with a staff
    component of 1472 employees, 15 fresh fish vessels, and 2 factory ships
    with a staff component of 735 employees. The inshore hake trawling, on
    the other hand, has 50% joint venture with SeaVuna, 1 fresh fish
    processing plant with staff component of 172 employees and, 4 fresh fish
    trawlers with 68 employees.


    2.3     ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT


    The Sea Harvest’s environmental management  programme  involves  a  sea-
    water project that is monitored by the Saldanha Bay Water Quality  Forum
    in order to ensure compliance with the standards set  by  Department  of
    Water Affairs and Forestry and Coastal Zone Water Quality Guidelines.


    2.4     OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY


    The company has occupational health and  safety  programmes  that  offer
    onshore and at sea services. The onshore programme has  fully-  equipped
    onsite clinic that provides occupational  health  services  and  primary
    health care facilities.


    2.5     EMPLOYMENT EQUITY


    During the period under review, the company has set a target of 35% of
    previously disadvantaged individual represented at management level of
    which 6% are Africans.  Although, the company has 97% of employees and
    98% of sea-going crew that were previously disadvantaged, it has a
    recruitment strategy that gives preference to Africans for every
    vacant management position. The challenge however, in term of
    Employment Equity is to employ more Africans at senior management
    level.


    2.6     SKILLS DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL INVESTMENT


    The company has a skill development and social investment programmes
    that focus on training, and community development. Its skill development
    programme includes the provision of learnership on fish and seafood
    processing, female cadets in the deep-sea trawling industry, trainees
    onboard and factory freezer-trawlers. The social investment on the other
    hand, focuses on education, health, Small Medium and Micro Enterprise
    (SMME) development and sports development in the surrounding community.


    2.7     ON-SITE TOUR (SEA HARVEST)


    During the on site tour, the delegation observed how sea harvest
    processes, packages and stores fishing products such as skinless
    fillets, coated cut portions, coated mince, hake fillets and baby hake.


    3.      VISIT TO OCEANA BRANDS


    The Managing Director, Mr. Themba Langeni, welcomed and briefed the
    delegation on the business operations on the company. The briefing
    focused on business infrastructure, market, supply chain, global
    marketing opportunities, employee development and social
    responsibilities.


    3.1     BUSINESS INFRASTRUCTURE


    The business infrastructure of the Oceana Marketing Brands Company is
    composed of 95 900 stores, 1250 customers, 5370 delivery points, 486
    merchandisers, 10 distribution centers, 10 sales and merchandising
    companies 93 sales representatives, and 45 million consumers.


    3.2     MARKET SECTOR PENETRATION AND SUPPLY CHAIN


    The market sector penetration supply chain of the company involves the
    white, coloured, Indian and black people in both the urban and rural
    areas. The supply chain on the other hand, involved 675 Wholesale Trade,
    93 480 General Trade and 1590 Formal Retail Trade.


    3.3     GLOBAL MARKETING OPPORTUNITIES


    According to the Managing Director, the global marketing opportunities
    of the Oceana Brands include maximization of canning, increase of
    exports, earning of foreign exchange, increase of employment, adding of
    value to raw materials, and expansion of lucky star franchise.


    3.4     ON-SITE TOUR


    During the on site tour, the delegation observed how Oceana Marketing
    Company processes, packages and stores fish products such as canned
    fish, sea food, lucky star, glenryck, saldanha and sea fare etc.


    4.      CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION


    Having conducted an oversight visits to Sea Harvest Ltd and Oceana
    Brands on the 19th of February 2005, the Portfolio Committee on
    Environmental Affairs and Tourism concludes and recommends as follows:

    4.1 Noting the progress made by both the fishing companies on their
    operational business activities, it is recommended that the Committee
    should make a follow up on how the Sea Harvest Ltd and Oceana Brands
    would put in place mechanism within the Department of Trade and Industry
    Black Economic Empowerment scorecard, to accelerate transformation
    targets in terms of ownership, strategic representation, employment
    equity, preferential procurement and enterprise development.


5.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
    Administration on the Reports of the Public Service Commission, dated 8
    June 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and  Administration,  having
    considered the Reports of the Public Service Commission on:

     1. The Abilities of the Departments to deal  with  Devolved  Authority
        regarding Remuneration and Conditions of Service, January 2004
     2. The Dispute Resolution Mechanisms in the Public Service, 2003
     3. Investigation into the Re-employment of Persons Retired due to  ill
        health, February 2003
     4. The Causes  and  Effects  of  Mobility  amongst  Senior  Management
        Service and Professional Staff in the Public Service, 2003

      Reports as follows:

     1.     On the Report on the Abilities of the Departments to  deal  with
        Devolved  Authority  regarding  Remuneration  and   Conditions   of
        Service, January  2004,  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  the  Public
        Service and  Administration  recommends  that  the  recommendations
        contained in the report should be acceded to.
     2.     On the Report on the Dispute Resolution Mechanisms in the Public
        Service, 2003, the Portfolio Committee on the  Public  Service  and
        Administration recommends that  the  recommendations  made  by  the
        Public Service Commission should be acceded to.
     3.     On the Report on the Investigation  into  the  Re-employment  of
        Persons Retired due to ill health, 2003, the Portfolio Committee on
        Public   Service   and   Administration   recommends    that    the
        recommendations contained in the Report should be  acceded  to  and
        furthermore,  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Public   Service   and
        Administration  urges  that  the  traditional  or  non-conventional
        system  of  health  care   as   prescribed   in   the   Traditional
        Practitioners Act, 2004 should be incorporated on  similar  grounds
        as the mainstream health system regarding decision on ill health.
     4.     On the Report on the Causes  and  Effects  of  Mobility  amongst
        Senior Management Service and Professional  Staff  recommends  that
        the recommendations of the  Public  Service  Commission  should  be
        acceded to.

     Furthermore,  the   Portfolio   Committee   on   Public   Service   and
     Administration notes that the Public Service Commission has  discharged
     its mandate in terms of the law.

