---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 13 December 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: DECEMBER
month_slug: Dec
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-12-13
---

TUESDAY, 13 DECEMBER 2005
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mnr C J VAN ROOYEN: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

   Dat die Raad kennis neem van die volgende:


   (1)      dat die ANC in die Vryheidsmanifes verklaar dat Suid-Afrika aan
        almal wat hier woon, behoort;


   (2)      dit beteken dat Suid-Afrika ook aan die Afrikaner behoort;


   (3)      dat daar in die ANC ruimte en respek vir alle tale, kulture en
        groeperings van die samelewings is;
   (4)      dat die ANC alle Afrikaners uit nooi om die boeie van die
        verlede en die vrese waarmee hulle leef, af te skud en saam met mede-
        Suid-Afrikaners van alle rasse en kulture die vryheid van
        Afrikaanswees binne die ANC ervaar.
Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council notes that –


   (1)      the ANC declared in the Freedom Charter that South Africa
        belongs to all who live in it;


   (2)      this means that South Africa also belongs to the Afrikaner;


   (3)      within the ANC there is a place and respect for all languages,
        cultures and groupings of society; and


     4) the ANC invites all Afrikaners to shed the shackles of the past and
        to do away with the fears in which they live and with fellow
        Afrikaners of all races and cultures to experience the freedom to
        be Afrikaans in the ANC.
   Thank you.]


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Any further notices of motion?

Mr A WATSON: Chair, you asked whether anybody wished to  give  notice  of  a
motion, but the member read a motion without notice. If that’s  so,  then  I
object to that motion.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Oh, was it a motion without notice? Oh, we
have not yet come there. Ok. So there are no . . . All right, I’ll come
back to that. There are no notices of motion. So we have started with a
notice of motion that is actually a motion without notice. There is an
objection to that motion and therefore the motion will be printed in the
Order Paper. It becomes a notice of a motion. Any other person who wants to
move a motion without notice? Hon Kgoshi Mokoena.


                     CONGRATULATIONS TO ROLAND SCHOEMAN


                             (Draft Resolution)

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council notes that –


   (1)      Roland Schoeman, our South African professional swimmer, has
        been made a multi-million rand offer to swim for Qatar;


   (2)      Schoeman, the reigning world 50m freestyle and silver medallist
        over 100m, has rejected that multi-million rand offer to swim for
        Qatar;


   (3)      he rejected the offer to swim for Qatar because he wants our
        national anthem, Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrica, to be sung whenever he
        lifts a medal;


   (4)      the rejection of the offer and motivation thereof shows a deep
        sense of patriotism on the part of Schoeman, who is an Afrikaner
        athlete; and


   (5)      patriotism in South Africa is gaining more value and recognition
        at the expense of individualistic, material gains and benefits.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                               CHILDREN’S BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of report thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, hon members, thank
you for the opportunity to introduce the Children’s Bill in this session of
the House. The debate on the Children’s Bill in the NCOP today is indeed a
milestone in the efforts of government to protect the rights of children as
enshrined in the Bill of Rights of the Constitution.

I wish to thank all members of the Select Committee on Social  Services  for
their  assistance  in  finalising  the  Children’s  Bill.  The  process   of
developing this Bill has taken very long. It started in 1996, when  existing
legislation was found not to be in keeping with  the  realities  of  current
social problems, and no longer protected children adequately.

South Africa had  introduced  a  new  Constitution,  that  also  acceded  to
various international  conventions,  the  principles  of  which  had  to  be
incorporated into local legislation. During  1997,  the  then  Minister  for
Welfare requested  the  South  African  Law  Reform  Commission  to  develop
comprehensive new legislation for children. After an  extensive  process  of
research and consultation due to the envisaged comprehensive nature  of  the
Bill, the Law Reform Commission finalised its report and  proposed  a  draft
Children’s Bill  in  December  2002.  The  Bill  was  deliberated  upon  and
approved by Cabinet with changes in July 2003 and  submitted  to  Parliament
in August 2003. The current Bill contains part of the  envisaged  Children’s
Bill Act. The Bill that was initially submitted to Parliament in 2003  dealt
with the full spectrum of  protection  of  children  in  both  national  and
provincial spheres and was to be dealt with in terms of section  76  of  the
Constitution.

It was, however, found to be a mixture including elements to be  handled  in
terms  of  both  section  75,  which  is  a  functional  area  of   national
legislative competence, and section 76  of  the  Constitution.  Due  to  the
mixed character, the consolidated Bill was  split.  The  provisions  of  the
consolidated Bill that would apply to the  provincial  government  had  been
removed and consequently the current Bill contains matters that have  to  be
dealt with in terms of section 75 of the Constitution.

As soon as the current Bill is enacted,  an  amending  Bill  containing  the
matters that apply to the provincial government  only  will  be  introduced.
The amending Bill will then be dealt with in terms  of  section  76  of  the
Constitution,  and  will  complete  the  current  Bill  by   inserting   the
provisions, which deal mainly with social welfare services.

Chairperson, the  Bill  gives  effect  to  certain  rights  of  children  as
contained  in  the  Constitution  in  the  following  manner:  to  stipulate
principles relating to the  care  and  protection  of  children;  to  define
parental  responsibilities  and  rights;   to   determine   principles   and
guidelines for the  protection  of  children  and  the  promotion  of  their
wellbeing; to regulate matters concerning the protection  and  wellbeing  of
children;  and  to  consolidate  the  laws  relating  to  the  welfare   and
protection of children.

The objects  of  the  Bill  are:  the  promotion  of  the  preservation  and
strengthening of families; to give effect to the  Constitutional  rights  of
children,  the  protection   against   maltreatment,   neglect,   abuse   or
degradation and that the best  interests  of  the  child  are  of  paramount
importance in every matter concerning the  child.  The  Bill  also  provides
giving effect to the Republic’s  obligations  concerning  the  wellbeing  of
children in terms of international instruments binding the Republic.

It further makes provision for structures, services and means for  promoting
and monitoring the sound, physical, psychological,  intellectual,  emotional
and  social  development  of  children.  Strengthening  and  development  of
community structures to assist in providing care and protection of  children
are also one of  the  main  objectives  of  the  Bill.  Children  should  be
protected  against  discrimination,  exploitation  and  any  other  harm  or
hazard.

The Bill further provides for the care and protection of  children  who  are
in need of care and protection, and  it  recognises  the  special  needs  of
children with disabilities. The  Bill  generally  promotes  the  protection,
development  and  wellbeing  of  children.  Chairperson,  I  would  like  to
emphasise the intersectoral  nature  of  the  Bill  and  the  importance  of
working together in the best interests  of  children.  The  Bill  emphasises
that services to children should be prioritised by government  on  national,
provincial and local levels, and  that  all  spheres  of  government  should
strengthen their own services and support and assist each other in terms  of
budgets to ensure services to children.

The Bill attempts to promote child participation  and  enables  children  to
have a say in their own situation and future arrangement. The  Bill  further
provides for the child’s right not to be subjected to social,  cultural  and
religious practices that are detrimental to his/her wellbeing.  Issues  like
virginity testing,  female  and  male  genital  mutilation  or  circumcision
received special attention in the select committee  meetings  as  there  are
cultural, religious and social practices  that  require  harmonisation  with
children’s rights as expressed in the Constitution.  After  public  hearings
and comprehensive deliberations during the select committee meeting, it  was
decided that virginity testing of children under the age  of  16  should  be
prohibited and that virginity testing of children  older  than  16  only  be
performed if the child has  given  consent  to  the  testing,  after  proper
counselling of the child and in the manner prescribed by the regulations  of
the Act. It was also decided not to disclose the results  of  the  virginity
test without the consent of the child, and that the body of  the  child  who
has undergone virginity testing may not be marked.

Regarding circumcision of male children, the Bill proposes  the  prohibition
of circumcision for boys under the age of 16, except  when  circumcision  is
performed for religious purposes, in accordance with the  practices  of  the
religion concerned and in the  manner  prescribed  by  regulation;  or  when
circumcision is performed for medical reasons on the  recommendations  of  a
medical practitioner.
Circumcision of male children older than 16 may only  be  performed  if  the
child has given consent to the circumcision and;  after  proper  counselling
of the child and; in the manner prescribed by the regulations of the Act.

However, taking into consideration the child’s age, maturity  and  stage  of
development, every male child has the  right  to  refuse  circumcision.  The
Bill also provides for the lowering of the age of maturity from 21 years  to
18 years.

The Children’s Bill regulates  parental  rights  and  responsibilities,  the
entering into agreements and that such agreements should be registered  with
the Family Advocate or the High Court or divorce court. Fathers of  children
born out of wedlock are provided with an opportunity to play  a  major  role
in their children’s lives by  being  assigned  rights  and  responsibilities
under specific  circumstances.  The  Bill  further  provides  for  parenting
plans, lay forum hearings and family group conferences, to act in  the  best
interests of the child and to ensure  more  protection.   A  two-part  child
protection register is provided by the Bill. Part A  of  the  register  will
contain a record of all reports  of  abuse  or  deliberate  neglect  of  the
child. All convictions of all persons on  charges  involving  the  abuse  or
deliberate neglect of the child, and all findings of  the  children’s  court
that the child is in need of care and protection.

Part B of the register will contain a record of persons who  are  unsuitable
to work with children and the information on the register will  be  used  in
order to protect children in  general,  against  abuse  from  such  persons.
Another important provision is that an alleged  offender  could  be  removed
with a written notice from a home or place where the child resides,  instead
of the  child  being  removed.  The  child  is  actually  the  person  in  a
vulnerable position, and should stay in familiar surroundings.

The Bill provides for the  HIV-testing  of  children  for  foster  care  and
adoption purposes in order to ensure that children who are living with  Aids
are provided  with  appropriate  family  care.  The  provision  to  regulate
intercountry  adoptions  gives  effect  to  the  Hague  Convention  on   the
Protection  of  Children  and  Co-operation  in  respect   of   Intercountry
Adoption. The chapter safeguards and  ensures  that  intercountry  adoptions
take place in the best interests of the child. These  safeguards  should  be
respected and thereby prevent the abduction, the sale of or the  trafficking
in children. The child abduction chapter aims to ensure  the  prompt  return
of children wrongfully removed to or retained in another state. The  chapter
on child abduction promotes the rights of custody and of  access  under  the
law of one state and are effectively respected in another state.

The Children’s Bill further provides for the  prevention  and  combating  of
trafficking  in  children.  International  co-operation  is  of  the  utmost
importance and particular attention should be paid to  women  and  children.
The Bill attempts to protect and assist  the  victims  of  trafficking  with
full respect  for  their  human  rights.  The  Bill  is  forwardlooking  and
requires a new approach  in  implementing  changes  that  must  replace  old
practices. New skills are required  to  implement  this  Bill  successfully.
Existing service providers should be strengthened to take the challenges  in
implementing this Bill into consideration.

There is also an important role for the private sector and civil society  to
play in assisting with the implementation of this Bill  and  being  involved
in the protection of children. Resources  required  to  implement  the  Bill
will be provided in terms of an approach that recognises  the  existence  of
competing social and economic  needs,  and  that  organs  of  state  in  the
national, provincial and, where applicable,  local  spheres  of  government,
will  take  reasonable  measures  within  their   available   resources   to
prioritise the realisation of the objectives of this Act.

Chairperson, the Bill is  one  of  the  foundation  Acts  of  Parliament  to
protect our children  and  to  ensure  actions  in  the  best  interests  of
families and children.

I want to thank the members of the Select Committee on Social  Services  for
processing the Bill. I would also like to thank the officials of the SA  Law
Reform Commission  and  the  State  Law  Advisors  for  assisting  with  the
drafting of amendments to the Bill, as well as officials of  the  Department
of Social Development and other departments who are on the  children’s  Bill
steering committee, for their hard work and persistence over this period.  I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms J M MASILO: Thank you, hon Chairperson. Hon Deputy Minister, hon
members, senior officials from the Department of Social Development, the
Children’s Bill aims to provide workable solutions to the major challenges
facing children in the areas of social services and protection against
abuse and neglect.

The Children’s Bill Working Group was established in March 2003 and the
Department of Social Development has been working on this Bill since in
consultation with most of the child sector civil society bodies. On 2
August 2005, the Department of Social Development briefed the Select
Committee on Social Services on this Bill. The committee had the workshop
with the department, where it was stated that this is comprehensive
legislation to protect children. However, some issues were still causing
concerns, namely virginity testing, children’s access to medical treatment,
surrogate motherhood, trafficking in children, genital mutilation or
circumcision of female children, information on healthcare, access to
court, parental responsibility and rights.

The workshop was also attended by representatives from the Departments of
Correctional Services, Safety and Security, Home Affairs, Health,
Provincial and Local Government, National Treasury and the United Nations
Children’s Fund, UNICEF.

For further consultation with stakeholders, the committee agreed that
public hearings should be held on 11 October 2005. Sixteen written
submissions and fifteen oral presentations were received, including that of
Inkosi Mzimela of the National House of Traditional Leaders.

On 25 October 2005, during deliberations on the Children’s Bill with the
Department of Social Development the following recommendations were made:
Virginity testing for children under the age of 16 years would be
prohibited. Virginity testing for children over the age of 16 years is
allowed only with the consent of the child involved.

It was agreed that religious practices should not of necessity be blocked
but that circumcision should take place under acceptable medical health
supervision. The age of consent for male children is also set at 16 years.

The committee stated that female circumcision – bojale – should be
regulated and not prohibited. But it was noted that the practice was not in
the best interest of the child and that the Bill is about restricting
cultural practices that are harmful to the girl child. It was also agreed
that not all cultural practices are harmful and that genital mutilation is
one such practice.

There were presentations on female genital mutilation, circumcision,
initiation schools and the committee was briefed by five women on how
female genital mutilation is performed by various groups in our society.
This was part of the further consultation on this Bill by the Select
Committee on clause 12. Mrs Albina Kekana’s presentation was on research of
female circumcision, Mrs M Lokotu made her presentation from a Venda
perspective, Mrs Mahlangu represented the Ndebele Princess of Manala, Mrs G
Masango represented the Ndebele of Ndzunza and Mrs G Fakude represented the
Swazis from Mpumalanga.

The traditional practice is as old as the people in every ethnic group. It
was and still remains a method of socialising girls and preparing them for
transition into womanhood. The main purpose was to empower girls to enter
womanhood with confidence from lessons and information given during the
initiation period.

With regard to forced marriages, it was noted by the committee that the
provision accommodated the request for criminal offence in the discussion.
It was agreed that the boy child as well as the girl child should be
protected.

With regard to consent to adoption, the committee agreed that the current
clause be kept as it is. A child is adopted if the child has been placed in
the permanent custody of a person in terms of a court order that has the
effect contemplated in clause 24(2). The purposes of adoption are to
protect and nurture children in a safe and healthy environment with
positive support and to promote the goals for permanently placing children
in a position where they can enjoy safe and nurturing family relationships.

On the issue of a High Court granting guardianship, the committee felt that
the magistrate courts should deal with this in future.

With regard to HIV-testing provided by clause 130(2), consent for HIV-
testing of a child may be given by the child, if the child is 12 years of
age or older and is of sufficient maturity to understand the benefits,
risks and social implications of such a test. No person may disclose the
fact that a child is HIV-positive without the child’s consent, which can be
given in terms of subsection 2. Consent to disclose the fact that a child
is HIV-positive may be given by the child, if the child is 12 years of age
or older. The IFP did not support this position.

The purpose of Part B of the National Child Protection Register is to have
a record of persons who are unsuitable to work with children and to use the
information in the register in order to protect children against abuse from
these persons. The committee agreed to maintain the current formulation in
clause 128 of the Bill, which allows for application for removal from the
register five years after certain conditions have been met, except the DA’s
position that the offender should be in the register for a lifetime.

With regard to clause 134, which provides for access to contraceptives, no
person may refuse to sell condoms to a child over the age of 12 or to
provide a child of the age of 12 years with condoms on request where such
condoms are provided for distribution free of charge.

Ka gonne bana ba rona ba montaga ba le dingwaga di le 12. Rona fa re gola,
bana ba dingwaga di le 12 e ne e sa le masea. Ba jaanong ba setse ba
tlhalefile. Ke ka moo re reng fa ba ya go dira voluntary testing ba kopa le
dikhondomo ba se ke ba ba tima tsona. (Translation of Setswana paragraph
follows.)

[It is because our children are mature at the age of 12. During our
childhood, we used to know that children who were 12 years old were still
babies. It is a different case now with today’s generation, they become
mature earlier. It is for that reason that we advise them; when they go for
voluntary testing, and not to allow to be refused condoms when they ask for
them.]

Proper medical advice is given to the child to determine whether there are
medical reasons why a specific contraceptive should not be provided to a
child. A child who obtains condoms, contraceptives and advice in terms of
this legislation is entitled to confidentiality in this respect.

The Bill also acknowledges that children can be given responsibilities,
having proper regard to age and maturity of the child. A child, whether
male or female, becomes mature upon reaching the age of 18 years.

In conclusion, in terms of consultation on this Bill, I believe that
members of the select committee have done their best by holding open
meetings, including consultations, workshops, public hearings, dedicating
and sacrificing their time, working after hours even during the recess
period to finalise this important piece of legislation. Well done! Keep it
up, as we are all a nation at work, comrades and friends.

Thanks and appreciation go to the Department of Social Development working
group, the legal department, and the Chief Director, Dr Mabetoa, for their
work.

Tshwara jalo mme gonne mmangwana o tshwara thipa ka mo bogaleng. [Madam,
keep up the good work, because a mother protects the interests of the
child.]

I hope you and your staff qualify for a good performance bonus. That’s the
message, Deputy Minister. The committee wishes all of you in the House a
merry Christmas and good health in the coming New Year.

The committee supports the Bill 120%. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr O M THETJENG: Ndi a livhuwa, Mudzulatshidulo. [Thank you, Chairperson.]

Members of the public and representatives of civil society and NGOs that
took an interest in this particular Bill, we want to thank you and welcome
you. Your contributions have been valuable and are welcomed. You are
involved in matters relating to children’s wellbeing on daily basis and I
am touched by that. Some of your valuable contributions have been thrown
out of the window by those who use their majority power to the detriment of
the general public that put them in those positions of authority.

The implementation of this Bill, once it becomes law, will have unintended
consequences that were deliberately allowed to go through by the ANC
members, despite our objection to certain formulations. We have provided
provisions that were to avert such instances. Virginity testing is a
nonstarter for the DA. Individuals are humiliated and their rights are
violated.

The major purpose of any law is to be accessible by all, rich and poor, old
and young. Section 24 (1) deals with the assignment of guardianship:


  Any person having an interest in the care, wellbeing and development of a
  child may apply to the High Court for an order granting guardianship of
  the child to the applicant.


Most of our rural areas do not have access to a High Court in whatever form
but have easy access to the magistrates’ courts. Travelling to places where
these courts are is a nonstarter because the majority of our people are
without money. They find it difficult to travel to apply for a mere ID and
for the birth certificates of their own children, and yet we are burdening
them with matters of guardianship to be taken up at High Court level.

Let us capacitate our magistrates’ courts so that they are able to handle
guardianship matters. This may encourage more individuals to become
guardians of children whose parents have died. This will curtail the high
number of child-headed families, which is on the increase lately, due to
HIV/Aids, about which the ANC government continues to be in denial that it
is a killer disease and sufferers must be provided with antiretroviral
drugs.

Clause 42(8)(d) of the Bill provides for children that are both physically
challenged and have special needs to have access to the children’s courts.
It is a disgrace that this clause has been removed on the basis that it is
costly. We need to provide services to all citizens of our country without
discriminating against them on the basis of their physical disability. Are
the rights of these groups of people taken into cognisance? Are they not
South Africans?

Formulation on male circumcision is appreciated and it should perhaps be
noted that it is a cultural practice that does not undermine individual
rights.

The police have contributed significantly to this Bill and we really
appreciate the extent of their contribution because their contribution will
ensure that they actually deal with these matters within the law and that
access is actually given. They have taken the interests of children
seriously. It is my prayer that this section will remain when the Bill is
finally referred to the National Assembly, but I have my doubts if this
section will be retained.

Section 28 offers perpetrators of abuse against children an opportunity to
be removed from the Part B register on application after a period. Thank
you, Chairperson, for acknowledging the position of the DA. You should have
done more on other matters as well.  Any abuse, particularly rape and other
forms of abuse, of a child leaves a scar for life. Offenders should not be
given the opportunity ever to work with children for the rest of their
entire lives. They can find work opportunities elsewhere, but not where
children are involved at any level, including the private sector, the
Public Service and municipalities. Once an offender against a child, it
becomes in perpetuity.

Members of the ANC in the committee insisted that offenders must be allowed
to be removed from Part B of the register on application and the DA says
no. Actually, these offenders must spend a lifetime in jail. Can you
imagine how a child will feel meeting a person who abused him or her in the
streets? Children have long been ignored and this is the time that they
should be fully protected.

A foreign tourist, who has been reported as being lawyer by profession,
recently abused one child. He was given a fine of R10 000 after making a
deal with state organs to avoid prosecution. He paid and went home and the
abused child still has a scar that will probably last a lifetime. How did
he lure this child into the hotel? Is there not a cartel that is involved?
Why was he allowed to go without serving his time in jail? The police
caught him red-handed; in the act . . . [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, hon members,
firstly I would like to highlight to this House that apart from section 28
of the Constitution, which clearly stipulates the rights of children, there
are various pieces of legislation and international conventions affecting
the lives of children.

It is clear that the existing legislation is not in keeping with the
realities of current social problems and no longer protects children
adequately, hence this new Bill.

Some of the main objects of the Bill are: to make provision for the
structure, the services and the means for promoting and monitoring the
sound physical, intellectual, emotional and social development of children;
to protect children against maltreatment, abuse, neglect, degradation,
discrimination, exploitation and any other physical, emotional or moral
harm or hazards.

Chapter 9 of the Bill says a child in need of care and protection, if
abandoned, orphaned and living in the streets, begging for a living, can be
removed by a designated social worker or a police official into temporary
safe care without a court order.

The children’s court will decide the question of whether a child who was
subject to proceedings is in need of care and protection. Before a child is
brought before the children’s court, the designated social worker must
investigate the matter and within 90 days compile a report in a prescribed
manner on whether the child is in need of care and protection. Such matter
should be reported to the provincial Department of Social Development. The
report should include the conditions of the child’s life.

There is a contribution order, where a children’s court may make an order
instructing a respondent to pay a sum of money or recurrent sum of money as
a contribution towards the maintenance or the costs resulting from the
special needs of a child. This contribution order has the effect of a
Maintenance Act, as the case may be.

Chapter 15 talks about the adoption of children. Children may be adopted
and the purpose of the adoption is to protect and nurture children by
providing a safe, healthy environment with positive support and promote the
goals of permanency planning by connecting children to other safe and
nurturing family relationships intended to last a lifetime.

The director-general is responsible for keeping and maintaining a register
which is to be called the Register on Adoptable Children and Prospective
Adoptive Parents for the purpose of keeping a record of adoptable children
and keeping a record of fit and proper adoptive parents. Such information
may not be disclosed to any person, except to an adopted child after the
child has reached the age of 18 years or by an order of the court, if the
court finds that such disclosure is in the best interest of the adopted
child.

Chapter 16 talks about the intercountry adoption. The purpose of
intercountry adoption is to give effect to the Hague Convention, to provide
for the recognition of certain foreign adoption, to find fit and proper
adoptive parents for an adoptable child and generally to regulate
intercountry adoptions.

The Bill, in Chapter 18, deals with combating trafficking in children and
gives effect to the UN Protocol to prevent trafficking in persons.

Before I sit down, I would like to relate the Gauteng province situation.
The Department of Social Development, in its programme for children living
and working on the streets, it managed to register and fund 20 shelters
accommodating a total of 1 043 children. All shelters received additional
funding to appoint at least two outreach workers to target so-called street
children not currently receiving social services. Through these measures at
least 40 additional jobs were created for young people and volunteers who
are over 18 years of age.

Social work processes attempting to reunite children with their families
have so far proved extremely successful. Of the 1 525 so-called street
children cared for in the shelters, 286 were reunited with their families
or placed in foster care or adopted.

The Gauteng Premier, Mbhazima Shilowa, launched a project called Bana Pele
on 1 June, International Children’s Day. The aim was to provide a package
of services to improve the lives of the poor and vulnerable children in the
province. The Premier called on society to protect children against abuse,
drugs and poverty. [Applause.]

Nkk J N VILAKAZI: Mphathisihlalo ohloniphekileyo, Ngqongqoshe nomnyango
wakho, abahlonishwa abakhona phakathi kwethu kanye nendlu yonke. Engifisa
ukukuphawula egameni leqembu lami Inkatha Freedom Party ngalo Mthetho
oshayelwa abantwana abaneminyaka eyi-12 nje vo, okuthiwa sebengaqala
ukuvimbela inzalo bafake namakhondomu – ingane iye emtholampilo wokuhlela
umndeni ukuthola konke ekudingayo bese umzali engangeni ndawo kukho konke
lokhu. Kithina esithanda ubuzwe bethu namasiko esizwe, lokhu sikubona
kuyinsumansumane uqobo lwayo. Hawu, laze lafa elihle kakhulu!

Ingane eneminyaka eyi-12, kungaba umfana noma intombazane, kuseyingane
leyo. Thina bazali asifundise abantwana bethu indlela eqotho yempilo
yokuziphatha besebancane okuyothi sebekhulile bangasuki kuyo. Nawe mzali
uyoziqhenya ngayo uma isiyenza lokho oyifundise khona isencane. Iminyaka
eyi-12 yiklume lelo. Usakhula lo mntwana futhi usafundiseka. Mfundise mzali
ungethembeli kumakhondomu nokunye. Angiphiki ukuthi ingane ekule minyaka
iyalwazi ucansi kodwa iningi alukakazi lutho olutheni kulesi sigaba. Kudala
abantwana babewudlala umacashelana kodwa hhayi le ndlela osekukhulunywa
ngayo.

Lesi sigaba sisodwa nje egameni le-IFP ngithi asivumelani impela naso
thina. Lesi sigaba sodwa hhayi okunye. Okunye kulungile. Siyancoma kakhulu
ukuhlolwa kwezintombi ukuthi kwachibiyelwa kangcono kunalokhu okwase
kushiwo ukuthi azingahlolwa izintombi. Bakithi sakha isizwe lapha. Nanso-ke
indlela yokuvimbela engenasihluku. Akuphoqwa muntu kodwa kwenziwa
othandayo. Umzali uyathanda ukubona ingane yakhe ikhula kahle iyintombi nto
kunokuba iguge ivela nje. Siyabonga Ngqongqoshe ngalokhu nasemnyangweni
wakho ngokuthi wasizwa. Nanto-ke ikhambi elihle lokuphephisa intsha yethu
ekutholeni izifo zocansi zisencane. Indlela emsulwa neqotho kunamakhondomu
nokunye okunganambitheki kahle kithina bazali nentsha yethu eyakhuliswa
kahle. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Hon Chairperson, the Minister and her department, the
dignitaries here in our midst, and the House at large, I will be speaking
on behalf of my party, the IFP, regarding this Bill, which allows children
as young as 12 to start using preventive measures, including condoms;
children are even allowed to go to clinics to get prophylactics without the
parents being aware of it. People like us, who are patriotic and love our
cultures, see this as a mystery at its worst. Alas, cry the beloved
country!

A person aged 12, whether it is a girl or a boy, is still a child. We as
parents should instead very early on teach our children good behavioural
patterns that they will adhere to even when they grow old. A person aged 12
is still an infant for all intents and purposes. This is still a child, who
is growing and educatable. A parent should educate his or her child and not
trust condoms and other things. I am not for a minute saying children at
this stage know nothing about sex, but most of them have very limited
knowledge as far as sex is concerned. In the olden days, children would
indeed play father and mother, but it would not be as explicit as it is now
. . .

We in the IFP do not support this part of the Bill; this part only, not the
other parts. The rest is fine. We are also happy with the amendment
regarding the banning of virginity testing. It could not have been done
better than this. People, we are building the nation here. These are
preventive measures that do not contain any form of abuse. It is every
parent’s dream to see his or her girl-child growing up a virgin, rather
than one who throws herself at men. We thank the Minister and her
department for this amendment and for giving effect to our plea. This is
the best cure for saving the youth from contracting sexually transmitted
diseases at a tender age. This is the purest way, a better way than using
condoms and other things, which do not go down well with us as parents and
the youth who grew up in stable families.]

Today we are debating a very crucial topic, the Children’s Bill. Children
play a very important role in our families; hence we must take good care of
them. A home without children is very quiet and empty; it’s like a bereaved
family after the death of a mother, who besides the motherhood was the
breadwinner in the family. By this, I mean children must be properly
nurtured, without any abuse whatsoever.

We must teach our children rights and responsibilities, which instil the
culture of morality more than anything else. Teaching about condoms and
contraceptives does not augur well with the moral way of bringing up
children. Our children need proper education in life skills according to
their stages of development. Parents should play a pivotal role in their
children’s lives. Let us as parents strive to promote favourable ways of
living rather than promoting depravity in our children.

I want to emphasise that a 12-year-old is just a child that needs to be
taught about morality. It must not be made easy for children to be immoral.
She or he must remain 12-year-olds and not be pushed up to 14. Of course,
we are aware that children nowadays enter the puberty stage at an early
age. [Time expired.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Chairperson, Minister and the House, the Bill before the
House is one of the most extensively interrogated pieces of legislation.
This was due to the sensitive nature of certain provisions and their
relation to certain cultural beliefs and customs.

One of the provisions which were hotly debated and for which a number of
submissions and presentations were made, was virginity inspection or
testing. The committee had agreed as a compromise that it could be
performed on girls of over 16 years, after the necessary counselling and
with the consent of the girl concerned. This places the onus to agree or
not to agree on the child concerned.

Another common incident for which provision was made in this Bill is the
refusal of access or refusal to exercise parental responsibilities and
rights. The Bill is very clear that, if a parent, guardian or caregiver of
a child prevents the other parent or guardian from having contact with the
child or refuses to let them exercise their responsibilities and rights,
they would be guilty of an offence.

Another heated debate was around the National Child Protection Register.
The committee regarded it as a useful mechanism for protecting children.
For instance, the committee was in agreement that the name and particulars
of a person convicted more than once of an offence with regard to a child
might not be removed from the register, lest he or she repeats the offence.
[Time expired.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister,
Dr Benjamin, hon members, fellow colleagues and comrades, the passage of
the Children’s Bill this afternoon represents yet another important
milestone in our ongoing struggle to create a caring society for the weak
and vulnerable sections of our society.

The children as the bedrock and foundation of the future of our nation are
through this Bill accorded their rightful place in the ongoing task of
social transformation.

I rise on behalf of the ANC to salute the Ministry of Social Development
for the visionary and sterling leadership provided in the course of the
consideration of this Bill.

Chairperson, the commitment and patience of the Deputy Minister to listen
and accommodate various viewpoints that were aimed at shaping this Bill is
something that cannot go by without notice and appreciation. As the member
of the Executive she afforded us a noble opportunity to interact with
various stakeholders and interest groups without any undue interference.

The process of considering this Bill was indeed long and arduous and at
times riddled with robust contestations amongst stakeholders. As we present
this Bill to this august House for adoption this afternoon we want to
acknowledge that it was one of the most complex pieces of legislation ever
presented before our select committee.

The confusion in the minds of some among us in the select committee,
thinking that this Bill will address the problem of accessibility of courts
in the country, actually points to the complexity of the Bill itself.

So, we don’t need amateurs to come here, thinking that the problem of South
Africans’ access to courts by the majority of our rural people can be
resolved by this Bill. This Bill is not intended to address that particular
problem. I think the point made by hon Thetjeng is misguided and at worse
it represents infantile disorder in this honourable House.

It would certainly be an omission on my part not to acknowledge and express
similar words of gratitude to the director-general of the department and
his dedicated team who spent sleepless nights to bring us to the point of
passing this Bill this afternoon.

Chairperson, in dealing with the Bill I will limit myself to the issues
that were the focus of disputes and contestation at both public and
committee levels. Before I do that, I must caution that the public and the
House must not be misled; it is the ANC that rose and consciously came up
with this Bill. And there is no way that the ANC could reject its own
product. What we have rejected is some of the proposals that were made and
were not realistic, firstly, to our country, and that were inconsistent
with the policy prescription of our country.

For example, the issue that was raised earlier on by Mr Thetjeng, the issue
of clause 42 (8)(d), in the terms of Mr Thetjeng, that the clause was
saying that the courts must be accessible and user-friendly to people with
disabilities and those with special needs. We agree with that. But our view
is that for the past four years the Department of Public Works, in pursuit
of the National Integrated Disability Strategy, which is a policy of
government, has taken a conscious programme and unleashed resources to the
effect of ensuring that all public places, public institutions, are
actually accessible and user-friendly to the disabled people of our
country.

So, this Bill is not aimed at that, Mr Thetjeng. You must refer to the
Department of Public Works, programme. There are reports on this particular
matter. I think it is addressing that. It is our view that that matter does
not belong to this Bill. In actual fact, if you look closely at clause 11
of the Bill, that clause on its own is quite comprehensive and it addresses
all the needs and the plight of the people, particularly children who have
special needs and are disabled. So, the attempt to get some luck by Mr
Thetjeng, by thinking that when he played to the gallery he would change
the mind of the ANC and its position on this Bill, is misguided. And I say
it’s hard luck.

As part of the measures to ensure that perpetrators of abuse and neglect
against children are not let loose to repeat the same offences, the Bill
makes provision for the National Child Protection Register. The National
Child Protection Register is an instrument to be employed by the director-
general, where records of abuse or deliberate neglect inflicted on children
are kept.

This record will provide full details of the nature of the abuse or neglect
against the child, full particulars of the child and the perpetrator,
including details of circumstances surrounding that abuse.

The register will have two parts, namely Part A and Part B. I think the
contestation was around the Part B of the register. The Part B of the
register is intended to have records of people who are unsuitable to work
with children and to use that information to protect the children against
abuse from these persons.

If a person’s name appears in that part of the register that person may,
among others, not manage, operate, or participate in an institution that
provides services to children; work with or provide services or have access
to the institution that provides services to children; or work in any unit
of the SAPS that provides protection for children.

A person whose name has been entered in that part of the register may apply
for the removal of his or her name or any information relating to him or
her from the register. This application can only be made after at least
five years since the entry was made to any competent court the director-
general if the entry was made in error, or to the High Court if the
director-general refuses an application. The ANC supports the Bill. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, my comments will be
much shorter than 10 minutes, that I see on the clock here, that has been
allocated to me.

I would like just to respond to a few points that have come up in the
debate. The member from the DA refers: With regard to foreign minors this
issue is dealt with in the Bill in the same way as all other children who
are residents or citizens of the country, in accordance with the
Constitution.

With regard to the removal of offenders from the register, after five years
application for removal of offenders from the register is proposed in the
Bill to provide for offenders who have been rehabilitated. This will not be
automatic. Applications must be made to the High Court and strict criteria
will apply. No automatic removal will take place.

The department feels that guardianship issues should for the time being
stay in the jurisdiction of the High Court. However, research will continue
on the matter.

In applying a global perspective on this Bill, if implemented, this Bill
will place South Africa in a favourable position on the globe if one takes
into account the situation of the majority of children in the world, and I
quote:

    The global scandal of violence against children is a horror story too
    often untold. With malice and clear intent, violence is used against the
    members of society least able to protect themselves, children in
    schools, in orphanages, on the street, in refugee camps and war zones,
    in detention and in fields and factories.

In its investigations of human rights abuses against children, Human Rights
Watch has found that in every region of the world in almost every aspect of
their lives children are subjected to unquestionable violence most often
perpetrated by the very individuals charged with their safety and their
wellbeing.

Government has many priorities and many challenges remain in the
implementation of integrated services in general and in particular with
regard to the children in need of care and those who are vulnerable. Such
challenges include budget constraints and the realisation of government’s
integrated approach to social transformation.

After this Bill is passed, a framework for implementation will be
formulated and a phase-in approach will be adopted. I thank the House for
their collective commitment to providing the children of our country with
the love, protection and care needed to ensure a better future and quality
of life for all our people. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Deputy Minister. I shall now put
the question and the question is that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance
with rule 63 I shall first allow political parties to make their
declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any party that wishes to do
so? None. We shall now proceed to voting on the question. Those in favour,
please say Aye! and those against say No!

HON MEMBERS: Aye!
HON MEMBERS: No!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I think the ayes have it. The majority of
members have voted in favour and I therefore declare the Bill subject to
the proposed amendments, agreed to in terms of section 75 of the
Constitution. [Applause.]

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

     INDEPENDENT COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY OF SOUTH AFRICA AMENDMENT BILL



                       ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS BILL





                         (Consideration of Reports)


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms M P Hollander): Order! I have been
informed that there will be only one speakers’ list for the second and
third Orders of the Day. As the Secretary has already read both of them, I
shall now call upon the Minister of Communications, the hon Dr I Matsepe-
Cassaburi, to take the platform. Minister, you can use the podium here or,
if you feel like it, there, it is fine; it is up to you. [Interjections.]
They want you at the podium. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Chairperson, hon members of the NCOP,
distinguished ladies and gentlemen, when this Electronic Communications
Bill, called the Convergence Bill at the time, was decided in the National
Assembly, it was praised as breaking out of the old mould, a Bill for the
South Africa of today and yet there was some fear that it might be a trick
rather than a treat. I assured members that it was actually a treat and not
a trick.

Indeed both Bills before the House are groundbreaking. We are discussing
these Bills after the conclusion of the World Summit on Information
Society, a summit at which the South African delegation and a team of
officials under the leadership of my director-general, Lyndall Shope-
Mafole, and Ingrid Poni received outstanding recognition and an ovation for
the work that they had done.

In particular, the summit entrenched several principles, amongst which
were, firstly, the principle of inclusivity and multi-stakeholder
partnership; secondly, using ICT for development and, thirdly, an agreement
that Internet cannot be governed by one country but that a legitimate
mechanism for its governance must be explored and, finally, the
implementation mechanism was agreed upon. These are some of the things that
were agreed upon.

These Bills, the Electronic Communications Bill and the Icasa Bill, are an
expression of some of those principles of the World Summit of Information
Society. They do not allow us to go back to the drawing board, but to move
forward with the implementation of the decisions that were made.

The Electronic Communications Bill contains a forward-looking policy whist
the Icasa Amendment Bill is a regulatory framework Bill intended to
establish proper governance of the ICT sector in a converged environment.
Not many countries have been able to achieve this so we are quite lucky
that we were ahead of most countries including developed countries.

Given the challenges that we face after 10 years of democracy, the
challenge of ensuring the separation of powers between the executive, the
legislature and the judiciary, the Electronic Communications Bill breaks
totally new ground because it seeks to delineate the powers of the Minister
as well as those of Icasa without sacrificing our constitutional
principles. It entrenches transparency of processes and the accountability
of everyone. According to the Electronic Communications Bill, Icasa shall
bear responsibility for the implementation of national policy through
promulgation of regulation related to the communication sector.

Better clarity has been given to the different classes of licences that can
be granted by Icasa. It allows for competition while it gives recognition
to necessary action by the Regulator when the asymmetry of the market or
the abuse of the market by the dominant players has an adverse impact on
society.

The Electronic Communications Bill allows Icasa to prescribe rights and
obligations of facility and network owners. It allows Icasa to control,
plan, administer and manage frequency spectrum in accordance with
international regulations and national needs. It allows Icasa to set
communication equipment or apparatus standards and set out interconnection
regimes.

All of these must of course ensure that consumer issues and the needs of
broadcasting services are met through a code of conduct prescribed by
Icasa. There is therefore nothing in the Bill that sacrifices Icasa’s
independence, as many out there have tried to make us believe.

The Icasa Amendment Bill on the other hand addresses the need for
strengthening the Regulator to make it capable of responding to the
changing communications landscape, particularly in view of a more converged
and competitive environment. It also enables the Regulator to develop
regulations timely to ensure certainty within the market to attract
investment capital to the communications sector. I suppose at this stage I
can refer to the fact that you have seen what happened to the SNO which we
thought we would have licensed 18 months ago, but the process indeed took
so long that only three years later will we be able to licence the SNO. So,
the intention is to make sure that those processes are speeded up so that
investors would be interested.

The Icasa Amendment Bill, which allows for the principle of the separation
of powers, provides for the change in the appointment procedures of the
councillors. According to the latest draft emanating from this House, the
Minister will appoint a panel that will conduct the process of appointing
the councillors and make recommendations to the Minister, who will then
appoint the panel.

The panel includes two representatives from Parliament. This will be a
shorter process than before but it will be transparent. The proposed
appointment takes into consideration some of these issues, which may be
raised as constitutional matters in the body that regulates broadcasting.
This would arise, for example, with reference to section 192 of the
Constitution.

This Bill and its new appointment procedures, does not interfere with the
independence of regulating broadcasting content and this is whether it is
radio, television, Internet or anything else.

The amending Bill provides for the establishing of the postal regulator
within Icasa, which regulator is currently located within the Department of
Communications. The amending Bill also provides for the enforcement of the
postal regulations by Icasa. Further, the amending Bill empowers Icasa to
investigate better and more efficiently and resolve consumer complaints and
noncompliance by licensees with regard to their obligations timeously by
establishing a complaints and compliance committee.

In addition, the amending Bill recognises the delays in resolving consumer
complaints and disputes among industry players, used as an effective
strategy to thwart competition and gain unfair advantage in a competitive
market. Therefore, the Bill requires that Icasa creates an investigating
unit as well as a complaints and compliance committee to investigate and
resolve consumer complaints timeously.
The Icasa Amendment Bill consolidates the powers of Icasa to conduct
enquiries formally contained in other Acts, including the treatment of
confidential information obtained in the course of such enquiries.

The Bill requires compliance with decisions and orders issued under the
powers granted to Icasa and makes noncompliance an offence with serious
consequences and this did not use to be the case.

Finally, the amending Bill recognises the Broadcasting Act, the Sentech Act
and the Icasa Act together with this new convergence law that we call the
Electronic Communications Bill, which will later be an Act, but they must
all work together in this converged environment. Accordingly, it resolves
conflicts that may arise among the various Acts by creating a hierarchy
within the various Acts for interpretation purposes.

Given the above challenges that Icasa will now face the amending Bill
provides for a consultative mechanism for the development of the Icasa
budget, which will more realistically reflect the financial needs of the
Regulator for a given period. The Minister will consult with the Minister
of Finance for any additional funding.

I wish to take this opportunity to express appreciation to all members of
the committee of the NCOP as well as the National Assembly who have worked
very hard to make sure that we can pass these Bills this year. Therefore, I
would like to say I hope that after the good work that the committee has
done, I can urge members please to adopt this Bill. Thank you very much.

Ms M P THEMBA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, allow me to
start by congratulating the government on its participation in the World
Summit on the Information Society, which was convened in Tunis last month.
The aim of the summit was to tackle the problem of the digital divide and,
most importantly, to harness the potential of ICT to drive the economic and
social development of countries. The Tunis commitment and the proposed
agenda for the information society is confirmation that ICT is central to
development and should be given priority.

The rapid technological changes and the ICT global pressures cannot be
ignored. South Africa, like any country, is faced with challenges and to
address some of these challenges the government deemed it necessary to
introduce radical changes within the ICT sector.

The introduction of the Electronic Communications Bill, previously known as
the Convergence Bill, and the introduction of the Icasa Amendment Bill is
without doubt a milestone in the development of our people and the nation.
It is without doubt that these pieces of legislation will bring forth
dramatic changes and, most importantly, contribute towards the achievement
of an accelerated shared growth with its target of six percent.

Both these Bills will undoubtedly contribute towards the achievement of the
people-centred, inclusive development-oriented and non-discriminatory
information society. These pieces of legislation were negotiated through a
process with a multistakeholder approach, which included the participation
of industry, civil society and government, including Cabinet, and this
emphasises our country’s democratic principles of consultation and
inclusive participation. The sensitising and educating of our people on
these important pieces of legislation remain vital.

The Electronic Communications Bill has been introduced with the aim of
clarifying the legal and regulatory framework, which allows for the
convergence of technologies and services that have been previously
developed and regulated separately. In other words, the Electronic
Communications Bill crosses the existing boundaries between the
broadcasting and the telecommunications sector. This is long overdue given
the considerable public interest.

The Icasa Amendment Bill has been introduced with the intention of
consolidating certain powers and duties of the regulator. The impact and
importance of Icasa is fundamental to the development of the ICT sector.
The government, through the Department of Communications, has sworn its
commitment in building and positioning the regulator and, most importantly,
addressing some of the challenges facing Icasa, hence the introduction of
the Icasa Amendment Bill.

I want to put on record and I want to register that the amendments to this
Bill by the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises seek to place
the central role of Parliament in ratifying the appointment of councillors
to Icasa, not, as the Business Day said, that the officials of the
Department of Communications campaigned to the committee to rip off the
central role played by Parliament. When we talk of Parliament we talk of
both Houses, the NCOP and the NA, hence we are emphasising the fact that
our amendments seek to place on record the central role of Parliament in
ratifying the appointment of councillors to Icasa. So Parliament, the NCOP
and the NA, will take part.

Allow me to indicate that these pieces of legislation apply to ordinary
citizens of this country and therefore the impact will be felt across the
entire country, including those located in the second economy. The impact
of the legislation on communities, including the rural masses, will be
through the promotion of vigorous and effective competition within the ICT
sector.
Competition provides a consumer with a choice and issues such as
preselection, which is emphasised in the Electronic Communications Bill,
will allow people to have access to communications services of their
choice. The mandate of Icasa is to serve and protect consumers and Chapter
12 of the Electronic Communications Bill deals with consumer issues, which
Comrade Gamede will talk about.

The Electronic Communications Bill promotes the empowerment of historically
disadvantaged people with particular attention to women and people with
disabilities. Through the SMMEs marginalised groups are prioritised and the
regulation on a code of conduct regarding people with disabilities will be
prescribed and made applicable to licensees.

Comrade Gamede will also talk about Chapter 14 of the Electronic
Communications Bill, which emphasises the importance of bridging the
digital divide through universal services access. The continued existence
of the universal agency and universal fund is emphasised and also confirms
the government’s commitment to ensuring that rural communities are
prioritised and taken seriously.

Lastly, it is important to note other important aspects covered by the
legislation, such as the establishment of the public emergency centres,
which will be known as the 112 emergency centre; this is critical for
communities since this means that people will be able to access the same
number for any emergency, unlike previously, when people were faced with
many numbers.

In conclusion, one would like to emphasise the fact that the past year has
been a very interesting year in the history of the ICT sector. We have
witnessed the licensing of the underservice-area licensees, the ministerial
determination and last Friday a historic licensing of the SNO. It is
without doubt that the country is moving forward and aligning itself with
technological changes.

The committee supports the Electronic Communications Bill without
amendments and the Icasa Amendment Bill with proposed amendments from the
select committee. I urge this House to support these Bills. I also would
like to, once again, thank the Minister, the department and all the members
for their hard work. Well done. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, at the start I would like to say that owing
to unavoidable and unforeseen circumstances my colleague Su Chen and I
could not attend the Icasa briefing, but I was thoroughly briefed by the
spokesperson in the National Assembly and the portfolio committee. We have
dealt with this issue for the past seven years, and not only had one
briefing or two meetings on the issue.

To quote Tony Leon in his latest weekly newsletter SA Today: “Parliament
has kowtowed before the executive on every occasion that has mattered this
past year.” Unfortunately, this disease of deference to the executive has
now spread from the National Assembly to this House.

’n Voorbeeld hiervan is ’n uiters belangrike wysiging aan die
Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Onafhanklike Kommunikasiegesag van SA, wat
ongedaan gemaak is deur die Gekose Komitee op Arbeid en Openbare
Ondernemings.

In sy oorsponklike gedaante het die wetsontwerp die Parlement se
bevoegdheid om OKGSA-raadslede te kies, weggeneem, en die bevoegdheid
toegeken aan ’n paneel wat regstreeks deur die Minister aangestel word.

Die DA het dit verwerp en ’n alternatief aan die hand gedoen wat sou sorg
dat die Nasionale Vergadering en die Parlement, in plaas van die Minister,
die raadgewende paneel kies. Die Nasionale Vergadering sou ook oor die
finale lys name kon stem. Dit wou voorkom of die ANC hierdie kompromie in
die Nasionale Vergadering aanvaar het.

Die NRVP se Gekose Komitee op Arbeid en Openbare Ondernemings het egter in
sy wysheid besluit om die Nasionale Vergadering se besluit te verwerp en
die oorspronklike bepalings in die wetsontwerp weer in te stel. Die komitee
het selfs voorgestel dat die Minister die bevoegdheid moet hê om OKGSA-
raadslede te ontslaan en aan te stel.

Die afwenteling van bevoegdhede op die Minister sou nie net OKGSA se
politieke onafhanklikheid, wat in die Grondwet verskans is, in die gedrang
bring nie, maar sou nog ’n stap op die pad na ’n rubberstempelparlement
wees. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[An example of this is the crucial amendment to the Independent
Communications Authority of SA Amendment Bill, which was negatived by the
Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises.

In its initial format the Bill withdrew Parliament’s powers to elect the
members of the Icasa Board and furnished a panel directly appointed by the
Minister with these powers.

The DA rejected this and recommended an alternative that would ensure that
the National Assembly and Parliament elect the advisory panel, instead of
the Minister. The National Assembly would also be able to vote on the final
list of names. It would appear as if the ANC accepted this compromise in
the National Assembly.

The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises of the National
Council of Provinces, however, in its wisdom decided to reject the decision
of the National Assembly and to reintroduce the initial provisions of the
Bill. The committee even suggested that the Minister should have the powers
to discharge or appoint members of the Icasa Board.

The devolution of powers to the Minister would not only implicate Icasa’s
political independence, which is entrenched in the Constitution, but would
just be another step on the road to becoming a rubber-stamp Parliament.]

The issue of independence of the regulator has been a subject of dispute
since 1998 when President Mandela, at our request, sent the broadcasting
Bill back to the National Assembly to address the DA’s objection to the
infringement of the Independent Regulator.

Since then it has been the subject of dispute repeatedly, yet this House
overturned many weeks of deliberation in the portfolio committee, thereby
overturning their carefully wrought compromise in a single sitting at the
behest of the Department of Communications.

Hierdie selfde Huis het in die vorm van die Gesamentlike Konstitusionele
Hersieningskomitee, saam met die Nasionale Vergadering, aanbeveel dat ons
die voorstel ondersoek dat artikel 192 van die Grondwet verander behoort te
word, sodat telekommunikasie gevoeg word by die uitsaaiwese vir
onafhanklike regulering. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[This very same House, through the Joint Constitutional Review Committee,
together with the National Assembly, proposed that we investigated the
suggestion that section 192 of the Constitution should be amended in order
to include telecommunications in the independent regulation of
broadcasting.]

In other words, both Houses of Parliament think it is appropriate to
consider augmenting the constitutional independence of Icasa, not eroding
it.

Interestingly enough, the recommendation by the Joint Committee on
Constitutional Review . . .

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I am not sure whether the
interpretation was correct. I would just like to check with the member
whether she would agree with the interpretation that the NCOP is the
stepchild of the NA. I just want to get clarity on that.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: That is not what I said, Chairperson, and that’s not a
point of order either.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: She’s saying that she didn’t say that the
NCOP is the stepchild of the NA. Continue, hon member.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Thank you. Interestingly enough, the recommendation by
the Joint Committee on Constitutional Review was debated at the same time
that the National Assembly passed the Electronic Communications Bill and
the Icasa Amendment Bill – on 3 November. Unfortunately, the achievements
of the Electronic Communications Bill, which has been rewritten from start
to finish and with which we are very pleased, are eroded by what the NCOP
has done with the independence of the regulator.

The regulator presides over the new regulation regime created by the
Electronic Communications Bill. Also, by approving the amendments of the
NCOP committee today, we, as South Africa, move away from the direction the
rest of this continent is taking. I quote from a Constitutional Court
judgment, Independent Electoral Commission v Langeberg Municipality:


  Our Constitution has created institutions, such as the commission, that
  perform their functions in terms of national legislation, but are not
  subject to national executive control. The very reason the Constitution
  created the commission and other Chapter 9 bodies was so that they should
  be and manifestly be seen to be outside government.


It is noteworthy that the Constitutional Court did not see fit to
distinguish between the independent authority to regulate broadcasting and
other Chapter 9 institutions in respect of the nature of the independence
these institutions enjoy.

Therefore, the DA will oppose the Icasa Bill and support the Electronic
Communications Bill. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo, Ngqongqoshe, malungu ahloniphekile akhona,
ngingakaqali nje ukukhuluma amanye amalungu ahloniphekile ePhalamende kuye
kube khona angakwazi uma kwenzeka ngelinye ilanga angabi khona
emhlanganweni. Ukulungisa okukodwa nje umhlonishwa u-Terblanche wayekhona
emhlanganweni sizokhuluma ngoMthethosivivinywa we-Icasa kodwa wafika emva
kwesikhathi njengokujwayelekile. Emva kwalokho washeshe wahamba. Wafika nje
ephethe ipheshana elinemibuzo emva kwalokho wabuza, wabuza wase ehamba.
[Uhleko.] Usekhohliwe-ke manje ukuthi wayekhona emhlanganweni. Uthi
wayengekho.

Okwesibili uMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe asingawenzi indlu noma indawo
lapho okuzothi uma izinto zingaphumelanga kwiSishiyamthetho sikaZwelonke
bese zilethwa kuMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe. UMkhandlu kaZwelonke
weziFundazwe yingxenye yePhalamende efanayo futhi neSishiyamthetho
sikaZwelonke. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, Minister, hon members present here, before I
start, there are some things that other hon members of Parliament don’t get
if they are not present in meetings. On a point of correction, hon
Terblanche was present in a meeting where we were discussing the Icasa
Amendment Bill, but as usual she arrived late. She also left immediately.
She came with a piece of paper with questions. Then she asked her questions
and left. [Laughter.] She has forgotten that she was present at that
meeting. She is saying that she was not present.

Secondly, let us not make the National Council of Provinces a House or a
Place where we bring issues that failed in the National Assembly. The
National Council of Provinces is part of Parliament, just like the National
Assembly.]

In my speech I’ll deal with certain issues, one of them being the consumer
issue. The Bill reinforces and asserts the importance of consumer issues in
the communications industry. It provides for the regulator to prescribe
regulations, setting out a code of conduct for licensees as they provide a
service to the public. It can also set minimum standards for end-users and
subscriber-service charters. It provides for complaint procedure and
remedies to address complaints.

Moreover, the authority is compelled to establish a consumer advisory
panel, which will advise it on matters relating to consumer issues. This is
very good as it gives the consumer more leverage, and we are confident this
will result in better services for consumers in the future.

There are issues that are general, those that talk about E-rates, offences
and penalties. These issues are covered in Chapter 13 of the Bill.
Regarding the E-rate, this means that all public schools – now for the
first time with this ANC-led government – and all public further education
and training institutions will be able to access Internet services at a
minimum discounted rate of 50%. This discount applies, for example, to
connectivity to the Internet, and to equipment used for and in association
with such connectivity, as well as to all calls made to Internet service
providers.

Chapter 14 of the Electronic Communications Bill deals with the universal
services and access agency, as the ANC-led government recognises ICTs as
critical in rolling out services, especially to poor people in rural areas.
As part of our Reconstruction and Development Programme, this agency has a
very important function in regards to promoting universal service and
access. Under this Bill, the Universal Service Fund will continue to exist
but will now be renamed the Universal Service and Access Fund. Some of the
functions of this fund are to help needy people with the costs involved in
providing them with broadcasting and electronic communications services.

The licensees described in Chapter 3 will also now contribute no more than
1% of their annual turnover to this fund, and this will be regulated by the
authority. However, broadcasting service licensees can offset their Media
Development and Diversity Agency, MDDA, contributions against their
prescribed annual contributions.

Finally, the transitional provisions, which are provided for in Chapter 15,
provide for the validity of all current licences until they are converted.
So, the fear that is being talked about that some people will lose their
licences is unfounded.

These licences can be converted by the authority between 24 and 30 months
after the commencement of this Act. Licences will also be issued on no less
favourable terms than existing licenses. Within 30 days of this Bill
becoming law, the authority must also publish a schedule of how it plans to
undertake the licence conversion.

The ANC supports this Bill as we know that it will offer exciting
opportunities for both the industry and consumers. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J SIBIYA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, comrades, colleagues, ladies
and gentlemen, before I get down to my speech, let me refer to some of the
things that have been said by the hon Ms Terblanche. Our committee did not
confer any powers to the hon Minister - she knows that. It only emphasised
her duties.

The sin, which is alleged to have been committed by the committee, was to
amend the Bill where it was referring to Parliament as consisting of the NA
only. Parliament consists of two Houses, the National Assembly, as well as
the National Council of Provinces. There is no way in which the NCOP, on
its own, can confer powers to the Minister. It did not happen. Thank you.
[Laughter.]

The Bill under discussion today does seek to promote convergence in
broadcasting, as our chairperson, hon Priscilla Themba, has said earlier
on. Not only that, but also to provide for broadcasting services,
competition matters as well as granting of new licences and social
responsibilities, amongst others.

In keeping with its primary objectives of promoting, facilitating and
regulating electronic communication in the Republic of South Africa in the
interest of the public, the Bill envisages that the authority, in
considering the grant of a new public broadcasting service licence, and
inconsistent with principles initiated in section 2, take into account the
following:  Firstly, the demand for the proposed broadcasting service
within the proposed licensed area. Secondly, the need for the proposed
service within such area, having regard to broadcasting services already
existing in that area. Thirdly, the technical quality of the proposed
broadcasting service in regard to developments in broadcasting technology.

In our view, consideration of and adherence to above requirements will
enable the authority to determine whether or not the proposed broadcasting
service is necessary or otherwise. It will also help to check whether the
proposed broadcasting service is a step forward, a step backwards, or a
modern-time facility in as far as the development of technology in the
broadcasting field is concerned.

The question of granting of community broadcasting service licenses will be
a duty of the authority to ensure that the proposed broadcasting service is
not controlled by a profit-making entity, and that the applicant intends to
serve the interests of the relevant community, whereby members of such a
community participate in the selection and provision of programmes to be
broadcast in the course of such broadcasting service.

These requirements definitely enable the communities concerned to gain
control of what goes on in the proposed broadcasting service. It also is in
line with the nitty-gritty of the first clause of our sacred document, the
Freedom Charter, which says that the people shall govern.

I say so because governing, in a broader sense, is not only to make and
enforce laws, but also to determine what is better for us, and to formulate
it, as well as to communicate it to the broad masses.

The Bill comes out very clearly on prohibiting granting of broadcasting
service licenses to party-political entities, while commercial broadcasting
service licenses will be granted if the applicant, among others, has not
before been convicted of an offence in terms of this Act or the related
legislation. The government, through this Bill, foresees great
opportunities of beneficiation accruing to our people in this multipronged
approach, while elements hostile to our society will have their wings
clipped – and this is a very big step forward. It also erodes the vast
monopoly the media has had in this country.

On competition matters, the Bill reflects the commitment of our ANC-led
government to fair play and a level field. The authority guarding fair
competition will keep in check broadcasting service licence holders to
determine if they have been engaged in or if they intend to be engaged in
any activity likely to substantially prevent or lessen competition by
giving undue preference to or causing undue discrimination against any
other licence providing broadcasting services. On the regulation part of
it, the Bill demands that the authority makes regulations, prescribing a
numbering plan and that it maintains and manages a central numbering
database system. From the above it is clear that the Bill, if passed, will
go a long way to contribute to the meaningful involvement of our people in
broadcasting services, whereby jobs will be created and skills will be
transferred and some control of broadcasting service programmes will be in
the hands of our people.


Dames en here, dit sal baie waardeer word as hierdie agbare Huis hierdie
belangrike wetgewing steun. Ek weet dat die Wes-Kaap dit sal steun.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Ladies and gentlemen, it would be appreciated if this august House would
support this important legislation. I know that the Western Cape will
support it.]

The ANC unreservedly supports this Bill and urges this august House to do
the same. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Agb Voorsitter, kan ek miskien vir die agb
Terblanche iets sê wat sy sal leer, nie net van die ANC nie, maar ook die
geskiedenis, oor waar hierdie twee Huise vandaan kom. Soos baie van die
lede hier gesê het . . . [Hon Chairperson, may I perhaps tell the hon
Terblanche something that she will learn from not only the ANC, but also
from the history of the origins of these two Houses. As many of the members
have indicated here . . . ]

 . . . the NCOP makes its decisions according to what it believes. It is
not a rubber stamp for the NA or a rubber stamp for the Minister either. We
need to understand this and we cannot really start from our fears of the
past. Everyone knows that when we became democratic, there were certain
areas where we said, do we have to fight over this when it is clear that
there is no trust between others and us. We made certain compromises. One
of the comprises that we made . . . We never actually made it totally clear
in some cases, not all cases, of what the roles are of the legislatures the
executive and the judiciary.  I would like to remind Ms Terblanche that the
judiciary made a decision, for example, about nevirapine, a decision that
was a policy decision. They don’t have the capacity to decide, they just
know what others tell them about the role of nevirapine. Two years later,
when certain issues were being raised at those international forums, which
had promoted nevirapine before, we were stuck with a decision by the
judiciary saying that we must give nevirapine. We now had to say . . .
[Interjections.]

Jy verstaan dit nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Wat ons toe gedoen het, was om te
sê: Laat ons seker maak, die rol van die geregtelike gesag is dat . . .
[You don’t understand it. [Interjections.] What we decided then was to say:
let us determine the role of the judiciary is that . . .]

. . . the legislature does this, the executive does this and don’t conflate
the issues. I will give examples of what can actually be the consequences
of the previous dispensation. If any of the councillors or any of the SABC
board members that might have misbehaved . . . I had no powers. You can’t
have your cake and eat it. I had no powers, as Minister, to do anything.
The powers would be vested in the President and the President said: You
made me appoint these people, what can I do? I have no authority to sack
this person. On what basis can I do that? Yet, everyone in the Assembly
would say: Minister, come and answer. Now I must go and do so on the basis
of the fact that the Minister must stay away from it. She must not go and
interfere in it. Yet, when accountability has to be placed, accountability
is on the Minister. It is really schizophrenic. Let us make up our minds.
It is not an easy thing to do, but we have all gained experience from what
was before and what is now.

The second thing is: If you read section 192 - and we have read and reread
it - Icasa as a chapter 9 institution is not dealt with in the Constitution
as is the case with other chapter 9 institutions. It says: “Establish or
put in motion legislation for Icasa.” We must actually make sure of the
independence of Icasa regarding the regulation of broadcasting. At the time
we were faced with an SABC, which was this big monopolistic thing that was
said would be a propaganda tool for the ANC and so on. We have since then
established more than 38 community radio stations. Now you have
broadcasting over the Internet. Some of it is pornographic; some of it is
not. It is no longer that same old SABC. Icasa has to regulate the content
and the Minister does not interfere with the regulation of the content.
That is what this Bill does. It sets out clearly in the communications
section of the Bill what the Minister must do, what Icasa must do . . .

 . . . en ek ken my plek. Ek gaan krap nie waar dit nie jeuk nie. [Gelag.]
Dit doen ek nooit nie. In laaste jare het ons gesien hoe ek nooit gaan krap
in Icasa se sake of in die SABC se sake nie. [ . . . and I know my place. I
will not meddle in other people’s affairs. [Laughter.] I never do that.
These past years we have seen that I never interfere in the matters of
Icasa and the SABC.]

I only did so when there were matters that affected me as the Minister who
must oversee. That is the only time that I do that. This Bill now very
clearly establishes what is possible. What is important is that there is a
public process and I hope you read the Bill properly. There is a public
process for the appointment. It is not just the Minister who goes around
and says . . .

O, dié een is my vriend. Van der Merwe, kom jy. Ek sien ek sal op jou kop
kan dans. Miskien mevrou So-en-So; jy is ’n vrou en ek het ’n vrou nodig.
Ek hou van jou of ek hou nie van jou nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Oh, this one is my friend. Van der Merwe, you come. I can see that I will
be able to lead you by the nose. Maybe Mrs So and So; you are a woman and I
need a woman. I like you or I don’t like you.]

It sets up a public process, which everybody would follow and a
recommendation would be made to the Minister. The Bill says clearly what
kinds of people must be appointed; people who are in the legal field;
people who know the electronic communications area and people from the
industry. They know what it is that is needed. People from the community,
as well as people from Parliament, so that Parliament can also say: We were
there. We sat down and we saw how this was done. The Minister cannot
currently sack but the Minister cannot evaluate the performance either.
What has happened is that when the performance of a councillor is not very
good, it is the chairperson and not the Minister who sets up an independent
panel to evaluate the lack of performance or behaviour of that particular
councillor and then makes recommendations to the Minister. What more do we
want as South Africans for the sake of transparency?

“Om te hoor dat ons nie soos ander lande op die kontinent is nie . . .” [To
hear that we are not like other countries on the continent . . .] I was
shocked. I said:

Ek sit dan in al hierdie konferensies en het almal se wette gelees. Gaan na
enige plek toe. Gaan Nigerië toe. Gaan Algerië toe. Gaan Ghana toe. Ons
wette is steeds die beste. [Applous.] Ons land is nog steeds die beste
land. Gaan Amerika toe. Gaan Engeland toe. Gaan Frankryk toe en dan sal ons
regtig sien. Vergeet wat hulle sê, maar as jy so oopmaak, dan sien jy hoe
kom die wurms uit. Ons wet is die beste. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[I go to all these conferences and read everyone’s laws. Go to any place.
Go to Nigeria. Go to Algeria. Go to Ghana. Our laws are still the best.
[Applause.] This is still the best country. Go to America. Go to England.
Go to France and then we will really see. Forget about what they are
saying, because if you open it up like this you will see the worms crawling
out. Our law is the best.]

Let the Minister not have the powers to just do what she wants. These
powers are such that even you can actually nominate now. You could not do
that before. Now you can nominate your party members if you so wish. I
wouldn’t mind but when the list comes to me, I must make sure that it
follows the procedures that were put in place.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, may I request that you make a
ruling in terms of Rule 33 of this House, which says that a member may not
be interrupted while speaking. In particular, I think it is not in terms of
African culture for a young girl to shout at an elderly person, and that
just after 16 days of activism; it is not good. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, hon Chief Whip. Hon members,
could you please behave? Hon Terblanche, could you please listen to the
Minister? Hon Krumbock, could you please keep quiet and listen to what the
Minister is saying?

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Why is it that the Chief Whip says that in terms of
African culture a young girl can’t do what the member is doing. I thought
we were all equal in this House, and I thought the Constitution actually
guaranteed that?
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: The Chief Whip was referring to African
culture, and he didn’t say specifically that Ms Terblanche is a girl.
Continue, hon Minister. [Interjections.] Hon Watson?

Mr A WATSON: If your House would give me a chance, I would address you,
Madam Chair.

The Chief Whip, apart from being out of order himself, specifically said, “
. . . especially as Ms Terblanche is a young girl she should know that in
the African culture . . . ” and that is a sexist remark and he must
withdraw it, please.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Watson, I will check the Hansard on that
matter and rule on it later. Continue, hon Minister.

It is quite clear from what I have said, that we must move away from the
fear that we have about those who govern. Yes, we must have oversight and
not let them have anything easily. Oversight is extremely important and we
made sure that in the Bill oversight can be exercised by Parliament. The
second thing is that when we look at some of the issues, we realised they
did not belong in this Bill and that we had to go back and say what it is
that we would have to do with regard to the SABC in order to have what is
called “an SABC Act” and not a broad thing called the Broadcasting Act.
Broadcasting in its very nature has now changed. It comes into our house in
numerous ways, which the Minister certainly does not want to control. She
would never be able to control it. On the content of that, the regulator
must be the one that has control. It is stated very clearly in the Act and
therefore makes it possible to say it conforms to the constitutional
provision of the independence of the regulator regarding broadcasting
content.

With regard to Internet governance, members will recall how a year or two
ago, we were scolded in the media on the issue of dot-za, namely that it
belongs to us. Today the world says that Internet governance cannot be
placed in one country only, but according to the laws of one specific state
in that particular country. Today those very people who had said it is not
possible . . . “Ons sal dit doen soos ons dit moet doen.” [We will do it
like we are supposed to do it.]

We had found people who had objected to that Bill working with us and for
the last 18 months you haven’t heard a thing about a problem with the dot-
za domain name. They are monitoring it. They are doing what they should do,
despite the fact that we are going ahead. Can we take lessons from own
experiences to say: That “gogga” [bug] that we were afraid of was actually
just a “gogga” that did not exist. I think, in this particular case, that
the “gogga” the DA is presenting does not exist. Internet governance is
something that we have to do in the manner that suits our values, our
cultures and our religions. These are complicated matters. We want to make
sure of how can we entrench Icasa’s independence. The directions to the
continent are given by us. The continent looks at us, as was shown at the
WSIS. It was South Africa that saved the summit, so that it was success,
and the Tunisians have to thank us for that. A lot of what we were putting
into the world summit on information process is part of the things that we
were discussing here and what we are now saying, we will entrench.

Thank you to the members who have actually been able to read this law. My
first statement was really just an overview, allowing for members of this
House so that I could actually hear what they had to say. I have been
enlightened about how well they understood and therefore were not rubber
stamps of the committee, took back what they thought was a good proposal to
the committee, and I am sure that the committee, when it meets, should be
able to say: Members of the NCOP exercised their minds on both Bills,
making sure that whatever amendments they had suggested could be carried.

There are a number of things that we did with regard to this Bill. We live
in a society that has not completely outlived the ravages of apartheid,
particularly having first and second economies. The IT sector is still
squarely located in the first economy. It is time that we say: What happens
to the people, particularly the ones in the rural areas, matters.  We are
making sure that this sector will not be a preserve for those that already
have. We must make sure that it is not only a question of access, but also
of making sure that people participate, whether as network people, as
owners of telecommunications, or broadcasting services, so that it can be
enhanced by this Bill. This Bill makes that possible. What we have also
done is to make sure that the role of women, particularly women in the
second economy, are clearly supported by what we do. As the ANC in
particular, we have said that South Africa belongs to all of us and not
only to some of us. I’d hope that you would support the two Bills, the
second one with the amendments that have been suggested here, because we
truly want to create a South Africa that belongs to all of us and not only
to some of us. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.


                            PRECIOUS METALS BILL


                          (Consideration of Report)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I am speaking on behalf of the hon Nosipo, the
Chairperson of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs. Hon
Minister, hon Deputy Minister and hon members, on 1 December 2005 the
Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs met to discuss the
Precious Metals Bill, a Section 75 Bill, as referred to it by the NA for
concurrence. All the issues in this Bill are currently regulated through
Chapter 16 of the Mining Rights Act and the changes brought to us in the
form of this Bill have been necessitated by the realisation that less
beneficiation has taken place in the past in the sectors governed by this
Bill, namely the gold and platinum metal sectors, regardless of the fact
that South Africa is well endowed with both these minerals. South Africa
has a reserve base of approximately 87% of platinum group metals and 40,7%
of gold and we are the number one producers of both these commodities, and
at approximately 59% and 14% respectively on the supply side.

During a time when jobs in the mining sector, and especially in the gold
sector, are diminishing, it should be a priority for us to support this
Bill as it will help us in the development of the downstream industry, thus
creating more new jobs. This will enable us to compete and to do much
better than the other manufacturing countries that do not even mine these
resources. These countries have used our resources to create much-needed
jobs in their countries and we end up buying those end products from them.
It is high time that the reverse happens, as these are our resources, given
to us by mother nature.

The object of the Bill is to provide for the acquisition, possession,
smelting, beneficiation, use and disposal of precious metals. The Bill
therefore seeks to bring about clarity on the definition of unwrought
precious metals as contained in the Mining Rights Act of 1967, as the
previous definition had shortcomings. There is now a clear distinction
between unwrought precious metals and semi-fabricated precious metals. This
allows for legislation that is less stringent regarding semi-fabricated
precious metals, as well as less stringent control measures, which will
lead to increased beneficiation.

The Bill deregulates the position of silver as it is mined in minute
quantities in South Africa, mainly as a by-product and its value is in the
order of $10, whilst precious metals and gold are in the order of hundreds
of dollars. Therefore the Bill makes silver easily accessible for use in
the jewellery manufacturing industry by deregulating it.

Every applicant will be required to comply with the objectives of this
Bill, such as broad-based socioeconomic empowerment. Local beneficiation is
not to be compromised by international demand so as to ensure broad
participation throughout the value chain.

The introduction of the beneficiation licence is based on the recognition
of industries other than the jewellery manufacturing industry that use
unwrought as well as semi-fabricated precious metals. Industries that will
derive benefit from this licence will be IT, avionics and electronics
industries which do not hold a refining license, but may work with those
unwrought precious metals as semi-fabricated precious metals. The licence
will be issued for a period of ten years, with a possibility of renewals.

In conclusion, the above are the critical issues that are addressed by this
Bill, as supported by the select committee. However, I think it is worth
reminding you that about the minor consequential changes, as suggested by
the Department of Minerals and Energy and the state law advisors, contained
in the B-part of the Bill, we concurred, and we referred the Bill to the NA
for ratification of those amendments.

I would therefore like to ask the House to confirm our concurrence with the
Precious Metals Bill, with those consequential amendments and refer the
Bill to the NA for endorsement.

On behalf of the committee, I would like to thank the Department of
Minerals and Energy, the Minister, Mr Mkomezulu and Mr Mnonela. We wish you
all the best. Merry Christmas and a prosperous New Year.

We support the Precious Metals Amendment Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Declaration of vote:

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Although the intent expressed in the Bill to make South
Africa a major international minerals beneficiation country, in order to
develop the local beneficiation industry in South Africa this Bill, with
the accompanying Diamond Amendment Bill, will not ensure this. Nor will it
ensure the offset in the loss of jobs expected in the production sector
which is currently believed to provide 417 000 workers with employment.

The wide and unfettered discretion the Minister is furnished with is
arguably unconstitutional in the light of the lack of guidance and criteria
set in the Bill, in terms of which the Minister is expected to exercise her
discretion. The Bill is therefore likely to be counterproductive and to
affect beneficiation negatively. The DA will therefore be opposing the
Bill.

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                           DIAMONDS AMENDMENT BILL

                       DIAMONDS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL

                         (Consideration of Reports)

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMMITTEES: Order, hon members. I’ve been informed that
there will be one speakers’ list for both the fifth and sixth Orders of the
Day.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Hon Chairperson, colleagues, hon
members, hon Deputy Minister, I table before you today the most important
Bills that my department has introduced in the mining sector since the
Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act of 2002 was passed. Those
two Bills are the Diamonds Amendment Bill and the Diamonds Second Amendment
Bill.

We are aware of the important role mining has played in South Africa in
every respect: politically, socially and economically. Diamond mining as
the pioneer of organised mining in South Africa was the forerunner of the
other forms of mining. And its role in our country has, therefore, been
very significant.

Through these Bills, we are intending to increase the contribution that
diamonds will make to our economy by increasing downstream activity. The
problem of being overreliant on resource mining is typified by what we see
in Kimberley today. Kimberley is internationally recognised for its
contribution to diamond production. Yet we see how the community suffers
when the once lucrative mines are decommissioned because of low resources
and inaccessible deposits.

No meaningful development took place in Kimberley whilst mining was
happening, when, by all accounts, Kimberley had the potential to become one
of the wealthiest cities in the world. Whilst we still have resources in
the ground, we need to ensure that we maximise the benefits that they can
bring, particularly to towns that are located close to these mining
operations.

This piece of legislation seeks to create the framework for downstream
value addition and investment in the diamond-manufacturing sector. It also
forms part of the broader efforts of the government to bring development
opportunities to provincial economies and to promote a more equitable
spread of economic activity.

It is clear from my interaction with Ministers from other African countries
that we are not alone in our frustrations with the divorce of diamond
mining from the other more lucrative aspects of the industry. The positive
changes taking place on the African continent allow us to find ways of
exploring the downstream side of the diamond industry.

There are many synergies to be gained from co-operation with other African
diamond-producers in areas such as aggregation, developing a unique
regional brand, style specialisation and marketing, amongst other things.

It is necessary for these countries also to look at transforming this
industry by passing the relevant legislation that will enable them not only
to thrive on cutting and polishing African diamonds in Africa, but also to
see diamonds moving from the mines to the fingers of consumers.

Chairperson, I would like to touch briefly on the responses that we got
from the public hearings that were held subsequent to the tabling of this
Bill. During the public hearings in the parliamentary portfolio committee,
and through the media, there were a number of concerns with regard to this
Bill. Some of these include concerns that South Africans do not have the
ability to cut, polish and manufacture jewellery from the diamonds that we
mine.

We have heard that it is not economically viable to cut and polish small
diamonds in South Africa, and that diamond-producing countries should not
become polishers and manufacturers, but should rather concentrate on the
mining activities as such, which produce the diamonds.

We have listened to these concerns, and some of them have been dealt with
in the amendments that followed the tabling of this Bill. But I think we
should rather see these concerns as challenges for both government and the
private sector that need to be overcome as the dangers of pursuing an
approach that does not encompass the entire value chain would ultimately
lead to underdevelopment of our economy.

On the issue of skills and the ability of South Africans to engage
effectively in the downstream side of this industry, we recognise where we
come from and we know that training will need to take place, and greater
levels of investment are going to be required. We are committed to ensuring
that our people receive the required training and skills development so
that the necessary competences can be acquired.

Fortunately, we have been in discussions with major players from the major
diamond centres to support our skills development programme, and as we
speak some of our people who are interested - I think most of them were
women - have gone overseas. They have gone to Antwerp to acquire the skills
relating to how to manage a diamond-manufacturing factory.

We are also fortunate that some major players in the diamond industry have
been watching our developments with interest, with a view to investing in
downstream processing. Such investments, be they from India, Israel, New
York or Antwerp, will bring the latest technology and will be supported by
our own skills development framework.

Indeed, some companies are already making representations to my department,
indicating that they have the latest technology for cutting the smallest of
diamonds. We’ve been told that we don’t have the capacity to cut small
diamonds. Now these companies’ representatives are saying: “Minister, don’t
panic, the capacity is there, as well as the technology.”

We were also told, during the hearings, about the possible loss of
thousands of jobs on the production site should beneficiation be
encouraged. When this was said, members of Parliament questioned this
position and asked whether assurances could be given by the industry that
those jobs would be sustained, if this Bill was not passed.

The response, hon members, was: “No, there are no guarantees on this
front.” What we can guarantee is that through the successful implementation
of this piece of legislation, there will be job gains downstream.

Some of the concerns raised are nothing but myths that are created by
people who do not wish to see the status quo change. One such view, which
we would like to challenge, is the distinction between cuttables and
noncuttables, as we believe that this is a nonissue for now.

We have yet to be convinced that certain categories of rough diamonds
cannot be cut in South Africa. We would like to allow ourselves to compete
with Antwerp, and even the Indian centres. With investors bringing their
technology and expertise, I believe that in time we will be able to compete
successfully with established players in the industry.

We have seen that the Indian companies in the sector have followed diamonds
where they are, and I do not think there is anything stopping them from
following diamonds to South Africa, to cut and polish our diamonds here,
which will also see them bringing their technology. Therefore, until we
have proof that some diamonds are uncuttable in South Africa, we will not
discriminate.

The objectives of the Diamonds Amendment Bill are: To drive the
beneficiation of diamonds; to provide for local supply of diamonds to
ensure that diamonds are beneficiated here; and to ensure that cutters and
tool-makers can obtain regular supply of unpolished diamonds and thereby
create more jobs in the beneficiation industry.

With regards to this Bill, it establishes the State Diamond Trader, which
will acquire and supply unpolished diamonds to local diamond beneficiators
and promote the industry through the necessary research, support and
development, as deemed necessary from time to time.

I have to emphasise that the State Diamond Trader will set whatever portion
of the production cycle deemed to support local beneficiation at a
competitive market price. Because we are confident that we will not
compromise the producers, we have built in mechanisms to resolve disputes.

This Bill also establishes what we call a diamond export and exchange
centre, from where all rough diamonds are going to be exported. For control
purposes, they will be channelled so as to allow local producers to buy
them if they can utilise them. Here foreigners will also be allowed to
purchase the goods they want for export purposes. Under certain conditions,
such as when we have an oversupply in the country, rough diamonds could be
exported directly without being offered for purchase at the diamond export
and exchange centre.

The regulator has a right to declare any place a diamond export and
exchange centre, as it deems fit. Therefore, this is not a fixed place or
premises in Johannesburg, but could be anywhere in the country. We have
allowed this flexibility in order not to stifle the industry.

The regulatory function accompanying the aforementioned structures will be
conducted by the Diamond and Precious Metals Regulator. This structure will
replace the existing diamond board. In the principal Act an export duty was
proposed, which will operate as a deterrent against exporting unpolished
diamonds. This matter falls within the jurisdiction of the National
Treasury, which we are engaging with regard to the money Bill that they are
busy preparing. We were promised that this Bill would be ready to be tabled
in Parliament early next year.

When we come to the Diamonds Second Amendment Bill – I’m sure hon members
are aware that we are debating these two Bills at the same time - I would
like to say that . . .

. . . ufakelo lwezilungiso lwesibini kulo Mthetho uYilwayo beluyinxalenye
yezilungiso esithe sazenza ngempumelelo kwantlandlolo. Kambe ngelixa le
nkqubo yokubonisana noluntu, sacetyiswa ukuba yonke imiba ephathelene
norhwebo ngedayimane kufuneka isuswe kulo Mthetho uYilwayo owaziwa
njengeDiamonds Amendment Bill. Kwaye kufuneka ithatyathwe njengoMthetho
oYilwayo wecandelo 76.

Izilungiso ezikhoyo apha kulo Mthetho uYilwayo owaziwa njengeDiamonds
Second Amendment Bill neenguqu ezikhoyo ziya kwenza ukuba lo Mthetho
uYilwayo uhloniphe abantu ngokwesini, njengoko ngaphambili ubuthetha
ngamadoda odwa.

Ukudibanisa umsiki kunye nomenzi wezixhobo zokusika idayimane ukuba abe
ngumxhamli kwezeedayimane kwenzelwa ukuthintela abo bangenazo iilayisenisi
ekuncediseni abanazo ngexesha bethengisa iidayimane ezingamenyezeliswanga
nakuyiphi na indawo ezithengiswa kuyo. Oku sikwenzela ukunciphisa
ubuqhophololo bokumelwa kwabantu . . . “what we call fronting in English”.

Ukumiselwa kwexesha lokuba semthethweni kweelayisenisi kunye neziqinisekiso
kuyashukuxwa nako. Lo Mthetho uYilwayo umisela umlawuli weedayimane
nezinyithi zexabiso ukuba athathe indawo yebhodi yedayimane yeloMzantsi
Afrika ebikade isebenza. Umlawuli lowo uya kuphatha aphinde alawule yonke
imiba ephathelene nokuthengiswa nokungeniswa kwedayimane apha elizweni
kwakunye nokuthunyelwa kwayo phesheya.

Kananjalo, lo mlawuli uya kumisela amaziko okuthumela idayimane ngaphandle,
ajongane nomsebenzi wokutshintshwa kwemali yamanye amazwe ukulungiselela
ukuthengwa, ukuthengiswa, ukuthunyelwa ngaphandle nokungeniswa elizweni
kwedayimane yethu.

UMrhwebi weDayimani woMbuso uya kuba nelungelo lokuba abonelele
ngeedayimane ezingekamenyezeliswa kumsiki weedayimani, ze aphinde akhuthaze
ishishini leedayimane. Umba wokugqibela esiwufumana kolu lungiso lwesibini
ngowokuba uMphathiswa uya kumisela, ngamaxesha awahlukeneyo, ngokwazisa
kwiPhephandaba likaRhulumente ubungakanani ekhulwini beedayimani
ezivelisiweyo kumjikelo wemveliso ngokwemfuneko yosetyenziso lwayo ekhaya,
ubungakanani bokuthengwa kwayo ngumrhwebi karhulumente weedayimane.

Nanjengoko amalungu ezibonela, ezi nguqu ziinguqu ezimbalwa nezincinci
kakhulu ezenziwe nje ukufezekisa iinguqu eziya kwenza ukuba uphuhliso
lwedayimane yethu lube yimpumelelo. Ndiyazi kananjalo ukuba amalungu aza
kuzixhasa ezi nguqu siza nazo ngokubhekisele kulo mba. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[ . . . the second set of amendments to this Bill was part of the
amendments which we successfully made earlier. During the constituency
period we were advised that all matters relating to the diamond trade
should be removed from this Bill, which is known as the Diamonds Amendment
Bill. It has been classified as a section 76 Bill.

The amendments in the current Bill, which is known as the Diamonds Second
Amendment Bill, and the changes we are now making, recognise people in
terms of their gender, as before it only referred to men.

The integration of the cutter and the constructor of the diamond-cutting
equipment to be beneficiaries in the diamond industry is intended to
prevent those who do not have licences from assisting those who do have
them when selling unpolished diamonds to anyone anywhere that diamonds are
sold. We do this to minimise what we call “fronting”.

The duration of the validity of licences and permits is also under
discussion. This Bill gives the regulator of diamonds and precious metals
the authority to replace the Diamond Board of South Africa, which was in
operation. The regulator will control and manage all matters relating to
the trade in and importation of diamonds in the country, and also its
exportation overseas.

At the same time, the regulator will establish centres for exporting
diamonds to overseas countries, and will also monitor foreign exchange to
facilitate buying, selling, exporting and importing of our diamonds.

The State Diamond Trader will have the responsibility to provide unpolished
diamonds to the diamond cutter, and encourage the diamond industry. The
last issue which we find concerning this second amendment is that the
Minister will announce from time to time in the Government Gazette the
percentage of diamonds involved in the production circle, according to the
requirements for their use in the country, and the number bought by the
State Diamond Trader.

As members can see, these changes are very few and minor, and are just to
effect the changes that will make our diamond development a success. And I
know that members are going to support the changes we have come up with in
relation to this matter.]

In conclusion, let me say that our mining sector still has enormous
possibilities, and through Bills such as the Diamonds Amendment Bill and
the Diamonds Second Amendment Bill, we will achieve increased integration
of this sector with other facets of our economy. We will contribute towards
economic growth, equitable spread of economic activity and job creation.
Ndiyabulela. [I thank you.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Siyabula Mphathiswa ohloniphekileyo
kuzakulandela ibambela lika sihlalo wekomoti yezoqoqosho, ohloniphekileyo u-
MP Themba. [We thank you, hon Minister. Hon member Themba, who is the
Chairperson of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs will
speak next.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Hon chairperson, hon Minister and hon Deputy Minister, I
will focus my debate on the Diamonds Amendment Bill and other members on
the Diamonds Second Amendment Bill. The Diamonds Amendment Bill is
celebrated within the context of the 50th anniversary of the Freedom
Charter. The Bill owes its basis to the Freedom Charter.

This piece of legislation is contextualised within the clause “The people
shall share in the country’s wealth”. Central to the Bill are issues of
accountability, transparency, economic growth, black economic empowerment
and development of the local diamond industry through beneficiation and
skills development.

The Diamonds Amendment Bill is a logical response to challenges faced by
industry players and those intending to enter into the industry. The
fundamental problem for industry players has been and still is the lack of
access to rough diamonds. As a result, many companies had to shut up shop
and jobs were lost. This scenario should be attributed to the cartels that
determine who accesses rough diamonds. These cartels have been dominating
the industry since the discovery of diamonds in the country.

The Bill has the potential to spread wealth within the industry, thus
avoiding unnecessary advantage by the already existing diamond cartels. The
State Diamond Trader advocated in the Bill will enable those that do not
access to freely access rough diamonds. This will, to some extent, allow
new entrants from the historically disadvantaged background to gain access
into the industry, especially women - and black women in particular.

As the ANC-led government we refuse to be told that there are cuttable and
noncuttable diamonds. We view this as a ploy to discourage the development
of a local beneficiation industry. We believe that in the interest of
developing a local beneficiation industry, the market should be left to
decide which diamonds are cuttable and which ones are noncuttable.

It is imperative to note that the Diamonds Amendment Bill intends to serve
as an impetus for job creation. This Bill will, to some extent, assist
government in achieving its one million new jobs target. Through this Bill
there is the potential for the youth to be skilled and trained to work in
the cutting and polishing industry.

As the ANC government we endorse the objectives of the Diamonds Amendment
Bill. We believe that as one of the largest diamond producers in the world
we should stimulate the development of a local beneficiation industry and
ensure that cartels and tool-makers obtain regular supplies of unpolished
diamonds. This will, to some extent, cushion the impact of job losses
anticipated in the upstream.

As the ANC-led government, we are committed to changing the lives of the
masses of our people and we believe that legislative developments of this
character will stimulate socio-economic development as espoused in our
policies.

The Diamonds Second Amendment Bill is a section 76 version of the Diamonds
Amendment Bill, hence I said that other members would talk on the Diamonds
Second Amendment Bill section 76. We support the Bill.

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Hon Chairperson, my colleagues . . . “nam mandithi chatha.”
[ . . . I would like to add a few things to what the previous member has
said.]

Indeed, as the Minister has correctly said, and history informs us, diamond
mining was the first type of organised mining to take place in South
Africa. We are further reminded that Kimberley was the forerunner of formal
mining.

The discovery of this little precious stone transformed what was then an
agrarian economy to a dual economy with the development of the mechanised
industries. History has again taught us that in order to get value from the
mineral resources mined in the country, we must develop the downstream in
the mining value chain.

The diamond industry has failed to develop the beneficiation capacity. As
the ANC, we believe that the promulgation of the Diamonds Second Amendment
Bill will, to some extent, redress past imbalances, develop local
beneficiation industry and transform the diamond industry.

The Diamonds Second Amendment Bill is a section 76 version of the Diamonds
Amendment Bill. This Bill seeks to revolutionise the mining industry,
especially the components of doing business. This Bill repeals section 59
of the Diamond Act. It should be noted that this legislative development is
in the interest of ensuring equitable access to the mineral resources of
the country. The application of this Bill will ensure equitable access to
rough diamonds to those who wish to trade.

This legislative development intends to increase the contribution of
diamonds to the country’s economy by increasing the downstream activity.
This Bill empowers the regulator to implement, administer and control all
matters related to the sale, beneficiation, import and export of diamonds.

The Bill empowers the regulator to establish a diamond exchange and export
centre. In fact, this centre will be responsible for facilitating the
buying, selling, export and import of diamonds. The regulator empowers the
State Diamond Trader to acquire and supply unpolished diamonds to local
beneficiators, whereas the trader will promote the industry through the
necessary research and support.

As the ANC, we believe that the economic potential of this industry will be
unleashed, as skills development programmes will build the capacity that
was previously nonexistent. We believe that this Bill will serve as an
impetus to job creation. The beneficiation industry in South Africa will
develop if there is a commitment and determination from local diamond
houses and this will go a long way towards creating a substantial number of
jobs. [Applause.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, this Bill will create a State Diamond
Trader to buy diamonds in a volume or at a value to be determined by the
Minister. It will also replace the SA Diamond Board, which is largely made
up of industry representatives and funded with levies, with the state-
funded and government-dominated SA Diamond and Precious Metals Regulator.

Former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher once gave a resounding
warning to politicians, once adhered to by her successor Tony Blair, namely
that: “You can’t buck the market.” The ANC government, unfortunately, seems
to think otherwise, as can be seen in the Diamonds Amendment Bill.

The DA will oppose the Diamonds Amendment Bill because of the fact that it
is highly interventionist and puts the state at the centre of the diamond
business. It has been rushed, an issue which should be very alarming.

As I said in the committee meeting, the Bill was published in the
Government Gazette on 30 August 2005, and the government only allowed 21
days for public comment, a deadline that the industry complained was far
too short for such a major piece of legislation.

Unfortunately, this is not the first time that the ANC has used such
tactics. Before the Education Laws Amendment Bill went to vote, the ANC
hastily rewrote it, doing the amendments that were introduced painstakingly
in the Portfolio Committee on Education over several weeks by the DA’s
education spokesperson, Helen Zille. [Interjections.]

By bulldozing this Bill through Parliament, there will be jobs lost.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member. Could you debate
the subject matter under consideration? We are not debating the Education
Laws Amendment Bill.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: I am explaining that the tactics used in both pieces of
legislation are the same.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Can you focus on . . .

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: By bulldozing this Bill through Parliament, there will
be jobs lost, and the economy will be harmed as a result of that. In short,
what the Bill is doing is to bring about nationalisation through the back
door – and this does not come from me, but from McDonald Themane, the
chairperson of the Master Diamond Cutters Association.

Fifteen years ago he became the first black South African to obtain a
diamond cutting licence and he also noted that all over the world
governments have recognised that it is better for them to take tax and
privatise, objecting to the overinvolvement of the state. I’d like to pose
a question: Will the restructuring of the diamond industry in future
benefit those with close links to the ruling party? Only time will tell.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon
members, . . .

 . . . andizi kuchitha ixesha ngabantu abaze kumela oohlohl’esakhe.
Siyayazi into yokuba eli lixesha elandulela uvoto, ngoko ke kufuneka
siqalise amaphulo okunyusa iingxowa-mali ngokuthi sixhase kakhulu abo
sibaziyo ukuba bahlohla phi na, kunye nabo basixhasayo ngezimali kulo
mzabalazo wethu. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[I am not going to waste time on people who have come to represent the fat
cats. We know that we will be voting soon, therefore we must start
fundraising campaigns, and obtain the support of those whose pockets we
know and those who supported us with finances in our struggle.]

Allow me to support my Minister, on both the Diamonds Amendment Bill and
the Diamonds Second Amendment Bill.

Simvile uMam’uThemba xa ebethetha apha, echaza ngokuba uthini na uMqulu
weNkululeko. Ndifuna ukwaleka umsundulu, ndinabe ngokuthi nam ndicaphule
phaya kuMqulu weNkululeko: (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We heard Mrs Themba when she spoke here, explaining what the Freedom
Charter says. I want to add something, and further expatiate by quoting
from the Freedom Charter:]
“The mineral wealth beneath the soil, the banks and monopoly industry shall
be transferred to the ownership of the people as a whole.”

We don’t have just one race or class in this country; we are talking here
about billionaires who own South African minerals. The question is: Who
owns the means of production? Who owns the mines in South Africa? How many
black people own mines in South Africa? When we talk transformation, we
want transformation of this economy. Those that control this economy are
those that control the means of production.

We cannot just talk superficially, because we are not the iron ladies of
South Africa. We care about the people of South Africa. We care about the
women of South Africa. It’s not just about me. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Excuse me, hon Deputy Minister. Hon
Terblanche, I wish to draw your attention to the fact that you must allow
the person on the podium to speak uninterrupted, and that your disruptive
behaviour is unacceptable. Continue, hon Minister.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: I was saying, hon Chair, that
the Minerals and Petroleum Resources Development Act was passed in this
country to ensure that the government becomes the custodian of the mineral
rights of the people of South Africa, in keeping with the vision of the
Freedom Charter.

We started with our White Paper and proceeded to transformatory
legislation, and now we are really ensuring that the minerals do not just
leave the country; we are making sure that we add value to them. We are
making sure that they grow the economy of South Africa. That is the reason
we also want to beneficiate them in this country.

We want to transfer skills to our people and stop exporting jobs to other
countries. We instead want to create jobs for the people of South Africa in
South Africa.

Hon members might, therefore, be aware that this second amending Bill forms
part of our overall amendment of the Diamond Act, but only deals with
issues that pertain to the diamond trade. We are amending the Diamond Act
in order to protect and enhance the diamond trade by making diamonds
accessible to those South Africans who were denied the opportunity to
participate in this industry even though they had the financial capacity to
do so. We are also continuing to protect the legitimate trade as per the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme.

Our amendments to the Diamond Act introduce a new era in the regulation of
the diamond trade in South Africa by combining the diamond trade with the
precious metals trade through the Diamond and Precious Metals Regulator. We
will be creating an enabling environment for new players to enter the
sector. This regulator will, in essence, replace the current, toothless SA
Diamond Board, which had both the promotion and regulation function.

Unfortunately, this structure proved to be ineffectual in transforming and
growing this industry. We have seen this board being controlled by industry
players, who perpetrated their agendas and had no interest in changing the
status quo. Thus, hon members, we had to ensure that we change the
situation where all the players were also referees.

Through this Bill, the promotion and regulation functions are now to be
split, where the regulator will now focus only on the administration of the
law and the newly established State Diamond Trader will focus on promotion.

The board of the regulator will consist of four members from the business
sector, unlike now, where the SADB has become a mass meeting of
businesspersons who make laws favourable for serving their interests.

It is contrary to good governance principles for players in the industry to
make their own laws, as well as police themselves. I’m sure we’ve never
heard of such a practice anywhere in the world.

Given the strategic importance of this industry and the critical role that
it will play in beneficiation, as the Minister has already indicated, this
self-regulation is a misnomer and we have to stop it. To reinforce this
separation, the regulator will be funded through the fiscus, and not from
levies paid by diamond-mining companies.

The second amending Bill stipulates the functions of the regulator with
regard to diamonds, and outlines the role of the regulator, which will be
to implement, administer and control all matters relating to purchase,
import and export of diamonds. This regulator will be a key component of
our strategy to better manage the sector and ensure improved access to
rough diamonds. The regulator will, therefore, also be responsible for the
establishment of the diamond export and exchange centres.

The functions of the State Diamond Trader are also stipulated in the second
amending Bill. The trader shall purchase unpolished diamonds from
producers, supply local diamond beneficiators and also promote the diamond
industry.

The state has to intervene in this matter in order to address a market
failure, which is evident in the statistics on amounts of rough diamonds
exported from our country, in the closure of the factories that we see in
different provinces and also in the number of people who are not site
holders, the majority of whom are black players - including women - who are
unable to get access to unpolished diamonds.

We therefore want to see blacks in general, and women in particular,
involved, because as women we are the ones who buy and wear jewellery. It
is, therefore, only natural that we should also participate in the
industry, that we should be owners of the industry and that we should
create our own designs because we know what we want to wear. We should also
be able to benefit from the industry, and not just be consumers who support
other people.

Local access to rough diamonds and the active promotion of the diamond
trade will provide Africa with the opportunities for country-of-origin
branding. We know that we get rings Swiss-made or American-made, but we
don’t know exactly where the gold and diamonds come from.

As we have already committed ourselves, in the section 75 Bill, the State
Diamond Trader will monitor its clients to ensure that the beneficiaries’
access to diamonds translates unpolished diamonds that have been bought
into polished diamonds and diamond jewellery. The State Diamond Trader will
have the duty to monitor the market, both locally and internationally, by
benchmarking to ensure that South Africa remains competitive.

We have ensured that the State Diamond Trader will have the capacity to
support our broader objectives as the Bill makes provision for the Minister
to determine the percentage of the diamonds required for local
beneficiation. The conditions under which diamond producers will offer
unpolished diamonds to the trader are stipulated clearly in this Bill. This
is not about unfettered powers; this also comes from the Freedom Charter,
which says: “The people shall govern.”

It is the market and the people on the ground that will determine what
quantity of rough diamonds they want, and the Minister will be guided by
that principle.

Furthermore, we have never had unfettered powers in the ANC government. Our
Ministers’ powers and mandates originate from the 70% mandate that we
received from the people of South Africa. [Applause.] They have never
abused that power; they have never given orders for children to be killed
in Soweto or Langa, as the previous government did in 1976.

Chairperson, let me thank the members for supporting the Bill. The longer
we are in government, the more we have been able to recognise the
importance of using legislative mechanisms effectively to create an
enabling environment and economic opportunities for our people. And if we
have to drag along some people kicking and screaming to ensure
transformation in this country, we will do so.

This piece of legislation and the institutions created are an important
step towards transforming our economy and creating a better life for all. I
look forward to the implementation of this Bill, because I am sure that
members of this House support it. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D D GAMEDE: Hon Chairperson, once more I notice that, as usual, the hon
Terblanche has left the House. [Interjection.]

An HON MEMBER: Sy is ‘n bangbroek! [She is a coward!]

Mr D D GAMEDE: In addition, she is very conservative with the truth. She
has become one of the best ``performers’’ and ``actors’’ in this House.

The last meeting of the committee was held in V454 a few weeks ago. And the
hon Terblanche was not present. But she says she was present and that we
should study the Hansard. Honestly, she does not know when she is attending
meetings or not. [Interjections.] They are just misleading the public.
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: O gola mahala. [She is earning money for doing nothing.]

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, the imminent promulgation of the Diamonds
Amendment Bill is celebrated within the context of the 50th anniversary of
the Freedom Charter. The public hearings on this Bill were characterised by
negative sentiments from the minerals industry, as was shown by one member.
These negative sentiments can be attributed to the fear of the imminent
change that is going to engulf this industry.

It should be noted that this industry has long been operating under the
shrouded rules of secrecy it designed for itself. This piece of legislation
seeks to transform that, as it advocates accountability and transparency.
The Diamonds Amendment Bill provides the correct framework for the
acquisition, possession, beneficiation and use of this mineral resource.

December is a well-celebrated month, and only good things are supposed to
be said, be it statements or greetings. The ANC-led government gives the
people of South Africa this Bill because it is for beneficiation. And, the
people of South Africa are aware that other parties like the DA are saying
black people must not benefit.  [Interjections.] The Diamonds Amendment
Bill will unleash the potential of local beneficiation industry.
Consequently, the growth of the local beneficiation industry will create
jobs.

The Bill provides for the establishment of the State Diamond Trader to
ensure increased accountability. The essence of the trader will be to
promote equitable access to and local beneficiation of South Africa’s rough
diamonds. Others would want us believe that the majority of the people of
South Africa must look at diamonds being mined, smell them and let them go
to London without even participating in the industry. At the same time, in
a few months’ time, they would want these people to vote them in.

The Bill provides for the licensing of local trading hours. The portion of
diamonds that will be purchased from local producers - the State Diamond
Trader - will be sold to local beneficiators at fair market prices and will
be based on the requirements of local beneficiations.

Furthermore, the Bill provides for the establishment of a diamond exchange
and export centre, which shall act as a ``one-stop shop’’ where temporary
permit holders may purchase and export rough diamonds as well as pay 15%
export duty. It is imperative to note that any producer who intends
exporting unpolished diamonds will export from this centre and pay the
relevant export duty and not as is happening presently, where only one big
company produces, makes the rules and decides the price. [Interjections.]
Yes, indeed, acting referee and a player at the same time.

On that note, it should be noted that the ANC-led government continues to
advance progressive legislation that is to the benefit of all South
Africans.

As the Freedom Charter says: “The People shall share in the country’s
wealth!” I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr M GUNGUBELE (Gauteng): Hon Chairperson, I think a lot of things have
been said about the Bill. I want to start off by saying that as the Gauteng
province we support the Bill, with a dissenting view from a predictable
source.

Because a lot has been said about the objectives of the Bill, which we
already support, there are however just a few things that we would like to
share. One writer in the Business Report of The Star on 6 December 2005
said the biggest challenge facing developing countries with vibrant private
sectors, such as India, South Africa and Brazil, is how to manage the
accumulation of wealth with the objective of creating a more equitable
society.

Also, the latest report by the UN is on the increasing gap in income
between those who are at a low level and those who are at a high level and
the reckless way in which top professionals or top bosses are putting money
into their pockets. That report also reflects a very critical area as one
of the key areas that need to be looked at, namely the issues of skills
base and infrastructure capacity.

When you look at these issues, the key one is clear when you look at what
the Minister is doing. She is responding by ensuring that she puts together
a management strategy in a regulatory format to ensure that our economy
responds to the historic challenges of our country - a country where the
poor who are historically marginalized are unskilled and dislocated in
terms of infrastructure and many other require resources in order to
compete in the mainstream economy. Now, we are that country that this
writer refers to as “developing” and having a vibrant private sector, but
that does not respond to the historic challenges of the country.

Another business writer, Sikhakhane, on the same date, wrote about ubuntu
being weaved into capitalism. Quoting the Tata Group in India, which has
R110 billion sales a year and how interestingly the Tata family only owns
2% shares in that company - 65,8% are owned by a trust whose purpose is to
deploy that to community projects and also demonstrate how they deploy R25
million every year to the public service on issues such as education,
infrastructure support and it also supports a 740-bed hospital and shows
the kind of harmony that has emanated from a private institution that
between 1992 and 2001 retrenched from 78 000 to 48 800 without a strike and
offered to pay the retrenched earnings equivalent to their earnings at
their retrenchment time until they retire -  the very company having hired
no less than 39 000 people this year. This is the weaving of ubuntu into
capitalism.

Now the question is: Why would a government intervene in such a situation?
There would be no basis because the other rewards of harmony in this kind
of system is that in the 1970s the workers in this very company defended
that company against nationalisation by government.

It sounds very unusual, but it has occurred. It is because of the humanity
that prevailed in this company. Again, the question you would ask is: Why
would the government intervene in such a situation?

Yet another writer, Segone, says regulation is an incessant step in South
Africa’s growth. He demonstrates how the self-regulation in South Africa,
especially in the credit area, has actually excluded five million consumers
from having access to credit facilities and how that impacts on the
economic activities in this country. Because one of the things we have
agreed upon in South Africa is that you need to open resources to as many
small upcoming businesses as possible to spur economic growth and create
jobs.

The Credit Bill is one of the regulatory interventions. There is a
complaint from the business community that compliance cost it R79 billion.
What is not being calculated however is the benefit of that intervention
for the broader economy of the country. They also reflect the contradiction
that it is logically correct to say that if the majority who are
disadvantaged and marginalised were consumers, they would have made a
bigger cry for state intervention. But when that is happening, we must not
turn a blind eye to the fact that the business community also at times
calls for government intervention when the stream revenue is actually
affected. For example, very recently manufacturing and mining industries
called on the Governor of the Reserve Bank or the state to intervene in the
value of the rand. It was not about the poor people; it was about the
stream revenue.

What this writer is saying is that it is correct if the state regulates
heavily. That can stifle the growth. Yet it is correct, when self-
regulation is inefficient, that the state should do something.

What we are trying to speak about here is that the ANC government’s
approach in driving the South African economy is informed on an ongoing
basis by its impact on improving the lives of the majority who have been
excluded for centuries. Therefore, anyone who questions it must actually
put it to the following test: to what extent is it contributing to the
advancement and betterment of the people who own less than 17% of the
wealth of the country, yet they are more than 75% of the population? This
is the test that the ANC government must be challenged on.

If you look at this Bill quickly – I don’t want to repeat things that have
been said because repetitions do actually multiply boredom - what is key
here is that there is beneficiation, cutting and other multiplying effects
downstream. The fact is that South Africans must be given a chance to
participate in the economy – the chance they have not been allowed before.

The current board has been heavily structured in favour of the private
sector management. These are problems that the Minister is trying to
correct. This board has never attempted to correct them. In other words,
businesspeople were given a chance to sort out this situation. However,
they have not done so in many years. The government is now saying allow us
a chance to play a role so that we can find a balance. We are not going to
be heavy-handed, we are just removing inefficiencies that undermine the
participation of many who are poor who have no access.

In that context we think, as Gauteng, that it makes logical sense to
support this Bill, because one must belong somewhere else in the world not
to understand the situation in this country. It’s only a Bill of this
nature ensures the logic. Based on that economic logic, Minister, Gauteng
supports you on this. We think it’s actually an interesting thing that we
have leaders who are able to understand where we live and act in accordance
with the manner and the required situation in the place where we live. In
that context, we, as Gauteng, support the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr M J SIBIYA: Hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, comrades, colleagues,
ladies and gentlemen, I am reminded of the words spoken by one of our
greatest literary giants in Africa, a revolutionary, a son of the soil,
Amilcar Cabral, in 1974 when he addressed a conference of all Portuguese
colonies on the continent in  Brazzaville, Congo.

One field commander stood up in that conference and enunciated the list of
all the problems he himself, with the units, encountered in Guinea Bissau
in terms of executing the struggle. He suggested that a special conference
be called to overhaul the leadership of the then PAIGC, and that stands for
the African Party for the Independence of Guinea Bissau and Cape Verde.

Now when President Amilcar Cabral stood up to sum up all the things that
went on in that conference, amongst other things he said, and I quote: “It
is foolish to lament and try to take advantage of our difficulties, but it
is intelligent to make an effort at overcoming these.”

We have been hearing a lot of noise about the complaint laid against this
amending Bill. Some of the noise suggests, as the comrade put it eloquently
and very brilliantly, that our people and the government should leave the
market forces to determine the course of events in that industry. Comrades,
to me, this is tantamount to suggesting that someone must think of
organising a celebration party in hell, where there is no room for
laughter, smiles or anything outside of agony and pain, and I find it very
upsetting.

Now, when the government acts on behalf of our people in the footsteps of
the Freedom Charter, one of whose clauses reads, as Comrade Gamede said,
``The people shall share in the country’s wealth’’, we were told that that
is an intervention, which is an intervention indeed, but it is meant to
redirect the trajectory of the diamond industry towards benefiting our
people who have never benefited before. It is just as when our people, with
the ANC as the political organisation and leader, intervened all along to
redirect the trajectory of the apartheid regime towards the dustbin of
history, which we have succeeded in doing.

I remember that, at some stage, I had the opportunity to watch TV, although
I don’t usually do that. My son came to tell me to look at what was going
on. I went there. I saw a number of people, some of whom I recognised, as
this was in Khayelitsha, as I was told. They were talking about things they
would like to see our people getting in order to improve their lives. When
I looked, I saw some panties and underwear hanging on the washing line. If
there could have been the delivery of a half an ounce diamond, I think
those people would be far better off now than they have been since that
incident. Who did it, I don’t know. I still need to research it and settle
that.

Let me bring, together with this House, the revolutionary greetings in the
clause of the year of the mobilisation for the realisation of the Freedom
Charter.

The ANC-led government continues to distinguish itself as the champion of
the interests of the masses of our people. It is not something we are doing
today. We have done it from the very beginning of our existence. Those who
know can tell the story better.

The Diamonds Amendment Bill seeks to play a meaningful role in transforming
the diamond industry that is currently characterised by skewed ownership
patterns that are not reflective of the demographic make-up of the country.

This legislative development seeks to stimulate processes regarding the
promotion of equitable access and the development of local beneficiation in
the industry. The tabling of this Bill has been preceded by complaints from
the industry, blaming the government for so-called ``back-door
nationalisation’’. Sometimes it becomes a problem to understand words
superficially without knowing the philosophical content of such words. I am
saying this because of the misuse of the word ``nationalisation’’ in this
regard. I will perhaps come back to that later.

As the ANC-led government, we do not subscribe to the notion of so-called
``back-door nationalisation’’, as bandied about by the captains of
industry, accompanied by the DA. If the DA regards the promotion of
equitable access to diamonds and development of the local beneficiation
industry as ``back-door nationalisation’’, then logic forces us to say that
logical thinking should, from now on, become a commodity to be sold to
those who cannot think. [Laughter.]

The current scenario in the diamond industry does not augur well. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, I would like to thank all
hon members for supporting the legislation. I want to thank hon Gamede,
really, for exposing the hon member Terblanche for what she is. She is an
actor, standing here, reading a script prepared for her by her leader, Tony
Leon. What she said here is exactly what the DA member said in the NA and
it is exactly what their leader said in the papers. [Interjections.]

Oh no, sisi, I gave you a chance; I listened to you. Nyamezela kaloku.
Nyamezela xa ndikuphendula. [If you can't take the heat, get out of the
kitchen.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Minister, I think I am making
this point for the last time: Whoever wants to be listened to when he or
she speaks, irrespective of how he or she feels about what is being said by
another person, must expect the same. I am saying this to you, hon
Terblanche. [Interjections.] What is your point of order, hon Watson?

Mr A WATSON: My point of order is, Chair: Why are you continually picking
on the DA members when it comes to heckling but you allow the rest of the
House to do what they like? Could you please explain that?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: No, you are out of order.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE:  Chairperson, I rise on a point of order, and according
to the Rules of the House you are supposed to listen to a point of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I have ruled on that point of order.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: I am making another point of order and you don’t know
what my point of order is.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I have made a ruling on that point of
order. Please take your seat.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: I am making another point of order. It is allowed by the
Rules of this House.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Could you take your seat? Proceed,
hon Minister.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: I rise on a point of order, which is allowed by the
Rules of this House.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Minister, you can continue.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Ek gaan nie sit nie. Dit is ‘n Reël. Hy mag nie, nie met
‘n punt van orde nie. [I will not sit down. It is a Rule. He is not allowed
to do this, not with a point of order.]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: This hon member is beginning to sound
like a record with a scratch. If you remember the old LPs; when it had a
scratch it kept on making the same sound. [Interjections.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: You don’t seem to listen.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: That is what it sounds like to me, on
this issue of nationalising through the backdoor. This is an issue that we
have responded to publicly, to say that we are not nationalising through
the backdoor; we are intervening because there has been a market failure.
This government has a right to intervene when the markets fail and in this
case, as hon members ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Could you give me two minutes?
The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Could they stop the clock, please?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: With the powers vested in me, on
procedure, I am going to apply Rule 37, to order hon Terblanche to leave
the House until further notice. That is a ruling. [Applause.] Hon member,
could you please go, unless you want to be ordered out? [Interjections.]
“Ja, dis reg.” [Yes, that’s right.] [Interjections.]

Mr A WASTON: You see how you are allowing the House to heckle. You don’t
recognise me. I am rising on a point of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: What is your point of order?

Mr A WATSON: You must ask me. How would you know if you don’t ask me,
Chair? You refused the point of order from the previous member without
asking what the point of order was. I am now asking you: On what point did
you chase my member out?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: It is not your member. In this House
I treat everybody equally.

Mr A WATSON: No, you have just allowed heckling here.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I know that you are one of the senior
members of this House, but in my position here, I am not your son.
Secondly, there is a difference between heckling and interruption of a
member speaking. I think can produce evidence to that effect and on that
basis I order you to sit down and allow the Minister to proceed. Take your
seat. I am not going to entertain your question. Minister, please proceed.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: As I was saying, the DA is repeatedly
accusing us of nationalising through the backdoor when what we are actually
doing is to ensure equity and equitable access to the resources of this
country by our people, which have been denied them by the former
governments for all those years.

We are thus correcting an imbalance here, and as the government we cannot
sit and watch when our people are suffering and dying in the mines, and yet
they can’t enjoy the fruits of their labour. This is a decisive
intervention by a government where the markets have failed.

For years and years the government has been calling on the industry to help
us beneficiate our products, and they have done zilch. In India there are a
million cutters and polishers; they have no diamonds. In South Africa there
are fewer than 2 000, or about 2 500 – I am subject to correction – cutters
and polishers, and yet we are the third, sometimes said to be the fourth,
largest producer of diamonds in the world. I think it is something that we
must be shameful about and the DA should drop their heads in shame for
objecting to a measure that seeks to correct an imbalance created by
themselves.

It is wrong information by hon member Terblanche that this regulator, which
is being proposed in the legislation, is going to be dominated by
government. Government only has four people there; four more people will be
coming from the producers; two will be from the union. So I don’t know if
somebody here has offered to sell her commodity, which is called thinking
or logical thinking. Now, if you put those numbers together, I don’t know
how government is the majority in this case.

Finally, it is incorrect that the diamond Bill was rushed through
Parliament. This Bill followed all the processes since the time that it was
approved by Cabinet; all the parliamentary timeframes were adhered to, and
went through all the legal advisors, from our own to the parliamentary
advisors I mean. How they could not see that this is unconstitutional and
only the DA can see the unconstitutionality of this legislation is mind-
boggling.

Having said that, I must say to the member over there who was saying to the
people of South Africa that they must take this seriously, the ANC
government intervening, ensuring that we want to make their lives better,
that this is a serious statement by the member. And as for us, I must say
we feel that these two pieces of legislation are going to change the
landscape of South Africa.

I’ve already said that approaches are being made. I am not going to give
details, but we are going to see factories going up; we are going to see
jobs being created; we are going to see our people getting skills in
cutting, polishing and jewellery manufacturing, which will see their being
able to actually export their skills and their expertise to other countries
in Africa as we believe this is just the tip of the iceberg when it comes
to mining the mineral resources that Africa has. Africa is endowed with
these resources; we haven’t exploited them sufficiently. South Africans are
in the forefront of being able to get this technology, this expertise, and
then share it with our sisters in other countries in Africa.

With those words, thank you very much, Chairperson, Chairperson of the
NCOP, members from all provinces. This is our last piece of legislation in
this House and both the Deputy Minister and I would like to thank you for
you co-operation during this year. We had very testing times with our
legislation, but we always found support from the hon members. Thank you
very much and may you please go home and have some rest with your families.
[Interjections.] As for the Deputy Minister and me, it looks like there is
not going to be a Christmas this year. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question. The
question is that the Bills be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’
votes. Yes. In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first allow provinces the
opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there
any province that intends to make a declaration? None. We shall now proceed
to voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they
vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Ipuma-Kolonia iyaxhasa. [Eastern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Vrystaat steun. [Free State supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re e amogela ka atla tše pedi. [Limpopo
supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Kapa Bokone ya amogela. [Northern Cape supports.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke a rona. [North West supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITEES: All nine provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution. [Applause.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Before I call on the Secretary to
read the seventh Order of the Day, I would like to take this opportunity on
behalf of all members of the NCOP to thank the Minister and the Deputy
Minister for their efforts in leading this debate on this critical Bill,
which is about the lives of our people, and we hope that the relations
between the House and department, broadly, will grow and improve on an
ongoing basis. Thank you very much, Minister and Deputy Minister.
[Applause.]


                                NURSING BILL





                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)


Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I know it is very late in the afternoon and I
will not be long. I can see all of us are very tired.

The Nursing Bill before this House today reflects the commitment of our ANC-
led government not only to transform, but also to ensure accountability in
the manner in which statutory councils operate, and the SA Nursing Council
is no exception.

Statutory councils in general play a role in the governance of the health
sector in our country, in particular in regard to health professionals,
medical schemes, medicines control and medical research.

In respect of the SA Nursing Council and in terms of the way it is
presently constituted, there is clearly a need to strengthen its
contribution to the transformation of the health sector, the membership,
the operational procedures and communication.

As we all should know, the Minister appointed a task team four years ago to
look into this matter and to make recommendations to her. This task team
comprised of experts from government, council members, council officials
and academics. The Bill is therefore a product of these extensive and wide-
ranging consultations.

The purpose of this Bill is in line with the fundamentals and the spirit of
every Act our government has passed, namely, to transform the SA Nursing
Council so as to increase the protection of the public at large and to
promote greater accountability.

This, in our view, should not just be cosmetic but also involve a
fundamental change in the culture and focus of the council to reflect the
needs and aspirations of our transforming society. Moreover, membership of
the council should reflect the demographic composition of our country, and
strengthen the empowerment of those historically disadvantaged, women and
the disabled.

In this regard, members of the council should undergo continuing education
and development to reflect these values. The Bill provides for expertise,
namely in the financial, legal, community and academic fields to serve on
the council, so as to strengthen its capacity.

Furthermore, it seeks to promote the constitutional imperative of access to
health care, the right to basic health care and ensuring the dignity of all
health care users. It also seeks to make consequential amendments in order
to update outdated references.

In terms of the objectives of this Bill, it aims to uphold the objectives
of the National Health Act by, inter alia, ensuring that nurses provide
quality health care services. This must be achieved through the delivery of
these services in a dignified and respectable manner. In this regard, it is
critical that we create a kind of consciousness around these issues
because, in many respects, the rights of patients are trampled upon, either
through acts of negligence, or ignorance.

Moreover, the Bill seeks to regulate the nursing profession so as to ensure
appropriate and acceptable conduct in the profession, and in accordance
with the National Health Policy. The introduction of good co-operative
governance in terms of the powers and the responsibilities of the council
are especially pleasing. We have no doubt that this is in the best interest
of the public.

While the select committee is satisfied with the overall purpose and
objectives of the Bill, it nevertheless proposes two amendments. We propose
the omission of ``such further period as the Minister finds appropriate’’
on page 11, from line 30, and to substitute it with ``one further term not
exceeding five years’’. This, we believe, will ensure the kind of
responsiveness by the Minister that both the public and the patients
desire.

Secondly, we propose, on page 20, from line 10 to omit subsection 1, and to
replace it with ``a person who is a citizen of South Africa intending to
register for the first time to practice a profession in the prescribed
category must perform remunerated community services for a period of one
year at a public health facility’’.

In conclusion, the Bill is raising the bar on a wide range of pertinent
issues, inter alia, issues such as discipline, registration, education,
financial aspects, appointment to the council and so on. But, ultimately,
the responsibility and the political accountability is that of the
Minister.

We therefore wish to commend the Minister and her department for having
raised the bar to ensure the credibility of the overall governance of the
SA Nursing Council. We in the ANC support this Bill. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question. The
question is that the Bill, subject to the proposed amendments, be agreed
to.

In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow political parties to make
their declarations of vote if they so wish.

Declaration of vote:

Ms H LAMOELA: Hon Chair, the function of a democratic government is to
represent the wishes of the people. Its function is not to set up a series
of committees to rubberstamp the wishes of a few individuals who hold views
counter to those of the majority, nor to treat the country’s professional
adult citizens like children incapable of managing their own affairs.

The strong reservations of nursing organisations about this Bill centred
largely around two issues. Firstly, the Minister proposes to seize complete
control of the SA Nursing Council, an independent statutory body that is
supposed to represent the nursing profession.

This council will now become an organ of government which is accountable
only to the Minister of Health, not to the nurses, and which is
fundamentally undemocratic and unrepresentative. No longer will council
members who are professional nurses have the right to vote for the
professionals they feel best suited to represent them. Indeed they have
been thoroughly disenfranchised.

The autonomy and independence of the council is hereby severely
compromised, now placing the Minister of Health in full control of the
council that is in fact created to regulate the nursing profession and its
affairs. Moreover, unlike the existing Bill, which requires that a wide
range of interest groups be represented on the council . . .

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Please take your seat. Can I take a
point of order?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, is the hon member prepared to take a
question?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, can you take a question?

Ms H LAMOELA: No, hon Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: The hon member is not prepared to
take a question. Can you proceed?

Ms H LAMOELA: The new law places new constraints on the Minister’s decision-
making. For example, three persons must represent communities. I would like
to know which communities will be represented and which communities not.

The introduction of legislation legalising compulsory community service for
nurses, even those who were trained privately without government funding,
was fraught with conflict, but the Minister refused to grant any
concessions to nurses, despite the fact that they already give a
considerable amount of time during their training serving in public
hospitals.

Nurses should be governed by nurses, and should be allowed to vote for
their own representatives on the SA Nursing Council. The DA will most
definitely not support the Bill. I thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, we shall now proceed to
voting on the question. Those in favour, say ``Aye’’. Those against, say
``No’’. [Interjections.] I think the ``ayes’’ have it.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in terms of section 75 of
the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 17:26.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                         THURSDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Government Employees
         Pension Fund (GEPF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
         45-2005].

                         WEDNESDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)     Road Traffic Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of
         Transport on 29 October 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Transport and the Select Committee on Public Services.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality  of
      Life and Status of Women on Office on the Status of Women contained in
      the Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1  –  The  Presidency  for
      2004-2005,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on   the
      Financial Statements of Vote 1 for 2004-2005 [RP 191-2005],  dated  11
      November 2005:

         The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life
         and Status of Women, having considered Office on the Status of
         Women contained in the Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 –
         The Presidency for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 1 for 2004-2005 [RP
         191-2005]: referred to it, reports that it has concluded its
         deliberations thereon.

      The following points were considered:


      The Beijing + 10 Report referred to was not sent out for discussion to
      the relevant stakeholders prior to its presentation to the meeting in
      New York.  The Committee was not given the opportunity to discuss,
      comment on and/or adopt the Report.  To its knowledge, the Committee
      is not aware that there has been a report back by the Office of the
      Status of Women to stakeholders.


      In the spirit of consultation and participation, that the government
      is committed to, the Committee would like to recommend that the 10-
      year National Action Plan for Gender Mainstreaming, be opened up for
      broad discussion, in all the provinces, before Cabinet/the government
      adopts it.


      The National Policy Framework on Women’s Empowerment and Gender
      Equality, adopted in 2000, sets out both short-term and long-term
      indicators for the achievement of gender equality.  The Committee, as
      part of its monitoring role, would like the Office of the Status of
      Women to undertake research that responds directly to the indicators,
      to determine what progress has been made, five years after the policy
      has become operational.


      The National Gender Machinery, of which the Committee is one of the co-
      chairs, holds most of its meetings in Pretoria.  The Committee would
      like to recommend the rotational holding of the meetings in different
      provinces, as a way of broadening the participation of provincial
      stakeholders, and giving a broader base of civil society organisations
      access to the National Gender Machinery deliberations.


      Report to be considered.

2.    Annual Report of Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality
      of Life and Status of Women, dated 11 November 2005:


SCAN AND INSERT PAGES 2972 – 2985 OF ATCs


National Council of Provinces

      1.    Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public  Enterprises
      on the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa  Amendment
      Bill [B 32B-2005], dated 16 November 2005:


        The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises, having
        considered the subject of the Independent Communications Authority
        of South Africa Amendment Bill [B 32B- 2005] (National Assembly –
        sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
        Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with proposed
        amendments, as follows:


        CLAUSE 7


        Clause rejected.


        NEW CLAUSE


        1. That the following be a new clause to follow Clause 6:


        Amendment of section 5 of Act 13 of 2000


           7.     Section 5 of the principal Act is hereby amended—
        (a)      by the substitution for subsection (1) of the following
        subsection:
                 "(1)  [The Council consists of seven councillors appointed
        by the President on the recommendation of the National Assembly
        according to the following principles, namely—
        (a)      participation by the public in the nomination process;
        (b)      transparency and openness;  and
        (c)      the publication of a shortlist of candidates for
        appointment, with due regard to subsection (3) and section 6.]  The
        Council consists of a chairperson and eight other councillors
        appointed by the Minister, by notice in the Gazette.";
        (b)      by the insertion after subsection (1) of the following
        subsections:
                 "(1A) (a)  Whenever it is necessary to appoint a
        chairperson or other councillor, the Minister must appoint an
        independent and impartial selection panel consisting of seven
        persons who have an understanding of issues relating to the
        electronic communications and postal sectors.
                       (b)  The panel must consist of—
        (i)      a person with knowledge and experience from the industry;
        (ii)     a person with a legal background and  knowledge of  the
        ICT sector;
        (iii)    an academic in the field of electronic communications;
        (iv)     a representative from the labour sector;
        (v)      a representative of consumer interests; and
        (vi)     two representatives from Parliament.
                       (c)  The names and terms of reference of persons on
        the selection panel must be published by the Minister by notice in
        the Gazette.
                 (1B)  The selection panel contemplated in subsection (1A)
        must—
        (a)      at least 60 days prior to the last day of service of a
        councillor, invite the public to nominate candidates for
        appointment to the Council in not less than two newspapers
        circulating nationally;
        (b)      submit to the Minister a list of suitable candidates at
        least one and a half times the number of councillors to be
        appointed;
        (c)      recommend and motivate to the Minister, from the list
        contemplated in paragraph (b), persons who would be most suited to
        serve on the Council.
                 (1C)  If the Minister is not satisfied that the persons
        recommended by the panel do not comply with subsection (3), the
        Minister may request the panel to review its recommendations.
                 (1D)  The selection panel will be automatically dissolved
        when the appointment is published in the Gazette in terms of
        subsection (1).";
        (c)       by the substitution for subsection (2) of the following
        subsections:
                 "(2)  (a)  [The President must appoint one of the
        councillors as chairperson of the Council.]  The chairperson must,
        in writing, appoint a councillor as acting chairperson to perform
        the functions of the chairperson in his or her absence.
                       (b)  [In the absence of the chairperson, the
        remaining councillors must from their number elect an acting
        chairperson, who, while he or she so acts, may perform all the
        functions of the chairperson.]  Where the chairperson is unable to
        make an appointment, the remaining councillors must from their
        number elect an acting chairperson.";  and
        (d)      by the substitution for subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (b)
        of subsection (3) of the following subparagraph:
        "(ii)    possess suitable qualifications, expertise and experience
        in the fields of, amongst others, broadcasting, [and
        telecommunications policy] electronic communications and postal
        policy or operations, public policy development, electronic
        engineering, [technology, frequency band planning,] law, marketing,
        journalism, entertainment, education, economics, [business practice
        and] finance or any other related expertise or qualifications.".


        CLAUSE 11


        1. On page 9, from line 22, to omit subsection (2) and to
        substitute:
                 (2)   A councillor may be removed from office only [on]—
        (a)      [a finding to that effect by the National Assembly] on
        recommendation by the panel contemplated in section 6A(4) to the
        Minister; and
        (b)      [the adoption by the National Assembly of a resolution
        calling for that councillor’s removal from office] upon approval by
        the Minister of the recommendation contemplated in paragraph (a).
                 (3)   The [President] Minister—
        (a)      may suspend a councillor from office at any time after the
        start of the proceedings  of  [the  National  Assembly]  the  panel
        contemplated in section 6A (4) for the removal of that councillor;
        (b)      [must] may remove a councillor from office upon [adoption]
        approval by [the National Assembly] the Minister of the [resolution
        calling] recommendation for that councillor’s removal.”.


        CLAUSE 12


        1. On page 9, in line 40 to omit ",following approval by the
        National Assembly," and to substitute " ,on recommendation by the
        panel contemplated in section 6A (4),".


        CLAUSE 19


        1. On page 14, in line 40, to omit "serviced" and to substitute
        "service".


        2. On page 17, in line 53, to omit all the words after "in" up to
        and including "(1)(b)" in line 54 and to substitute "subsection
        (3)(b)".


        3. On page 17, in line 58, after "must" to insert "not".


        CLAUSE 21


        On page 18, in line 5, to omit "17" and to substitute "21".


                         THURSDAY, 24 NOVEMBER 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport
        (a)      The South African National Roads Agency Limited
        Declaration of Intent for 2005-2008.

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum for
         2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 194-2005].

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      a) Prosecutorial Policy and Directives relating to Prosecution of
         Criminal Matters Arising from Conflicts of the Past and which were
         committed before 11 May 1994, in terms of sections 21(2), 35(1) and
         35(2)(b) of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, (Act No 32 of
         1998).


      b) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
         Mr R Ameer, an additional magistrate at Pinetown Magistrates Court.


      c) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
         Mr M S Makamu, a senior magistrate at the Benoni Magistrates Court.


      d) Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2004-2005.


4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


      a) Government Notice No 1038 published in Government Gazette No 28143
         dated 21 October 2005: Restrictions on the use of water for
         Agricultural, Domestic and Industrial purposes in the
         Luvuvhu/Letaba Water Management Area, in terms of the National
         Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


      b) Government Notice No 1057 published in Government Gazette No 28167
         dated 28 October 2005: Invitation to submit written comments on the
         proposed construction of Phase-2 of the Olifants River Water
         Resource Development Project and Environmental Impact Assessment
         relating thereto, in terms of section 110 of the National Water
         Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


                          TUESDAY, 29 NOVEMBER 2005


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Housing

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Home Builders
         Registration Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 185-
         2005].


                         WEDNESDAY, 7 DECEMBER 2005


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

   1. Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises on the
      Electronic  Communications   Bill   [B   9B-2005]     (introduced   as
      Convergence Bill [B 9 - 2005]), dated 30 November 2005:

        The Select  Committee  on  Labour  and  Public  Enterprises,  having
        considered the subject of the Electronic Communications Bill [B  9B-
        2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by
        the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,  reports  that  it
        has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Nursing  Bill
      [B 26B – 2005 (Reprint)] (National  Assembly)  –  sec  75),  dated  30
      November 2005:

        The Select Committee  on  Social  Services,  having  considered  the
        subject of the Nursing Bill [B 26B  –  2003],  referred  to  it  and
        classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section  75,  reports
        the Bill with proposed amendments, as follows:


        CLAUSE 18


        1.  On page 11, from line 38, to omit "such further  period  as  the
           Minister finds appropriate" and to substitute "one further  term
           not exceeding five years".


        CLAUSE 40


        2.  On page 20, from line 10, to omit subsection (1) and to
        substitute:


              1) A person who is a citizen of South Africa intending to
                 register for the first time to practise a profession in a
                 prescribed category must perform remunerated community
                 service for a period of one year at a public health
                 facility.


3.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services  on  the  Children’s
   Bill [B 70B – 2003] (National Assembly) –  sec  75),  dated  30  November
   2005:

        The Select Committee  on  Social  Services,  having  considered  the
        subject of the Children’s Bill [B 70B – 2003], referred  to  it  and
        classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section  75,  reports
        the Bill with proposed amendments, as follows:


        PREAMBLE



     1. On page 2, to omit the second paragraph and to substitute:
            AND WHEREAS every child has the rights set out in section 28 of
       the Constitution;


        2.  On page 2, from the sixth line of the preamble, to omit all  the
           words after “and” up to and including “Rights”  in  the  seventh
           line and to substitute “fulfil those rights”.


        3.  On page 2,  in  the  twelfth  line  of  the  preamble,  to  omit
           “childhood is” and to substitute “children are”.


           4.    On page 2, in the fourteenth line of the preamble, to omit
           the first “of” and to substitute “on”.


        5.  On page 2, in the fifteenth line of the preamble,  to  omit  the
           first “and” and to substitute “,”.


        6.  On page 2, in the fifteenth line  of  the  preamble,  after  the
           second “Child” to insert “and in  the  African  Charter  on  the
           Rights and Welfare of the Child”.


        TABLE OF CONTENTS


        1.  On page 3, in line 35, to omit  “parental  responsibilities  and
           rights” and to substitute “contact and care”.


        2.  On page 3, in line 40, to omit  “parental  responsibilities  and
           rights” and to substitute “guardianship and care”.


        3.  On page 5, in line 1, to omit “Part 3”.


        4.  On page 5, in line 2, to omit “Clerks of children’s courts”.


        5.  On page 5, in line 3, to omit “Appointment  and  designation  of
           clerks of children’s courts” and to substitute “Clerk of court”.


        6.  On page 5, after line 4, to insert:

           Part 3



           Pre-hearing conferences, family  group  conferences,  other  lay
           forums and settling of matters out of court


        7.  On page 7, from line 18, to omit  “Accreditation  of  designated
           child protection organisation for inter-country adoption” and to
           substitute  “Accreditation  to  provide  inter-country  adoption
           services”.


        8.  On page 7, in line 20, to omit “agreements”  and  to  substitute
        “agreement”.


        9.  On page 7, in line  21,  to  omit  “Adoption  of  children  from
           Republic by persons in convention countries” and  to  substitute
           “Adoption  of  child  from  Republic  by  person  in  convention
           country”.


        10. On page 7, in line  22,  to  omit  “Adoption  of  children  from
           Republic  by  persons  in  non-convention  countries”   and   to
           substitute “Adoption of child from Republic by  person  in  non-
           convention country”.


        11. On page 7, in line  24,  to  omit  “Adoption  of  children  from
           convention countries by persons in Republic” and  to  substitute
           “Adoption  of  child  from  convention  country  by  person   in
           Republic”.


        12. On page 7, in line 25, to omit “Adoption of children  from  non-
           convention countries by persons in Republic” and  to  substitute
           Adoption of child  from  non-convention  country  by  person  in
           Republic.


        13. On page 7, in line 26, to  omit  “Recognition  of  inter-country
           adoption  of  children  from  convention   countries”   and   to
           substitute “Recognition of inter-country adoption of child  from
           convention country”.


        14. On page 7, in line 28, to  omit  “Recognition  of  inter-country
           adoption of  children  from  non-convention  countries”  and  to
           substitute “Recognition of inter-country adoption of child  from
           non-convention country”.


        15. On page 7, in line 32, to  omit  “children”  and  to  substitute
        “child”.


        16. On page 7, in line 51, to omit “a”.


        17. On page 7, in line 52, to  omit  “children”  and  to  substitute
        “child”.


        18. On page 7, in line 54, to omit “Report of child who is a  victim
           of trafficking” and to substitute “Reporting  of  child  who  is
           victim of trafficking”.


        19. On page 8, in line 1, to omit “a”.


        20. On page 8, in line 2, to omit “a”.


        CLAUSE 1


        1.  On page 9, in line 40, to omit “designated”.


        2.  On page 9, in line 43, to omit “designated”.


        3.  On page 10, in line 30, to omit paragraph (b).


        4.  On page 10, in line 31, to omit “(c)” and to substitute “(b)”.


        5.  On page 10, in line 33, to omit “(d)” and to substitute “(c)”.


        6.  On page 10, in line 34, to omit “(e)” and to substitute “(d)”.


        7.  On page 10, in line 36, to omit “(f)” and to substitute “(e)”.


        8.  On page 10, in line 37, to omit “(g)” and to substitute “(f)”.


        9.  On page 10, in line 39, to omit “(h)” and to substitute “(g)”.


    10. On page 10, after line 49, to insert:


           “circumcision”, in relation to a female child, means the removal
           of the clitoris by any means;


        11. On page 10, from line 50, to omit the definition  of  "clerk  of
           the children's court" and to substitute:


           “clerk of the court” means clerk of the court  of  the  relevant
           magistrate's court;


        12. On page 11, in line 17, to omit “*****”.


        13. On page 11, in line 23, to omit “or”.


        14. On page 11, in line 24, after "organisation;" to insert “or”.


        15. On page 11, after line 24, to insert:
           (c)   a municipality;


    16. On page 11, after line 52, to insert:


           “genital mutilation”, in relation to a female child,  means  the
           partial or complete removal of any part  of  the  genitals,  and
           includes circumcision of female children;


        17. On page 12, in line 13, to omit “*****”.


        18. On page 12, from line 30, to omit all the words after  "the"  up
           to and including "(Act No. 18 of  1973);”  in  line  31  and  to
           substitute “Mental Health Care Act, 2002 (Act No. 17 of 2002);”.


    19. On page 12, after line 34, to insert:


           “Municipal Systems Act” means the  Local  Government:  Municipal
           Systems Act, 2000 (Act No. 32 of 2000);”


        20. On page 12, in line 42, to omit “*****”.


        21. On page 12, in line 58, to omit “or kinship care-giver”.


    22. On page 13, from line  7,  to  omit  the  definition  of  “presiding
        officer” and to substitute:


           “presiding officer” means a presiding  officer  contemplated  in
           section 42;


        23. On page 13, after line 16, to insert:


           “Public  Service  Act”  means  the  Public  Service  Act,   1994
           (Proclamation No. 103 of 1994);


        24. On page 13, after line 22, to insert “*****”.


        25. On page 13, in line 49, after “youth worker” to insert “, social
        auxiliary worker”.


        26. On page 13, in line 61, to omit “*****”.


        27. On page 14, in line 9, to omit all the words after “place” up to
           and including "prescribed," in line 10.


        28. On page 14, in line 30, to omit “*****”.


        29. On page 14, in line 38, to omit " 'contact' and 'care' " and  to
        insert " 'care' and 'contact' ".


    30. On page 14, after line 41, to insert:


             (4) Any proceedings arising out  of  the  application  of  the
             Administration Amendment Act, 1929 (Act No. 9  of  1929),  the
             Divorce Act, the Maintenance Act, the Domestic  Violence  Act,
             1998 (Act No. 116 of 1998), and the Recognition  of  Customary
             Marriages Act, 1998 (Act No. 120 of 1998), in so far as  these
             Acts relate to children, may not be dealt with in a children's
             court.


        CLAUSE 12


        Clause rejected.


        NEW CLAUSE


        1.  That the following be a new Clause to follow Clause 11:


           Social, cultural and religious practices


                 12.   (1)  Every child has the right not to  be  subjected
           to  social,  cultural  and   religious   practices   which   are
           detrimental to his or her well-being.
                       (2)  A child—
           (a)   below the minimum age set by law for a valid marriage  may
           not be given out in marriage or engagement;  and
           (b)   above that minimum age may not be given out in marriage or
           engagement without his or her consent.
                       (3)  Genital mutilation or the circumcision of
           female children is prohibited.
                       (4)  Virginity testing of children under the age of
           16 is prohibited.
                       (5)  Virginity testing of children older than 16 may
           only be performed―
           (a)   if the child has given consent to the testing in the
           prescribed manner;
           (b)   after proper counselling of the child;  and
           (c)   in the manner prescribed.
                       (6)  The results of a virginity test may not be
           disclosed without the consent of the child.
                       (7)  The body of a child who has undergone virginity
           testing may not be marked.
                       (8)  Circumcision of male children under the age of
           16 is prohibited, except when―
      (a)   circumcision is performed for religious purposes in accordance
           with the practices of the religion concerned and in the manner
           prescribed;  or
      (b)   circumcision is performed for medical reasons on the
           recommendation of a medical practitioner.
                       (9)  Circumcision of male children older than 16 may
           only be performed―
           (a)   if the child has given consent to the circumcision in the
           prescribed manner;
           (b)   after proper counselling of the child;  and
           (c)   in the manner prescribed.
                       (10)  Taking into consideration the child's age,
           maturity and stage of development, every male child has the
           right to refuse circumcision.


        CLAUSE 21


        1.  On page 20, in line 9, after “father” to insert “or pays damages
           in terms of customary law;”


        CLAUSE 23


        1.  On page 21, in line 3, to omit “parental responsibilities and
           rights” and to substitute “contact and care”.


        CLAUSE 27


        1.  On page 22, in line 12, to omit “parental responsibilities and
           rights” and to substitute “guardianship and care”.


        CLAUSE 28


        1.  On page 22, in line 35, to omit "parental responsibilities and
           rights" and to substitute "contact and care".


        CLAUSE 29

        1.  On page 23, in line 17, after “may”  to  insert  “,  subject  to
        section 55”.


        CLAUSE 34


        1.  On page 25, after line 19, to insert the following subsections:
             (4) A parenting plan registered with a family advocate may  be
             amended or terminated by the family advocate on application by
             the co-holders of parental responsibilities and rights who are
             parties to the plan.
             (5) A parenting plan that was made an order of  court  may  be
             amended  or  terminated  only  by  an  order   of   court   on
             application—
             (a) by the co-holders of parental responsibilities and  rights
             who are parties to the plan;
             (b) by the child, acting with leave of the court;  or
             (c) in the child’s interest, by any other person  acting  with
             leave of the court.
             (6)  Section  29  applies  to  an  application  in  terms   of
        subsection (2).


        CLAUSE 35


        Clause rejected.


        NEW CLAUSE


        1.  That the following be a new Clause to follow Clause 34:


           Refusal   of   access   or   refusal   to   exercise    parental
           responsibilities and rights


           35.   (1)   Any person having care or custody of  a  child  who,
           contrary  to  an  order  of  any  court   or   to   a   parental
           responsibilities and rights agreement that has taken  effect  as
           contemplated in section 22(4), refuses another  person  who  has
           access to that child or who holds parental responsibilities  and
           rights in respect of that  child  in  terms  of  that  order  or
           agreement to exercise such access or such  responsibilities  and
           rights or who prevents that person from exercising  such  access
           or such responsibilities and rights is guilty of an offence  and
           liable on conviction to a fine or to imprisonment for  a  period
           not exceeding one year.
           (2)   (a)   A person having care or custody of a  child  whereby
           another person has  access  to  that  child  or  holds  parental
           responsibilities and rights in respect of that child in terms of
           an order of any court or a parental responsibilities and  rights
           agreement as contemplated in subsection (1) must upon any change
           in his or her residential address forthwith  in  writing  notify
           such other person of such change.
           (b)   A person who fails to comply with paragraph (a) is  guilty
           of an  offence  and  liable  on  conviction  to  a  fine  or  to
           imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year.


        CLAUSE 42

        1.  Clause rejected.
        NEW CLAUSE

        1.  That the following be a new Clause to follow Clause 41:


           Children's courts and presiding officers


             42. (1)   Every court which is established in terms of section
             2(1)(f) of the Magistrates' Courts Act, 1944 (Act  No.  32  of
             1944), is a children's  court  and  has  jurisdiction  on  any
             matter arising from the application of this Act for  the  area
             of its jurisdiction.
                 (2)   Every –
             (a) magistrate is the  presiding  officer  of  the  children's
             court;  and
             (b) additional magistrate is an assistant presiding officer of
             the children's court,
             for  the  district  of  which  he  or  she  is  magistrate  or
             additional magistrate, as the case may be.
                 (3)   The presiding officer of the children's court  or  an
             assistant  presiding  officer  thereof   must   perform   such
             functions as may be assigned to him or her under this  Act  or
             any other law.


        CLAUSE 45


        1.  On page 28, from line 4, to omit “Except  where  this  Act,  the
           Divorce Act or the Maintenance Act expressly provides otherwise”
           and to substitute “Subject to section 1(4)”.


        CLAUSE 46


        1.  On page 28, from line 48, to omit subparagraph (ii).


        2.  On page 28, in line  50,  to  omit  “(iii)”  and  to  substitute
        “(ii)”.


        3.  On page 28, in  line  51,  to  omit  “(iv)”  and  to  substitute
        “(iii)”.


        CLAUSE 47


        1.  On page 29, in line 52, after the second “of”,  to  insert  “the
           Administration Amendment Act, 1929 (Act No. 9 of 1929),”


        2.  On page 29, in line 53, to omit “or” and to substitute “,”.


        3.  On page 29, in line 54, after “(Act No. 116 of 1998),” to insert
           “or the Recognition of Customary Marriages Act,  1998  (Act  No.
           120 of 1998),”.



        CLAUSE 53



        1.  On page 31, in line 45, to omit the first “children’s”.


        CLAUSE 56


        1.  On page 32, in line 19, to omit “children’s”.
        CLAUSE 57


        1.  On page 32, in line 25, to omit “children’s”.


        2.  On page 32, in line 30, to omit “the  clerk  of  the  children's
        court or”.


        CLAUSE 59


        1.  On page 33, in line 2, to omit “children’s”.


        CLAUSE 63


        1.  On page 34, in line 30, to omit “professional” and to substitute
        “suitably qualified”.


        CLAUSE 65


        1.  On page 35, in line 23, to omit “children’s”.


        Part 3 of CHAPTER 4


        1.  On page 35, in line 34, to omit “Part 3”.


        2.  On page 35, in line 35, to omit “Clerks of Children's Courts”.


        CLAUSE 67
        1.  Clause rejected.

        NEW CLAUSE

        1.  That the following be a new Clause to follow Clause 66:


        Clerks of court


         67.      (1)    Every  clerk  of  the  court   at   the   relevant
        magistrate’s court must assist the children's court in  question  in
        performing its functions as provided for in this Act or in any other
        law or as may be prescribed.
        (2) If a clerk of the court is, for any reason, unable to assist the
        children's court or if no clerk of the court has been appointed  for
        a court, the presiding officer concerned may designate any competent
        officer employed in terms of the Public Service Act to act as  clerk
        of the court for purposes of assisting that children's court for  as
        long as the clerk of the court is unable to so  assist  or  until  a
        clerk of the court has been appointed, as the case may be.

        CLAUSE 68


        1.  On page 36, in line 1, to omit “children’s”.


        2.  On page 36, in line 2, to omit “children’s”.


        NEW HEADING

        1.  On page 36, after line 4, to insert:

           Part 3

           Pre-hearing conferences, family group  conferences,  other  lay-
           forums and settling matters out of court

        CLAUSE 72

        1.  On page 36, in line 49, to omit “children’s”.


        CLAUSE 73


        1.  Clause rejected.


        NEW CLAUSE


        1.  That the following be a new Clause to follow Clause 72:


        Other functions


          73.    The clerk of the court may attend every  children’s  court
          hearing.


        CLAUSE 75


        1.  On page 37, in line  19,  after  “courts”  to  insert  “and  the
           powers, duties and functions of clerks of the court in as far as
           they relate to the proceedings of children’s courts;”.



        CLAUSE 119



        1.  On page  40,  in  line  19,  after  “person”  to  insert  “,  if
        available”.


        CLAUSE 120


        1.  On page 40, in line  31,  to  omit  “either  as  a  party  or  a
        witness”.


        2.  On page 40, in line 43, to omit “sexual abuse” and to substitute
        “indecent assault”.


        3.  On page 40, in line 50, to omit “sexual abuse” and to substitute
        “indecent assault”.


        4.  On page 40, in line 52, to omit all the words after  “rape,”  up
           to and including “abuse” in line 53 and to substitute  “indecent
           assault”.



        CLAUSE 122



        1.  On page 41,  from  line  19,  to  omit  subsection  (2)  and  to
        substitute:
             (2) The Director-General must enter the name of a person found
           unsuitable to work with children as contemplated in section  120
           in  Part  B  of  the  Register  regardless  of  whether   appeal
           proceedings have been instituted or not.
             (3)  If,  after  appeal  or  review  proceedings   have   been
           concluded, a finding in terms of section 120 that  a  person  is
           unsuitable to work with  children  is  reversed,  the  Director-
           General must forthwith remove the name of the  person  from  the
           Register.


        CLAUSE 123


        1.  On page 41, in line 34, to omit “, kinship care-giver”.


        2.  On page 41, in line 37, to omit “or”.


        3.  On page 41, after line 37, to insert:
           (e)   be employed in terms  of  the  Public  Service  Act  in  a
           position where that person works with or has access to children;
           (f)   be employed in terms of the Municipal  Systems  Act  in  a
           position where that person works with or has access to children;
            or


        4.  On page 41, in line 38, to omit “(e)” and to substitute “(g)”.


        5.  On page 41, after line 49, to insert:
           (5)   The head of a state department  may  not  allow  a  person
           whose name appears in Part B of the Register to be employed in a
           position where that person works with or has access to children.
           (6)   The municipal council of a municipality may  not  allow  a
           person whose name appears in  Part  B  of  the  Register  to  be
           employed in a position where  that  person  works  with  or  has
           access to children.
        CLAUSE 124


        1.  On page 42, in line 10, to omit “or”.


        2.  On page 42, in line 13, to omit “.” and to substitute “;”.


        3.  On page 42, after line 13, to insert:
           (d)   is employed in terms  of  the  Public  Service  Act  in  a
           position where he or she works with or has access  to  children,
           that person must disclose that fact to the  head  of  the  state
           department in which he or she is employed;  or
           (e)   is employed in terms of the Municipal  Systems  Act  in  a
           position where he or she works with or has access  to  children,
           that person must disclose that fact to the municipal council  of
           the municipality concerned.


        CLAUSE 126


        1.  On page 42, in line 39, to omit “or”.


        2.  On page 42, in line 42, to omit “.” and to substitute “;”.


        3.  On page 42, after line 42, to insert:
           (d)   to be employed in terms of the Public  Service  Act  in  a
           position where he or she works with or has access  to  children,
           the head of the state department in which he or  she  is  to  be
           employed must  establish  whether  or  not  that  person’s  name
           appears in Part B of the Register;  or
           (e)   to be employed in terms of the Municipal Systems Act in  a
           position where he or she works with or has access  to  children,
           the  municipal  council  of  that  municipality  must  establish
           whether or not that person’s name  appears  in  Part  B  of  the
           Register.


        4.  On page 42, in line 50, to omit “and”.


        5.  On page 42, in line 53, to omit “.” and to substitute “;”.


        6.  On page 42, after line 53, to add:
           (d)   the head of every state department must establish  whether
           the name of any person employed in terms of the  Public  Service
           Act in a position where he or she works with or  has  access  to
           children appears in Part B of the Register;  and
           (e)   the municipal council of every municipality must establish
           whether the  name  of  any  person  employed  in  terms  of  the
           Municipal Systems Act in a position where he or she  works  with
           or has access to children appears in Part B of the Register.


        CLAUSE 128


        1.  On page 43,  from  line  40,  to  omit  subsection  (4)  and  to
        substitute:
            (4)  The name and particulars of a person convicted  more  than
            once of an offence with regard to a child may  not  be  removed
            from Part B of the Register.


        CLAUSE 129


        1.  On page 44, after line 29, to insert:
           (8)   The Minister may consent to the medical  treatment  of  or
           surgical operation on a child if the child unreasonably  refuses
           to give consent.


        2.  On page 44, in line 30, to omit “(8)” and to substitute “(9)”.


        3.  On page 44, in line 33, to omit “(9)” and to substitute “(10)”.


        CLAUSE 150


        1.  On page 47, in line 8, to omit all the words after  "worker"  up
           to and including "155(2)" in line 9.


        2.  On page 47, in line 10, after "labour;" to insert "and".


        3.  On page 47, in line11 to omit  “(b)   an  unaccompanied  foreign
        child”.


        4.  On page 47, in line 12, to omit “(c)  a child who is a victim of
        trafficking”.


        5.  On page 47, in line 13, to omit "(e)  a street child;  and".


        6.  On page 47, in line 14, to omit “(f)” and to substitute “(b)”.


        7.  On page 47, after line 14, to insert:
           (3)   If after investigation a social worker finds that a  child
           referred to in subsection (2) is not a child in need of care and
           protection as contemplated in subsection (1), the social  worker
           must  where  necessary  take  measures  to  assist  the   child,
           including   counselling,   mediation,   prevention   and   early
           intervention services, family reconstruction and rehabilitation,
           behaviour modification, problem solving and referral to  another
           suitably qualified person or organisation.


        CLAUSE 151


        1.  On page 47, in line 17, to omit "that presiding officer" and  to
           substitute "the children's court concerned".


        2.  On page 47, in line 22, to omit "to the court".


        CLAUSE 152


        1.  On page 48, in line 7, to omit “children’s”.


        2.  On page 48, in line 19, to omit “children’s”.

        3.  On page 48, after line 33, to insert:
           (6)   Misuse of a power referred to in subsection (1) by a
           designated social worker employed in terms of the Public Service
           Act or the Municipal Systems Act constitutes unprofessional or
           improper conduct as is contemplated in section 27(1)(b) of the
           Social Service Professions Act, 1978 (Act No. 110 of 1978) by
           that social worker.


        4.  On page 48, in line 34, to omit “(6)” and to substitute “(7)”.
        5.  On page 48, in line 37, to omit “(7)” and to substitute “(8)”.

        CLAUSE 153

        1.  On page 48, in line 57, to omit “children’s”.


        CLAUSE 156


        1.  On page 50, from line 35, to omit subparagraph (i).


        2.  On page 50, in line 37, to omit “(ii)” and to substitute “(i)”.


        3.  On page 50, in line  38,  to  omit  “(iii)”  and  to  substitute
        “(ii)”.


        4.  On page 50, in  line  40,  to  omit  “(iv)”  and  to  substitute
        “(iii)”.


        5.  On page 50, in line 42, to omit “(v)” and to substitute “(iv)”.


        6.  On page 50, in line 44, to omit “(vi)” and to substitute “(v)”.




        CLAUSE 158


        1.  On page 52, in line 16, to omit "or programmes".


        2.  On page 52, in line 19, to omit "or programmes".


        3.  On page 52, in line 21, to omit all the words after  "programme"
           up to and including "programmes" in line 22.



        CLAUSE 164



        1.  On page 53, in line 46, to omit all the words  after  the  first
           "to" up to and including "other" and to substitute "such".


        2.   On  page  53,  in  line  46,  after  "person"  to  insert   "or
        institution".


        CLAUSE 165


        1.  On page 54, in line 3, to omit all the  words  after  the  first
           "to" up to and including "other" and to substitute "such".


        2.   On  page  54,  in  line  3,  after  "person"  to   insert   "or
        institution".


        3.  On page 54, in line 8, to omit all the  words  after  the  first
           "to" up to and including "other" and to substitute "such".


        4.   On  page  54,  in  line  8,  after  "person"  to   insert   "or
        institution".


        CLAUSE 166
        1.  On page 54, in line 12, to omit “children’s”.


        CLAUSE 231

        1.  On page 55, in line 3, after “wedlock;” to add “or”.


        2.  On page 55, in line 4, to omit “;  or” and to substitute “.”.


        3.  On page 55, in line 5, to omit paragraph (f).


        4.  On page 55, in line 24, to omit “,” and to substitute “or”.


        5.  On page 55, from line 24, to omit all the words after the second
           “child” up to and including the first “child” in line 25.


        6.  On page 55, in line 30, to omit “the  clerk  of  the  children's
        court or”.


        7.  On page 55, in line 31, to omit all the words after  “child”  up
           to and including “care-giver”.


        8.  On page 55, in line 32, to omit “children’s”.

        CLAUSE 232

        1.  On page 56, in line 9, to omit “designated”.
        2.  On page 56, in line 11, to omit “designated”.

        CLAUSE 233


        1.  On page 56, in line  16,  to  omit  "minor"  and  to  substitute
        "child".

        2.  On page 56, in line 41, to omit “children’s”.


        3.  On page 56, in line 46, to omit “children’s”.

        CLAUSE 235


        1.  On page 57, in line 22, to omit "designated".


        2.   On  page  57,  in  line  22,  after  "organisation"  to  insert
           "accredited  in  terms  of  section  251  to  provide   adoption
           services".


        3.  On page 57, in line 28, to omit "designated".


        4.   On  page  57,  in  line  28,  after  "organisation"  to  insert
           "accredited  in  terms  of  section  251  to  provide   adoption
           services".



        CLAUSE 236


        1.  On page 58, in line 16, to omit “children’s”.
        CLAUSE 237


        1.   On page 58, in line 27, to omit “children’s”.


        2.  On page 58, in line 36, to omit “children’s”.


        3.  On page 58, in line 37, to omit “children’s”.


        4.  On page 58, in line 44, to omit “children’s”.

        CLAUSE 238

        1.  On page 58, in line 46, to omit “clerk of the children's  court”
           and to substitute “presiding officer”.

        2.  On page 58, in line 47,  after  “delay”  to  insert  “cause  the
        sheriff to”.

        CLAUSE 239

        1.  On page 59, in line 16, to omit “children’s”.


        2.  On page 59, in line 17, to omit “children’s”.


        3.  On page 59, in line 19, to omit “children’s”.


        CLAUSE 240


        1.  On page 59, in line 43, to omit “or kinship care”.


        2.  On page 59, in line 44, to omit “or kinship care-giver”.


        CLAUSE 243


        1.  On page 60, in line 31, after "time" to insert "but".


        CLAUSE 244


        1.  On page 60, in line  54,  to  omit  the  second  "that"  and  to
        substitute "the".


        CLAUSE 247

        1.  On page 61, in line 35, to omit “children’s”.


        CLAUSE 249


        1.  On page 62, in line 31, to omit “*****” and to substitute:
            (d)  a child protection organisation  accredited  in  terms  of
           section  251  to  provide  adoption  services,   receiving   the
           prescribed fees;


        2.  On page 62, in line 32, to omit "designated".
        CLAUSE 250


        1.  On page 62, in line 38, to omit "designated".


        2.  On page 62, in line 42, to omit "designated".


        CLAUSE 251


        1.  On page 62, in line 52, to omit "designated".


        2.  On page 62, in line 54, to omit "designated".


        CLAUSE 252


        1.  On page 63, in line 6, to omit "designated".


        CLAUSE 253


        1.  On page 63, after line 21, to insert:


           (e)    prescribing  the  requirements  that  a   child   welfare
           organisation  has  to   comply   with   for   accreditation   as
           contemplated in section 251 to provide adoption services;
           (f)    prescribing  the  requirements  that  a   child   welfare
           organisation  has  to   comply   with   for   accreditation   as
           contemplated in section 259 to  provide  inter-country  adoption
           services;
        2.  On page 63, in line 22, to omit "(e)" and to substitute "(g)".


        3.  On page 63, in line 23, to omit "(f)" and to substitute "(h)".


        CLAUSE 258


        1.  On page 64, in line 25, to omit "designated".


        CLAUSE 259


        1.  On page 64, from line 27, to omit “Accreditation  of  designated
           child protection organisation for inter-country adoption” and to
           substitute  “Accreditation  to  provide  inter-country  adoption
           services”.


        2.  On page 64, in line 29, to omit "designated".


        3.  On page 64, in line 34, to omit "designated".


        4.  On page 64, in line 37, to omit "designated".


        CLAUSE 260


        1.  On page 64, in line 46, to omit “agreements” and  to  substitute
        “agreement”.


        2.  On page 64, in line 47, to omit "designated".
        3.  On page 64, in line 50, to omit "designated".


        CLAUSE 261


        1.  On page 65, in line  1,  to  omit  “Adoption  of  children  from
           Republic by persons in convention countries” and  to  substitute
           “Adoption  of  child  from  Republic  by  person  in  convention
           country“.


        CLAUSE 262


        1.  On page 65, in line 48,  to  omit  “Adoption  of  children  from
           Republic  by  persons  in  non-convention  countries”   and   to
           substitute “Adoption of child from Republic by  person  in  non-
           convention country“.



        CLAUSE 264



        1.  On page 66, in line 38,  to  omit  “Adoption  of  children  from
           convention countries by persons in Republic” and  to  substitute
           “Adoption  of  child  from  convention  country  by  person   in
           Republic“.


        2.  On page 66, in line 50, to omit "for" and to substitute "to".


        CLAUSE 265


        1.  On page 66, in line 52, to omit “Adoption of children from  non-
           convention countries by persons in Republic” and  to  substitute
           “Adoption of child from  non-convention  country  by  person  in
           Republic“.



        CLAUSE 266



        1.  On page 67, in line 11, to omit  “Recognition  of  inter-country
           adoption  of  children  from  convention   countries”   and   to
           substitute “Recognition of inter-country adoption of child  from
           convention country”.


        CLAUSE 268


        1.  On page 67, in line 35, to omit  “Recognition  of  inter-country
           adoption of  children  from  non-convention  countries”  and  to
           substitute “Recognition of inter-country adoption of child  from
           non-convention country”.



        CLAUSE 271



        1.  On page 68, in line 1, to  omit  “children”  and  to  substitute
        “child”.


        CLAUSE 283


        1.  On page 69, in line 48, after "to" to insert "or".


        CLAUSE 84
        1.  On page 70, in line 2, to omit "84" and to substitute "284".


        CLAUSE 286


        1.  On page 70, in line 34, to omit "a".


        CLAUSE 287


        1.  On page 71, in line 1, to  omit  “children”  and  to  substitute
        “child”.


        CLAUSE 288


        1.  On page 71, in line 15, to omit "a".


        2.  On page 71, in line 16, to omit "288" and to substitute "289".


        CLAUSE 290


        1.  On page 71, in line 26, to omit "a".
        2.  On page 71, in line 27,  to  omit  "288(2)"  and  to  substitute
        "289(2)".


        CLAUSE 304


        1.  On page 75, in line 41, to  omit  “officer”  and  to  substitute
        “person”.


        CLAUSE 305


        1.  On page 76, in line 3, to omit everything after “12” up to and
           including “(6)” in line 4 and to insert “(2), (3), (4), (6), (7)
           or (8)”.


        2.  On page 76, in line 7, to omit everything after “section” up to
           and including “134(1)” and to insert “12(5), 12(9), 57(2), 124,
           126(1), 134(1) or 232(6)”.


        3.  On page 76, in line 19, to omit "*****".


        4.  On page 76, in line 29, to omit "or".


        5.  On page 76, in line 39, to omit “, kinship care”.


        6.  On page 76, in line 40, to omit “kinship care,”.


                          THURSDAY, 8 DECEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

    1.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Information Systems
             Audits performed at the National Treasury and the State
             Information Technology Agency for the financial year 2004-2005
             [RP 209-2005].

    2.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration for consideration:

          a) Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of the
             Management of Sick Leave Benefits at certain National and
             Provincial Departments [RP 215-2005].

    3.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance:
          a) Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of
             the Special Pensions Board for the year ended 31 March 2005
             [RP 217-2005].

    4.     The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:
          a) Special Report of the Auditor-General on the Status of the
             Delays in tabling of Annual Reports and consolidated financial
             statements of National Government for the financial year ended
             2004-2005 (as at 31 October 2005) [RP 225-2005].


    5.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation and the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
             Relations Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             222-2005].

    6.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries
             Sector Education and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 90-2005].

        7. The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
           Economic and Foreign Affairs and the Select Committee on Labour
           and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


              a) Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and
                 Safety Inspectorate for 2004-2005 [RP 125-2005].
    8.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Land and Environmental Affairs:

          a) Notice No 925 published in Government Gazette No  28058  dated
             23 September 2005: Release of State land at De  Mond,  Western
             Cape Province,  which  is  no  longer  required  for  forestry
             purposes, made in terms  of  section  50(4)  of  the  National
             Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).


          b) Notice No 926 published in Government Gazette No  28060  dated
             23 September 2005: Water Tribunals  Rules  made  in  terms  of
             section 148(5) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No  36  of
             1998).

          c) Notice No 945 published in Government Gazette No  28053  dated
             30 September 2005:  Proposal  for  the  establishment  of  the
             Gouritz Catchment Management Agency, made in terms of  section
             78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


          d) Notice No 944 published in Government Gazette No  28053  dated
             30 September 2005:  Proposal  for  the  establishment  of  the
             Olifants-Doorn Catchment Management Agency, made in  terms  of
             section 78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act  No  36  of
             1998).


          e) Notice No 939 published in Government Gazette No  28053  dated
             30 September 2005:  Establishment  of  the  Crocodile  (West)-
             Marico Catchment Management Agency (Water Management  Area  No
             3) which covers the Northern part of the North-West  Province,
             North-Eastern part  of  Gauteng,  the  South-West  portion  of
             Limpopo Province and a small portion of Western Mpumalanga and
             is bordered by Botswana on its  North-Western  side,  made  in
             terms of section 78(1) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No
             36 of 1998).


          f) Government Notice No 1038 published in Government  Gazette  No
             28143 dated 21 October 2005: Restrictions on the use of  water
             for Agricultural, Domestic  and  Industrial  purposes  in  the
             Luvuvhu/Letaba Water Management Area, in terms of the National
             Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


    9.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on  Land
         and Environmental Affairs for consideration:

          a) Government Notice No 1057 published in Government Gazette No
             28167 dated 28 October 2005: Invitation to submit written
             comments on the proposed construction of Phase-2 of the
             Olifants River Water Resource Development Project and
             Environmental Impact Assessment relating thereto, in terms of
             section 110 of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
             1998)

    10.    The following paper is  referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
         Finance  and  the  Select  Committee  on   Local   Government   and
         Administration for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Government Employees
             Pension Fund (GEPF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
             [RP 45-2005].

    11.    The following paper is  referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
         Public Services for consideration:

          a) The South African National Roads Agency Limited Declaration of
             Intent for 2005-2008.


    12.    The following paper is  referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
         Education and Recreation for consideration and report:


        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum for
           2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 194-2005].


    13.    The following paper is  referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


        a) Prosecutorial Policy and Directives relating to Prosecution of
           Criminal Matters Arising from Conflicts of the Past and which
           were committed before 11 May 1994, in terms of sections 21(2),
           35(1) and 35(2)(b) of the National Prosecuting Authority Act,
           (Act No 32 of 1998).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


      a) Government Notice No 1040 published in Government Gazette No 28150
         dated 28 October 2005: Borrowing powers of water boards listed
         under Schedule 3 Part B of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
         (Act No 1 of 1999).


2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      a) Progress reports in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates
         Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993) on magistrates (M S E Khumalo; K
         Sulliman and M F Mathe) suspended for alleged misconduct.


                          MONDAY, 12 DECEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

        1) Patents Amendment Bill [B17B – 2005] – Act No 20 of 2005
           (assented to and signed by President on 8 December 2005); and
        2) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B37 – 2005] – Act No 21 of 2005
           (assented to and signed by President on 29 November 2005).


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
   Diamonds Second Amendment Bill [B 39B - 2005] (National Assembly – sec
   76), dated 12 December 2005:

    The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having considered
    the subject of the Diamonds Second Amendment Bill  [B 39B – 2005]
    (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it and classified by the
    Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill without
    amendment.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
   on the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B 33B -2005] (National
   Assembly- sec 74), dated 12 December 2005:

    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
    considered the subject of the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B
    33B-2005] (National Assembly – sec 74), referred to it, reports that it
    has agreed to the Bill.


                          TUESDAY, 13 DECEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 13 December 2005:


            i) National Credit Bill [B 18D – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
               76)
           ii) Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 23D – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 76).

     (2)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 13 December
         2005:


            i) Electronic Communications Bill [B 9B – 2005] (introduced as
               Convergence Bill [B 9 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)
           ii) Diamonds Amendment Bill [B 27B – 2005] (Reintroduced)]
               (National Assembly – sec 75)
          iii) Diamonds Second Amendment Bill [B 39B – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 76)

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council
      1) Bill passed by National Assembly on 13 December 2005 and
         transmitted for
       concurrence:


             i) Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related
                Matters Bill [B 36B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)


          The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Local
          Government and Administration of the National Council of
          Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 2 – Parliament of the
        Republic of South Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 2 for 2004-
        2005.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and Intellectual
         Property Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2004-2005, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
         2005.

The Minister for Public Enterprises


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
         Company Limited (SAFCOL) for the year ended 30 June 2005, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for the year ended 30 June 2005.


      b) Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Limited for the 9 months
         period ended 31 March 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the 9 months period ended
         31 March 2005.

4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Botshelo Water for the year
        ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2005.


      b) Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuck Ridge Water for the
         year ended 30 June 2005.


      c) Report and Financial Statements of Albany Coast Water for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 2005.


      d) Report and Financial Statements of Amatola Water for the year ended
         30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2005.


      e) Report and Financial Statements of Lepelle Northern Water for the
         year ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
         2005.
      f) Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
         2005.


      g) Report and Financial Statements of Namaqua Water Board for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 2005.


      h) Report and Financial Statements of Overberg Water for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
         2005.


      i) Report and Financial Statements of the Pelladrift Water Board for
         the year ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended
         30 June 2005.

      j) Report and Financial Statements of Rand Water for the year ended 30
         June 2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2005.
      k) Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
         2005.

    (l)     Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni  Water  for  the  year
        ended 30  June  2005,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the  year  ended  30  June
        2005.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
      on the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
      Bill [B 36B - 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 13 December
      2005:

        The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration, having
        considered the subject of the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws
        Repeal and Related Matters Bill [B 36B - 2005] (National Assembly –
        sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Affairs
    on the Provisional Suspension from Office of  Mr  I  W  O  M  Morake,  a
    Magistrate at Lichtenburg Magistrate Court, dated 12 December 2005:

      The Select Committee on Security and  Constitutional  Affairs,  having
      considered the report on the provisional  suspension  from  office  of
      Magistrate Mr I W O M Morake, tabled by the Minister for  Justice  and
      Constitutional  Development  in  terms  of  section  13(3)(b)  of  the
      Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993), reports as follows:


         1.      The Select  Committee  noted  from  the  report  that  the
            Minister provisionally suspended Mr Morake from  office  on  16
            September  2005  in  terms  of  the  section  13(3)(a)  of  the
            Magistrates  Act,  1993.  The  report  of  the  Minister  which
            indicates reasons for the provisional suspension was tabled  in
            Parliament on 16 September 2005, in compliance with section  13
            (3) (b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.


         2.      The Select Committee invited Mr Morake on  the  3  October
            2005  to  submit  written  representations  to  the   Committee
            regarding the recommendation of the Magistrates Commission. The
            Committee  received  a  response  from  Mr.  Morake.   In   his
            presentation, Mr Morake denied the  allegations  and  requested
            the committee hold in abeyance a decision to confirm or not  to
            confirm his provisional suspension, pending the outcome  of  an
            application in terms of Section 174 of the  Criminal  Procedure
            Act, which was to be held on  27 October 2005.


         3.       The  Committee  was  informed  that   the   Section   174
            application was unsuccessful.


         4.      The Select Committee noted that Mr Morake  is  accused  of
            stealing monies which  were  handed  to  him  in  his  official
            capacity on two occasions at  the  office  by  members  of  the
            public. These monies were to be paid over to other  members  of
            the public during the period between 27 June 2003  and  1  July
            2003 and again between 23 April 2004 and  14  March  2005.  The
            amounts involved are R500,00 and R5 000,00.


         5.      In terms of section 13(4)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993,
            Parliament  must,  as  soon  as  reasonably  possible,  pass  a
            resolution as to whether or not the provisional  suspension  of
            the magistrate is confirmed. The  Select  Committee  considered
            the allegation to be of such a serious nature  as  to  make  it
            inappropriate for Mr Morake to perform the functions while  the
            inquiry referred to in section 13(3)(e) of the Magistrates Act,
            1993, is being held and therefore recommends that  the  Council
            resolves to confirm the provisional suspension of Mr Morake  in
            terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.


         6.      The Committee further recommends that a progress report in
            respect of the inquiry of the Magistrates Commission be  tabled
            in accordance with the provisions of section  13(3)(f)  of  the
            Magistrates Act, 1993.


Report to be considered.


3.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Affairs
   on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Mr K Suliman, an  additional
   Magistrate at Durban Magistrate Court, dated 12 December 2005:


      The Select Committee on Security and  Constitutional  Affairs,  having
      considered the report on the provisional  suspension  from  office  of
      Magistrate Mr K Suliman,  tabled  by  the  Minister  for  Justice  and
      Constitutional  Development  in  terms  of  section  13(3)(b)  of  the
      Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993), reports as follows:


            1. The Select Committee noted from the report that the  Minister
               provisionally suspended Mr Suliman from office on  22  August
               2005 in terms of the section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act,
               1993. The report of the Minister which indicates reasons  for
               the provisional suspension was tabled  in  Parliament  on  23
               August 2005, in  compliance  with  section  13(3)(b)  of  the
               Magistrates Act, 1993.


            2. The Select Committee invited Mr Suliman on 29 August 2005  to
               submit written representations to the Committee regarding the
               recommendation of the Magistrates Commission.  The  Committee
               did not receive a response to the invitation.

            3. The Select Committee noted that  Mr  Suliman  is  accused  of
               indecent assault/crimen injuria in that he allegedly sexually
               assaulted his colleague, Ms N V Khumalo.

            4. In terms  of  section  13(4)(c)  of  Magistrates  Act,  1993,
               Parliament must, as  soon  as  reasonably  possible,  pass  a
               resolution as to whether or not the provisional suspension of
               the magistrate is confirmed. The Select Committee  considered
               the allegation to be of such a serious nature as to  make  it
               inappropriate for Mr Suliman to perform the  functions  while
               the  inquiry  referred  to  in  section   13(3)(e)   of   the
               Magistrates Act, 1993, is being held and therefore recommends
               that  the  Counicil  resolves  to  confirm  the   provisional
               suspension of Mr. Suliman in terms of section 13(3)(c) of the
               Magistrates Act, 1993.



            5. The Committee further recommends that a  progress  report  in
               respect of the  inquiry  of  the  Magistrates  Commission  be
               tabled in accordance with the provisions of section  13(3)(f)
               of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

          Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
       on Visit to Abaqulusi Local Municipality, dated 13 December 2005:

       Delegates  of  the  Select  Committee   on   Local   Government   and
       Administration, i.e. Mr S  Shiceka,  Mr  C  Ntuli  and  Mr  M  Mzizi,
       conducted a visit to the Abaqulusi  Local  Municipality  in  KwaZulu-
       Natal on 21 November 2005.  The  delegation  was  guided  by  section
       139(3)(b) of the Constitution,  which  states  that  if  a  municipal
       council is dissolved, the dissolution takes effect 14 days  from  the
       date of receipt of the notice by the council unless set aside by that
       Cabinet member of the council before the expiry of those 14 days. The
       delegates conducted meetings with  relevant  stakeholders,  including
       the Strategic Support Team, SALGA, the Ward Committees, the  business
       community  and  organised  labour.   The   political   parties   were
       represented and these  representatives  were  requested  to  make  an
       input:


       IFP        5
       ANC        3
       DA         2
       ACDP 2

       The Committee, having conducted such a review,  will  report  to  the
       House  and  forward  such  recommendations   to   the   KwaZulu-Natal
       provincial government.


       ISSUES ARISING FROM THE BRIEFING BY THE MEC - 17 NOVEMBER 2005


       There  were  factions  and  infighting  amongst  councillors  of  the
       majority party,  the  Inkatha  Freedom  Party,  which  paralysed  the
       functioning of Council.


       The Provincial Exco received reports on these matters since May 2005,
       and thereafter periodically.


       Minister Mufamadi also visited Abaqulusi in October 2005.


       Item 4(2) of the Code of Conduct  for  Councillors  provides  that  a
       councillor who fails to attend 3 or more consecutive meetings must be
       removed from office. This is a peremptory provision.


       On 2 November the MEC dissolved the Council, following  a  resolution
       of the Executive Council.


       On 2 November the  notification  of  the  intervention  in  terms  of
       Section 139(3) was served on the NCOP, by means of a fax.


       This notice of dissolution is required by  Section  139(3)(a)(ii)  of
       the Constitution, from the MEC  for  Local  Government,  Housing  and
       Traditional Affairs (KwaZulu-Natal).


       On 17 November MEC Mabuyakhulu briefed the Select  Committee  on  the
       background to the intervention.


       AN OVERVIEW OF THE MUNICIPALITY


       The province has 61 Municipalities, of which 29  are  being  assisted
       under  Project  Consolidate.  The  province  has   one   Metropolitan
       Municipality (Ethekwini), 10 District  Municipalities  and  50  Local
       Municipalities.


       Abaqulusi  Local  Municipality  falls  under  the  Zululand  District
       Municipality.


       The Abaqulusi Local Municipality is located on the  western  boundary
       and comprises approximately 30% of the District Municipality area.


       Abaqulusi was constituted from the former entities:


       Vryheid Transitional Local Council (TLC);
       Louwsburg Local Council;
       Part of the Abaqulusi and Usuthu  Sub-regions,  administered  by  the
       Zululand Regional Council (ZRC); and
       eMondlo  Town  Committee,  administered   by   Umsekele   (Provincial
       Department).


       Abaqulusi comprises of an urban and rural component. The urban sector
       includes  the  towns  of  Vryheid,  Bhekuzulu,  Louwsburg,  Lakeside,
       Hlobane and eMondlo. The latter was administered by the Vryheid  TLC,
       whereas the rural areas were administered by  the  Zululand  Regional
       Council (ZRC).


       The Vryheid TLC allocated its capital budget  to  address  the  total
       spectrum of development required within these urban areas as follows:


       Allocate 30% of the capital budget for the  development  of  economic
       and social infrastructure; and
       Allocate 70% of the capital budget for new infrastructure.


       In the case  of  the  ZRC  the  allocation  was  based  on  an  equal
       distribution throughout its area of jurisdiction.


       Abaqulusi consists of 20 wards with 17 councillors  and  falls  under
       the Zululand  District  Municipality,  located  in  the  province  of
       KwaZulu-Natal. Its area is now roughly 200  times  the  size  of  the
       original area administered by the former  Vryheid  TLC,  the  largest
       part of which is rural and underdeveloped.


       The municipality is an executive committee and ward  committee  type.
       The Council consists of a total of 39 councillors,  20  of  whom  are
       ward councillors and the remainder are PR councillors 11  Councillors
       are females. There is a staff compliment of 452.


       Abaqulusi includes the former Vryheid TLC, Louwsburg  Local  Council,
       eMondlo Town Committee and parts of the  Abaqulusi  and  Usuthu  Sub-
       regions. The Abaqulusi Municipal area is approximately 3 960  km²  in
       extent and includes the following main settlement concentrations:


       Vryheid  with  its  central   business   district   and   surrounding
       residential area together with its former black township Bhekuzulu;
       Louwsburg, an independent settlement area some 67  km  north-east  of
       Vryheid and at the entrance to the Ithala Game Reserve;
       Hlobane, Coronation and other similar mining settlements 25 km to the
       north of Vryheid;
       eMondlo and the surrounding Tribal Area to the south-west of Vryheid;
       Khambi Tribal Area and surrounding settlements in the north-eastern
       part of the Municipal area;
       Glückstadt and surrounding settlements in the  eastern  part  of  the
       Municipal area;
       Boschhoek and surrounding settlements in  the  central  part  of  the
       Municipal area; and
       A number of rural settlement areas around Brakfontein.


       VIEWS EXPRESSED IN THE MEETING

        FIVE IFP COUNCILLORS


        The 5 IFP councillors did not support the MEC ‘s intervention based
        on the following reasons:


          ➢ They believe that the MEC should have  applied  other  ways  of
            intervention like Municipal Assistance programmes
          ➢ The Council was operating well
          ➢ The intervention by the MEC was politically driven
          ➢ The Council budget  2005/2006  was  passed  within  the  MFMA’s
            specified period although after the intervention by the MEC
          ➢ The Municipality was listed among  those  Councils  which  were
            under the Municipal Assistance Program
          ➢ The records of Council reflects one  Mayor  who  was  paid  and
            that the problem was caused by the Court which ordered  that  a
            councillor who was no more a Mayor to be reinstated
          ➢ The unauthorized use of Council vehicle by  former  Mayor,  Mrs
            E. J .S Moolman, was considered by Council and  finalised.  Her
            report was  accepted  because  she  was  attending  to  Council
            business to hand over a cheque for  development  to  the  needy
            community and the only problem was that it was assumed that she
            knew that the other meeting at KwaGwebu was an IFP meeting
          ➢ The  non-attendance  of  meeting  by  certain  councillors  was
            considered by the Council and it was reported to  the  MEC  who
            did not respond to that effect
          ➢  Why  the  Council  was  dissolved  if  it   was   faced   with
            administrative problems because there is a Municipal Assistance
            Program to cater for such problems
          ➢ The MEC’s intervention had crippled development in rural areas
            because councillors are no more assisting needy communities
          ➢ The Municipal Manager wanted to be the Mayor
          ➢ The Municipal Manager was  supposed  to  communicate  with  the
            councillors about its non-delivery of services,  but  that  was
            not done by the Municipal Manager
          ➢  The  MEC  ignored  the  Commission’s  recommendation  not   to
            dissolve the Council
          ➢ The MEC did not give the dismissed councillors the  opportunity
            to appeal for not attending three consecutive meetings
          ➢ The Municipal Manager did not accept  the  recommendation  that
            the election of the Speaker should take place


        COUNCILLORS FROM THE OTHER POLITICAL PARTIES


        The representative councillors from the other political parties all
        supported  the  intervention.  Their  reasons  for  supporting  the
        intervention are as follow:


            ➢ Council could not operate as a  result  of  the  in  fighting
              between IFP councillors
            ➢  Opposition  councillors  were   out-voted   where   unlawful
              decisions were taken
            ➢ Letters were written to the MEC, requesting his  intervention


         ➢  The  DA  was  in  favour  of  the  Administrator  taking   over
           responsibilities  and  functions  of  the  Speaker   and   EXCO,
           including that of the Mayor, but advised that the  Administrator
           work with the remaining councillors in an advisory capacity
         ➢ The Municipal  Manager  reported  all  the  unlawful  activities
           which took place at the Council to the MEC
          ➢ The Bhekuzulu, Vryheid and eMondlo communities  hosted  several
            marches with  regard  to  the  dissatisfaction  with  the  non-
            delivery of services, but these were covered up by  the  ruling
            party
         ➢ The  unauthorized  use  of  the  Council  vehicle,  unauthorized
           opening of water at Hlobane and the use of Council resources  to
           fund the IFP activities
         ➢  The  indigent  support  was   not   utilised   accordingly   as
           applications were filled by the applicants but Council  did  not
           process them
            ➢ There is no development in rural communities,  no  water  and
              sanitation
            ➢  Councillors  did  not  understand  their  roles   in   their
              communities
      ➢ Few ward committees were fully established


        WARD COMMITTEES


        There were 7 properly constituted  committees  represented  in  the
        meeting.  These  7  ward  committees  were   in   favour   of   the
        intervention. Of the 13 wards, representatives  were  appointed  in
        the meeting. Two ward  representatives  abstained  from  presenting
        their views about the intervention.


           Those ward committees in favour of the intervention  felt
           so because:


                ▪ Communities were not consulted during  the  budget
                  process
                ▪  There  are  no  development  programmes  in  some
                  wards
                ▪ Contractors use poor material  where  construction
                  occurred
                ▪  People  are  not  benefiting  from  the  indigent
                  policy
                ▪ Councillors use resources  for  themselves,  their
                  friends and their families
                ▪ Politics played a role when  deciding  who  should
                  get services


           Those ward representatives not favouring the intervention,  felt
           so because:


               ▪ The MEC did not allow the communities to  vote  on  whether
                 or not councillors should be dismissed
               ▪ Councillors were working hard
               ▪  National  government  was  suppose  to  give   funds   for
                 development
               ▪ Community projects are happening  in  certain  areas,  e.g.
                 bricklaying, dressmaking etc.
               ▪ Council was operating effectively



        BUSINESS



        There were 6 representatives who spoke on behalf  of  business.  Of
        the 6 representatives, 4 representatives  were  in  favour  of  the
        intervention by the MEC and 2 representatives were not  in  favour.
        The business representatives argued that they pay  tariffs  but  do
        not receive services and small businesses do not get  tenders.  The
        two representatives indicated that nothing has improved  since  the
        intervention.


        CIVIC STRUCTURES


        There were 4 representatives that spoke  on  behalf  of  the  Civic
        Structures, with 3 representatives supporting the intervention  and
        1   representative   not   supporting   the    intervention.    The
        representative not supporting the intervention felt  that  the  MEC
        should have interviewed each councillor before making  a  decision.
        The three representatives indicated that several marches were  held
        to complain about poor service delivery. There are service delivery
        backlogs, but councillors do not report back to communities.
        There is  no  service  delivery,  roads,  water  and  old  people’s
        electricity’s accounts  are  cut  off.  The  MEC  delayed  to  take
        decision to dissolve the Council.


        SANCO


        SANCO  supported  the  intervention.  SANCO  made   the   following
        presentation. SANCO has since 2000 indicated that they were against
        the tariffs of 120% charged by the Council   but  got  no  response
        from Council.  Signatures  of  members  of  eMondlo  and  Bhekuzulu
        communities complaining about the failure by AbaQulusi Municipality
        to deliver services were submitted


        1. THE MUNICIPAL MANAGER


      He supported the intervention by the MEC.


      The Municipal Manager reported that it was difficult to  operate  with
      the Council and that he recommended to the MEC to  either  consider  a
      general intervention or a specific intervention. He  referred  to  the
      irregular expenditure referred  to  by  the  MEC  and  the  aspect  of
      councillors giving instructions to  officials  against  the  Municipal
      Manager’s instructions. The Municipal Manager felt  that  it  was  not
      necessary for him to report those issues that were  already  submitted
      to the MEC.


   1. IRREGULAR EXPENDITURE BY COUNCILLOR E J S MOOLMAN


      The matter served three times before EXCO. The then  EXCO,  when  they
      considered the matter in  her  absence,  resolved  that  she  be  held
      responsible for the cost expenditure as a result of her instruction to
      the  official.  She  did  not  deny  giving  such  instructions.   The
      expenditure had accumulated over a period of years and the  MFMA  only
      makes provisions for an unauthorized expenditure  falling  within  the
      financial year. The issue could not  be  addressed  by  an  adjustment
      budget because it was related to many financial years.  EXCO  resolved
      that the money be recovered from Councillor Moolman.


       When the matter was considered they had two options, i.e.  either  to
      condone the expense or she be given a chance to pay  back  the  money.
      EXCO opted for the second option. The expenditure was ±R11 000,00  and
      she was given a chance to negotiate payment options, but she  did  not
      respond. The Municipal Manager then instructed the CFO to deduct money
      from her. It was during the time of different Mayors and by  then  she
      was the Deputy Mayor.


      The new EXCO chaired by Councillor G M Nxele  confronted  the  CFO  to
      refund Councillor Moolman the money  deducted  from  her  salary.  CFO
      requested that the instruction be in writing,  which  never  happened.
      The Mayor, Councillor  G  M  Nxele,  asked  the  CFO  whether  he  was
      disobeying their instruction. The  CFO  reported  the  matter  to  the
      Municipal Manager. The Municipal Manager advised the  Mayor  that  the
      matter required the decision of Council and that in terms  of  section
      32 of the MFMA, which gives guidelines on how to deal  with  irregular
      and unauthorized expenditure.


      Before the matter was reported to the Council, a motion  from  members
      of EXCO was submitted to  refund  Councillor  Moolman  the  R2  000,00
      deducted from her salary. It was proposed by Councillor  M  B  Khumalo
      and seconded by Councillor B L Zwane, whose husband  was  involved  in
      the incident that resulted in the cost. Council was  made  aware  that
      Councillor B L Zwane should be regarded as having an interest  on  the
      matter because the persons responsible for the costs, which Councillor
      Moolman was being made to pay, included  Councillor  Zwane’s  husband.
      This advice was disregarded. When Council considered  the  matter,  it
      was resolved that because Councillor Moolman was delivering  water  to
      the  poor,  it  would  overlook  the  unauthorized  expenditure.   The
      recommendations by the Municipal Manager were not accepted.


   2.  THE PURCHASE OF TRACKSUITS


      On 14 September 2005 the Mayor, Councillor G M Nxele,  requested  EXCO
      to take an urgent decision for the purchasing of tracksuits to be used
      by all participants during the Mayoral Games to be held on Saturday 16
      September 2005.


      The Municipal  Manager  felt  that  it  was  not  necessary  for  such
      expenditure because Council has the necessary sports kits for all  the
      sports  codes  and  he  indicated  that  the  procurement  policy  and
      procedures could only be bypassed on matters of emergency and  in  his
      view there was no emergency in that  regard.   The  Municipal  Manager
      felt that the purchase of tracksuits was more  of  a  luxury  in  that
      regard as opposed to a basic  necessity  for  a  sport.  Moreover  the
      project was for another municipality’s project  (ZDM).  The  Municipal
      Manager  advised  against  this  expenditure.   EXCO  went  ahead  and
      purchased the tracksuits without taking the concerns of the  Municipal
      Manager in consideration.


   3.  YOUTH CONFERENCE FOR ABAQULUSI YOUTH COUNCIL


      The  Abaqulusi  Youth  Council  requested  financial  assistance  from
      Council for a Conference, which was to be held on 26-27 June  2005  at
      Stillwater Hotel. EXCO at its ordinary meeting held  on  7  June  2005
      approved a grant-in-aid of R30 000,00  as  Council’s  support  to  the
      Youth Summit.  Afterwards the Youth Council did not agree  to  certain
      things requested by EXCO and EXCO then decided to withdraw the funding
      on its special meeting held on Friday 24 June 2005.


      The cheque was issued, but was still with finance  department  because
      the Youth Council wanted it to be paid directly to  Stillwater  Hotel,
      where the conference was supposed  to  be  held.  EXCO  cancelled  the
      conference by withholding the finance.


      The Municipal Manager felt that this was not a  meeting  of  EXCO  and
      that they had no authority to authorize the expenditure. The Municipal
      Manager felt that EXCO misused the office. The money budgeted for  the
      conference was not spent by year ended on 30th June 2005 and the money
      was rolled over.


      COMPLAINTS AGAINST COUNCILLORS


      The Municipal Manager referred  to  the  reports  by  the  Speaker  to
      Council addressing complaints against certain councillors. The Speaker
      did not invite any witnesses during his investigation.


      The Municipal Manager referred the matter of Councillor  M  B  Khumalo
      who attacked the journalist in the Council Chamber to the Speaker. The
      Speaker, in his report, agreed that Councillor M  B  Khumalo  attacked
      the journalist in the Council Chamber, but indicated that  it  was  an
      isolated  incident,  not  misconduct.  They  created  a  cover-up   by
      negotiating with the journalist to pay  for  the  maintenance  of  the
      camera to the value of R 5 000,00 to finalise the matter.


MEETING WITH THE UNIONS

       1. IMATU

IMATU supported the intervention by MEC even though IMATU felt that  it  was
long overdue. Section 57 Managers were  never  given  a  chance  to  utilise
their leadership skills and councillors  influenced  their  decision-making.
This situation had destroyed the good relationship between the managers  and
their subordinates. Councillors interfered in administrative duties by:

      ✓ Giving direct instructions to employees


      ✓ Those  employees  were  faced  with  disciplinary  enquiries  as  a
        result of those instructions, e.g. one employee was involved in  an
        accident while driving for  a  councillor  and  that  employee  was
        forced to pay for the damages.

      ✓ A councillor attacked an employee and the Speaker’s  findings  were
        that that councillor was not guilty and given a warning

      ✓ Unions wrote  several  letters  requesting  a  meeting  to  resolve
        employees’ problems and training needs of employees

      ✓ Employees were not treated well and politics  played  an  important
        role on decision-making

      ✓  Some  employees  were  employed  without   following   the   right
        procedures

      ✓  Expelled  councillors  were  invited  to  a  meeting  to   resolve
        problems but they did not attend

      ✓ Employees did not have job descriptions

      ✓ Political appointments were made

      ✓  Councillors  who  had  an  interest  in  certain   posts   recused
        themselves as Union representatives on the panels

  2.  SAMWU


    SAMWU supported the intervention by the MEC.


        ✓ Several marches were held by  SAMWU  employees  complaining  about
          their  problems  within  the  Council,  including  employment   of
          employees which they were not happy with
        ✓ People from outside  the  Vryheid  area  was  employed  in  vacant
          positions
        ✓ Unions are not involved in the IDP process
        ✓ The Local Labour Forum was operating before the chaos started
        ✓  The  Corporate  Services  Manager  is  part  of  the   employment
          corruption
        ✓ Nepotism played an important role when employing people




OBSERVATIONS

The team did not have much time to sufficiently deal with the issue due to
some internal weaknesses of the National Council of Provinces and this
affected the organization of meetings in the municipality. Only 7 ward
committees were operating and were properly constituted, therefore the
evidence presented by the ward representatives (appointed in the meeting),
cannot be taken as evidence against the wards that were properly
constituted. The views of the ward committees should be disregarded as the
properly constituted structures in the area are in the minority, i.e. 7 out
of the 20 wards. The overwhelming majority of stakeholders met by the
delegation supports the intervention with the exception of the ruling party
in that Council and a civic movement. The administration was interfered
with, thereby undermining it from doing its duties. Some public
representatives assaulted some Council employees with impunity. Councillors
instructed officials without due regard to the protocol of communicating
with the administration through the Municipal Manager. The laws of Council
were disregarded when EXCO wanted to take decisions in conflict with
stipulated legislation, thereby undermining the pledge that Council will
uphold the Constitution of the Republic and the law of the Constitution at
all times. The irregular expenditure was undertaken by EXCO without due
regard to the MFMA. The in-fighting within the local ruling party affected
the function of the administration and caused serious problems. The payment
of more councillors than required by Council lead to fruitless expenditure.
The ruling party showed no remorse during the discussions.


RECOMMENDATIONS

   The NCOP supports the intervention and dissolution. However, there are
   certain areas that must be addressed by the Province:

           1) The development of human resource policies which can build
              the municipality
           2) Establish structures envisaged by the MFMA
           3) Develop a guide on the delegation of powers and functions of
              the Mayor, Speaker, Municipal Manager and councillors
           4) The recovery of money that were unduly paid to councillors
              and for the damage done to the official vehicle
           5) Develop programmes for service delivery
           6) Establish a program to develop ward committees that should be
              unleashed after the election in all wards
           7) Develop systems to ensure that IDP’s get full community
              participation when being drawn up
           8) Establishing a properly constituted local labour forum
           9) In the absence of ward committees, the Administrator should
              brief the community through ward representatives or alternate
              means
          10) The Administrator and the MEC should report to the NCOP about
              progress on these issues on a bi-monthly basis

Report to be considered.


