---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 15 November 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-11-15
---

TUESDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 2005

                                    ____





              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I have been informed that the
Whippery has agreed that there will be no notices of motion and no motions
without notice today.

We shall therefore proceed to the questions to the Deputy President, as
printed.

Questions to the Deputy President:


     Government plan to advance global commitment to poverty eradication


     1. Mr S Shiceka asked the Deputy President:
    What has the Government planned to ensure the advancement of global
    commitment to eradicate poverty and to promote peace, security and
    sustainable development?                       C292E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, Chairperson, the reply to the question is
as follows: One of our regular activities as the South African government
in our participation in multilateral organisations such as the United
Nations, the African Union and other organisations of this nature is to
ensure that these organisations prioritise the importance of committing
greater resources to the eradication of poverty and to the promotion of
peace, security and sustainable development.

This has been vividly evident in our vocal calls to the Western world to
cancel the debt of poor nations and to participate in poverty relief and
development programmes. Our participation in UN peacekeeping missions in
strife-torn regions of the continent also attests to our commitment to
peace, security and sustainable development. Our persistent calls for the
restructuring of the United Nations are also partly aimed at creating a
global environment that is sensitive to the issue raised in the question.

That said, however, we need to acknowledge that there is still a lot of
work to be done. The outcome document of the Millennium Declaration states
that Africa is the only continent not on track to meet any of the goals of
the Millennium Declaration by 2014. Although recent debt cancellation by
the G8 will free up much-needed resources for poverty eradication and
sustainable development, Africa and the developing world need assistance in
terms of resources required to meet the millennium development goals.

According to Geoffrey Sach’s report for the developing world, the cost of
meeting the millennium development goals will amount to US$12O billion in
2006 and US$198 billion in 2005. For poorer countries to meet their
millennium development goals, it is estimated that global assistance will
need to double roughly from US$69 billion in 2003 to US$135 billion in
2006. Overall assistance needs are likely to be higher, since these
estimates cover only investments that contribute directly to achieving the
goals.

Our government plans to continue lobbying for debt cancellation and for
increased official developmental assistance by developed countries to
achieve the required scale of resource transfer to empower the poor of the
world to extricate themselves from their misery. It is particularly
important to make sure that the millennium development goals, which deal
with global partnerships, are given high priority. It would be difficult to
realise these goals without meeting that particular objective. Government
also remains committed to efforts to strengthen the United Nations with a
view to enhancing its authority and efficiency, as well as its capacity to
promote peace, security and sustainable development. Thank you.
Mr S SHICEKA: Thank you, Chairperson, I must thank the Deputy President for
responding to this question. At the same time, the follow-up question
relates to the unsuccessful discussions that have taken place around the
restructuring of the UN. Given that the issues that were supposed to have
been focused on in the millennium development goals were not focused on,
and given the fact that the discussions did not succeed at that level, what
is this government doing to ensure that there is an engagement with other
countries so that these issues are taken up and finalised in the next
round?

It is not only that. In two month’s time, we are going to Hong Kong, where
we will be discussing issues around the World Trade Organisation. We have
had problems regarding trade and the discussions are not going well. Are
there any possibilities that, by next month, in terms of sustainable
development, we will be able to succeed in Hong Kong? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: With regard to both questions, although the UN
negotiations were unsuccessful, they were not a total failure because there
is room for continuous engagement. The African heads of state are going to
meet soon in order for them also to revisit the African position. I think I
will be the first one to say that progress is disappointing, both in
relation to the UN restructuring and to the discussions at the WTO. As we
prepare for Hong Kong, we are not as hopeful as we would have liked to have
been at this point in time.
South Africa is, however, maintaining intense discussions with regional
blocs, such as the EU and SADC in order to see how we  together with these
countries, can play a constructive role. As you all know, South Africa has
a partnership with India and Brazil. All three countries tend to be quite
strong and vocal on these issues. As individual countries and as a
collective, we are also continuing discussions with the relevant parties,
to see if we cannot broker any progress. The Hong Kong situation looks very
dicey. Maybe some progress can be made in the UN, but the Hong Kong
discussions are more difficult.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Angibonge kuSekela Mongameli, enkulumeni yakho okuvukayo
okuwumbuzo ukuthi yize phela manje sikhuluma ngokuxosha indlala kulabo
abampofu nababempofu kulezo zikhathi, lokhu kubhekise kubantu ababencishwe
amathuba nabantu abampofu. Uma sikhuluma ngokuxosha indlala, sikhuluma
ngabantu abampisholo ababencishwe amathuba. Ngabe uhulumeni uqikelele
kangakanani ukuthi lezi zinsiza ezitholakayo zifika ngqo ngempela kulabo
abazidingayo na? Phela kungase kube khona ukukhwabanisa sibone kulokhu
kukhuluphala leya ebivele ikhuluphele kuthi lena ezacile ihlale izacile
njalo. Ngiyabonga.

IPHNII LIKAMONGAMELI: Njengoba wazi ukuthi uMthethosisekelo wethu thina
lapha eNingizimu Afrika uyalungiselela ukuthi indlela esisebenza ngayo
kufanele siqale ngalaba abangalidli izambane likampondo uma senza lokhu
okuthiwa phecelezi ‘affirmative action’.Leyo nto-ke ilungesela ukuthi usizo
lusheshe lufike kulaba abaludinga kakhulu. Ekunikezeleni-ke lolu sizo
kubantu, uma ubheka isabiwomali sethu singuhulumeni siyazichaza sona ngoba
njengoba usibona nje sinokwenzelela okuningi emisebenzini ebhekene
noxoshindlala. Kodwa-ke into esafuna ukuthi sisizane ngayo sisonke kanye
namalungu ale Ndlu nomphakathi uphelele ukugada laba abathi noma iqatha
selizongena emlonyeni womuntu olambileyo balintshontshe.

Kunabantu abathi bengenazo izingane ezihluphekayo nezidinga ukuthola
isondlo sikahulumeni bahambe bayosintshontsha, kanye nalabo bantu
abangakabibikho ezingeni lokuthi kufanele engabe bathola imali ephuma
kuhulumeni bahambe bayoyintshontsha. Yizinsizi-ke lezo zobugebengu esinazo
lapha emphakathi. Niyabona-ke ukuthi laphaya kwezokuthuthukiswa
kwezomphakathi ikakhulukazi, kanye namaphoyisa babambisene ekulweni naleyo
nto yingakho nje sekukhona abantu esesibabambile. Nokho, akukalungi konke.
Sisadinga ukuthi sibambisane ukuze konke lokhu kuchithwa kwemali ngale
ndlela kuphele. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Thank you, Madam Deputy President. What arises from your
response is a follow-up question.  When we speak of alleviation of the
poverty of the poor and the previously disadvantaged, we are categorically
referring to the previously disadvantaged people and the poor. When we
speak of the alleviation of poverty, we are referring to the poverty of the
black people who were previously disadvantaged. What measures has the
government put in place to ensure that all these services and resources are
channelled directly to those who are needy? If this does not happen, there
will be corruption and one would see the rich remaining rich and the poor
remaining poor. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: As you know, hon member, our Constitution in the
Republic of South Africa guides us in our operations first to give
preference to those who are poor, and that practise is called “affirmative
action”. That policy lays a foundation for speedy service delivery to those
who are in dire need. In delivering these services, we as government look
at our budget, which defines itself as being biased towards the poverty
alleviation programmes. What we need to work on together, with the members
of this House and the entire community, is to keep an eye on those who
steal resources set aside for the poor.

There are people who steal by applying for social grants when they do not
have children who qualify for government grants. There are also those who
steal by receiving a government pension when they have not reached the
right age yet. These are criminal problems that we encounter in our
communities. The Department of Safety and Security, acting jointly with the
Department of Social Development, are busy fighting that scourge, which is
why we have arrested a number of people, although we have not finished. We
need to work together in order to avoid unnecessary spending.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, there is no interpreting service available.
I don’t know whether it is because it is the second last day of Parliament,
but the wheels are coming off. We did not understand a word of that last
answer.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you for notifying me about that. Can we
check the interpreting service up there, please, and make sure that we have
an interpreting service for all members so that they can hear what the
deliberations are about?

Are there any follow-up questions? Oh, Ms Terblanche. Did you understand
what the Deputy President said?

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: I did not understand what the Deputy President said.
That’s why I don’t know whether my follow-up will be relevant. That is my
problem but I will ask the question nevertheless. I would like to know,
with regard to television news reports of last night and this morning - it
is fantastic to hear what we are doing on a global scale to eradicate
poverty - what is government’s plan regarding assisting those people at
grassroots level who are extremely angry at the lack of delivery and at the
lack of poverty eradication?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: In the answer that I gave, that it is exactly what I
explained what we are doing at grassroots level.


               Progress with democratisation African continent


     2. Mr Z C Ntuli asked the Deputy President:


      What progress has been registered on the African continent with regard
      to democratisation and respect for the rule of law and human rights?
                                                         C295E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, the answer to this question is as
follows: The promotion of democracy, respect for the rule of law and human
rights remain the central pillars of South Africa’s foreign policy. Our
engagements in the African Union and the Southern African Development
Community seek to strengthen institutions that promote human rights,
democracy and the rule of law.

We are engaged in various forums and continental institutions to further
the cause of our belief in human rights and democracy. We continue with our
efforts to help consolidate the African Union and its organs of governance
in the belief that its efficient functioning will enhance the values of
democracy, respect for the rule of law and human rights.

We contributed to the adoption of the Protocol on the African Court of
Justice by the African Union Assembly in Maputo in 2003. We are also
involved in initiatives to bring peace, stability and post-conflict
reconstruction in the continent. We believe that good governance is a basic
requirement for peace, security and sustainable development.

As part of promoting good governance and further to strengthen the values
of democracy and the rule of law, we are currently in the process of
reviewing ourselves as a country, through the African Peer Review
Mechanism. The process seeks to review our democracy, economic and
political governance as well as socio-economic development. So far, two
countries, namely Ghana and Rwanda, have been reviewed. Our efforts to
encourage other countries to accede to the African review process continue.

South Africa will continue with efforts to strengthen the African Union
regarding its structure and goals of promoting human rights, democracy and
good governance. We have a moral responsibility to continue to work towards
strengthening democracy in the African continent.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Deputy President. Whilst we are
speaking about Rwanda, I have been reminded that there is a delegation from
the second house, the senate, of Rwanda. They are sitting in the gallery
and they are led by their deputy president. I would like them to stand up
so that the House can see them. I wish to recognise them. [Applause.]

Deputy President, the entire delegation in fact represents women’s
empowerment. I was surprised when I saw them this morning when they visited
our programming committee – there was only one man amongst them that I
could see. I can tell you that South Africans will follow suit soon. I am
told Rwanda is the first country to beat us in that regard, but we will
catch up soon. You are most welcome to the sitting of this House. Enjoy
your stay in our country. Thank you very much.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I would just like to ask, with regard to
this answer that we have just been given concerning democratisation and
respect for the rule of law and human rights: What is the government’s
viewpoint, then, regarding the abuse of human rights in Zimbabwe?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy President, although that seems like a
new question, I am not too sure . . .

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I will handle it. Our view is the same regarding
human rights abuses anywhere in the world.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you very much, hon Deputy President,
for your response. I believe it that our participation as a country has in
part led to a situation where Liberia has held its own elections. And the
prospect is that we may have, for the first time, a woman president in
Liberia. What are the prospects of other countries in Africa following suit
by holding their own democratic elections?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I think that it is now a common trend for African
countries to hold democratic and credible elections. Sometimes the
shortcomings that are there have a lot to do with resources and logistics.
But the spirit, governance and legislation that govern elections in most of
the countries are in place. So the prospects of democratic elections in
Africa being the norm are much higher than they have ever been.

In fact, it’s difficult to think just offhand of a country that wouldn’t
actually do it. Of course, some countries have their own slightly different
versions of democracy, but nevertheless they have a mechanism to test the
will of the people, even if it’s to a limited extent. For us, as a
continent, to be able to make as much progress as was made in Liberia
certainly augurs well. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf is definitely a veteran in
areas of governance and she comes with a lot of credibility. I thank you.


                      Missing children in South Africa


     3. Ms F Nyanda asked the Deputy President:


      (1)   Whether she is considering establishing a commission or
             structure to look into the possible reasons for the increase
             in the number of missing children in South Africa; if not, why
             not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   whether there are any programmes or other measures in place to
             address this issue; if not, why not; if so, what programmes or
             measures?                                   C324E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, the answer to the question is as
follows. The Office on the Rights of the Child in the Presidency and the
national structure responsible for advancing children’s rights have
initiated a process that aims to explore and understand the causal factors
responsible for the high incidence of child abuse and missing children.

This consultative process will include the provincial Offices on the Rights
of the Child, local government representatives and relevant government
departments. The process will also seek to secure the input of relevant
organs of civil society, parents and children themselves.

It is intended that the findings of this consultative process will enable
us to improve the effectiveness of our programmes to address the problem.
It is expected that this consultative process will be completed early in
the new year.

The responsibility for tracing missing children lies with the SA Police
Service and with the communities to assist the police. Their success rate
in recovering missing children from 1 April 2005 to 30 June 2005 is
approximately 86%, which is high when compared to international standards.
Nevertheless, one child missing is one child too many.

The Bureau for Missing Persons in the SA Police Service was established in
October 1994, after a thorough study had been done on strategies that were
being utilised in other countries. The bureau does regular searches
regarding the phenomenon of missing persons and the relevant training
modules for detectives are revised and updated with the most current
investigative methods being utilised worldwide.

It is important to note that the phenomenon of missing children is also a
component part of our strategies to address violence against children. In
this context, various departments have line functions and intersectoral
programmes that address the issue of violence against children. A good
example of such a programme is the 16 Days Campaign of No Violence Against
Women and Children, which will run from 25 November to 10 December 2005.

      Role of the black middle class in addressing poverty, illiteracy,
                      unemployment and underdevelopment

4.    Ms B N Dlulane asked the Deputy President:


       1) Whether, since taking office in the Presidency, she has engaged
          the black middle class in playing a more proactive role in
          addressing the issue of (a) poverty, (b) illiteracy, (c)
          unemployment and (d) underdevelopment, particularly in the rural
          areas and townships; if not, why not; if so, what has been the
          response in each case;


     (2)    whether there are any projects that are currently under way that
          are supported mainly by black business; if so, what are the
          relevant details?                                   C326E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chair, the answer to the question is that the
President has tasked me and other colleagues to develop an initiative to
ensure that our country’s economic growth is accelerated and shared, with
the objective of having unemployment and poverty halved by 2014. Part of
this responsibility includes engaging with all sectors in our society to
gain not only their support for this initiative but also to determine their
contribution to it.

Although I cannot comment at this point on the specific commitment made by
social partners because the engagement is still going on, I can indicate
that social partners consulted so far have been very supportive of the
initiative and indicated their willingness to contribute towards achieving
the initiative’s goals of halving unemployment and poverty and of
overcoming the problems of underdevelopment, both in urban and rural areas.

I have engaged the black middle class on the issues of poverty,
unemployment, illiteracy and underdevelopment. I have, for example, engaged
the Black Management Forum and the Business Unity SA at their general
meetings on these matters. I’ve also engaged individual members of the
black middle class for their insight and knowledge. And as we speak, we
will be able, when we present our programme, to approach them for specific
contributions in accordance with what we conclude to be intervention
strategies. At this point, we are busy fine-tuning those strategies.

I have also engaged the black middle class in particular to support job
creation, the employment of unemployed graduates and support for small,
medium and micro enterprises, especially with regard to affirmative
procurement in the areas where the black middle class are either managers
or shareholders.

I’ve also engaged them in relation to the plough-back campaign, which the
BMF, in any case, is already involved in, in regard to human resource
development efforts and, lastly, with regard to persons that are affected
by HIV and Aids, especially the plight of children who do not have parents.
All have expressed an interest and are all waiting to be consulted once we,
together with the relevant departments have identified the input required.

Just to give examples, hon Chair and members, the Black Management Forum,
for instance, has a programme of ploughing back in terms of which black
professionals contribute skills, resources and their time to rural
communities, specifically in the areas where they grew up or are based.
There’s a programme at university level to fast-track black students into
leadership and management roles. This involves a collaboration with the
university to enhance the management capacity and skills of black
graduates, as well as giving them some measure of hands-on experience. The
BMF has, therefore, opened chapters at universities to equip these young
people with the skills that are needed by our economy.

Women’s empowerment programmes embarked upon by women’s consortia,
specifically Wiphold, Nozala and Women’s Development Banking, also have
specific outreach programmes that address women in the rural areas. Some
are income-generating. Some basically the address the rights of women and
some address the plight of children.

Mvelaphanda, for instance, has charities that it supports. These include
Cotlands in Johannesburg, which is a charity that looks after children;
Aids Link; Kagiso Trust – a black-empowered company that has a myriad
programmes that offer support at grassroots level; Eyesizwe, which is a
mining company, has a partnership with young people in KwaZulu-Natal, where
they support development of young people; Nakana, a black-owned tourism
company, has a partnership with the Umsobomvu Trust involving, fast-track
skills development for young people. Thank you.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chair, bridging the divide between the first and second
economies mainly aims to ensure that the black middle class is mobilised.
In this country, there is general acceptance of the fact that there is a
lack of skills. Is there any campaign that has been embarked upon to
mobilise different professionals in different sectors, those who have
retired, to come and assist in ensuring that the country moves forward?

Secondly, have we undertaken any credible skills audit to determine the
level of skills that we have and do not have in this country, in concrete
terms?

Thirdly, is the education system being linked to the economic priorities
and imperatives of the country, so that we are able to produce the
requisite skills in an accelerated manner?

Lastly, the Deputy President has raised the issue of the commitment by
various organisations to imparting certain skills in the country, but I
want to direct myself to the Black Management Forum’s plough-back campaign,
which will ensure that skills are taken even to the rural areas. Now, this
is good information; it’s refreshing. However, as a public representative
coming from emaMpondweni, Pondoland, how do I ensure that I access those
skills so that the people of Pondoland can benefit from these initiatives?
Is there any way that we can make use of this good news? Thank you.

USEKELA MONGAMELI: Sihlalo, ndiza kuqala ngalo mbuzo wokugqibela, ngelithi
kwilungu elihloniphekileyo: Hamba, uye kufuna amaMpondo akowenu, . . .
[Kwahlekwa.] . . . la wawukhula nawo, ze uthi kuwo: Masidibaneni, siyeni
enkomeni sisonke. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, I will start with the last question
from the hon member: Go to your people, the amaMpondo . . .
[Laughter.] . . . the ones you grew up with, and tell them: Let us get
together and meet the challenge.]

We are also going to depend on the leadership of public representatives to
continue to sustain this mobilisation of the black middle class to plough
back into the rural areas.

There is actually an NGO called Plough Back, which has centralised
information that you can access regarding who is available to do what. The
BMF is linked to that campaign.

We are also working towards having a relationship, as the Office of Deputy
President, because that is where we are going to harvest some of the people
whom we intend deploying to assist us in addressing the issues of the
second economy.

Nani apha ePalamente nikwiqela elikumgangatho ophakathi. [Members of
Parliament belong to the middle class too.]

So it’s not just about those in the private sector; we also need people in
this House to go and deploy back in the areas where they are needed, beyond
what they do in their constituency offices. Well, I don’t know how many
hours of sleep you’ll get after that, but I think that we are part of that
collective of skills that is needed out there.

On the issue of bridging the divide between the first and second economies
and mobilising the skills of retired professionals, there is a process,
which is led by the Department of Public Service and Administration . . .
First let me start by saying that we have identified different categories
of skills that are critical for us to, for instance, implement the very
ambitious programme that we have in order for us to drive growth to higher
levels. What is most challenging about that programme are the skills we
require for the programmes that we need to start with immediately.
Infrastructure is one of them, including delivery at local government
level.

So we’ve started with mobilising and documenting the shortage of skills at
that level. The Department of Public Service and Administration, together
with National Treasury, is establishing institutional capacity within DPSA
in order for them to invite, document, commit and write the specifics of
the people when they deploy them.

It’s one thing to have a volunteer who’s willing to help. But if you don’t
know exactly what it is that you want to do, they can go in the field and
actually mess up by becoming little politicians once they get there. So you
need very concrete job descriptions, support mechanisms, monitoring
mechanisms and key performance indicators. All of that is being worked on
in the DPSA. They’ll have a database of everybody, which we’ll evaluate so
that you don’t have chance-takers with no credible skills making themselves
available.

Yes, we want volunteers and the Department of Local Government is drafting
volunteers, assisted by the Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut, AHI.

We also want to make the point that for some of the challenges that we
face, it’s not enough to get a volunteer, because you want people to be
committed; you want to hold them accountable. So we’ve said that we are
willing to pay in order to engage people in those areas where we
desperately need skills.

This is in regard to financial skills in many of the municipalities
because, as you know, we have the problem of many municipalities having
audits that don’t look too good. We also need to pay lots of attention to
the engineering field. Economic planning is another skill that is very rare
in the rural areas. You hardly find any economists that reside in the rural
areas.

So our intention is to have a collective of people whom we can deploy on a
revolving basis. We deploy you in an area and you must have around you
people that you must mentor. So the municipalities must identify those
people who must be mentored so that the people who go there are there to
mentor people.

Where we cannot find enough people from South Africa, we will look outside
South Africa. Our first preference is South Africans. Eskom has also done
that. Our first preference, obviously, is South Africans who are in the
country or who are retired. The second option is South Africans who are
living overseas, who thought that the pastures were greener there and are
now dying to come back.

We are co-operating with an organisation called Revolution Come Back – I
may have the name wrong – which is facilitating the return of those South
Africans who want to come back.

Our third option is other Africans from other African countries who more or
less come from similar situations and understand our situation. Then, of
course, broadly, we’d recruit from other countries in the diaspora and
beyond. So that is our strategy for mobilising skills.

We will be able, some time next year, to give feedback on how many people
we have been able to mobilise, what skills they have, what they do and what
impact they are having, etc. Our intention is that, some time next year,
there should be no municipality with a shortage of skills that has not been
given some attention and assistance in order for it to be able to perform
on its very, very basic tasks.

Therefore, regarding the skills audit, yes, the Department of Science and
Technology has issued one of its councils with a mandate to check the
supply and demand of skills. The information is published every year by
National Business Initiative, Nabi. One can always improve the performance
of the board, because it is not perfect.

Based, for instance, on the big and ambitious programme that we intend
implementing to drive growth, and with respect to each project that we are
going to be implementing, we know what skills you need for each project.
Somebody will plan the project and that is the reason they arrive at a
budget.

We insist that they must give us the skills requirements of each project so
that we start working on ensuring that we supply the skills. In order to do
that, we collaborated with - again, in terms of the work that I am doing on
both the second economy and economic growth - the National Business
Initiative, which, as you know, is a business association. Together, we are
going to be bringing in labour. Just this morning I just finished a round
of discussions with Nactu and Fedusa, having finished earlier discussions
with Cosatu, who are also coming on board.

We are going to be looking at how we can fast-track the development of
people who will have the skills that we need in the short term. We are
giving ourselves an 18-month schedule.

The second initiative is what we call a joint council, where we will work
on an institution which will solely exist for addressing the supply and
demand of the skills; provide credible data; track people; mobilise
scholarships and assist students with study programmes as well as ensure
that the curricula of the teaching institutions change and become
appropriate.

We will probably get good results quicker in the further-education and
training institutions. They are more ready and more accepting of this
initiative. In fact, the Minister of Education sees this as a partnership
between government and the private sector in developing education content.
The same thing will have to happen with universities.

So we are going to be looking at the mobilisation of the skills at the
middle level: your artisan and plumbing skills. With Umsobomvu, we are
doing a very thorough review of anybody or anything that has capacity to
train. We are going back to the institutions that used to be owned by
government, Transnet, the private sector, etc., which used to provide the
skills that we need now, that we have identified as lacking, and we are
asking them to reopen. I’m quite heartened because in many cases they are
actually willing to reopen and to take in the students.

In the first instance, we are going to be bringing in unemployed
matriculants and unemployed graduates. We are going to do some re-
engineering so as to reposition them better in the economy.

I must say, hon members, that regarding this part of my work failure is
just not an option, because if we don’t get this one right, everything else
that we are talking about is halalala! We have to get this question of
skills right because even the benefits and the gains of the past 11 years
hinge on us cracking the question of skills and turning it around so that
in future we talk about – and my future is two years, not that we’ll have
all the answers – a system and a process that works.

We know where in the pipeline the students are and we know how we are going
to deploy them in the economy. Of course, again, partnerships and support
from both hon members and the broader public are essential. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, I thank the Deputy President for this
information. It’s a pity that one can’t access this information in a
written form so that we can make more use of it.

The other problem that is faced by people in the second economy is that
they do have ideas regarding what they want to do, but the biggest problem
in South Africa today is access to finance. I think that many efforts have
been undertaken, but so far it’s very difficult for people to access
finance. Is there something, perhaps, that is being done to ensure that
finance is facilitated?

If you talk about Khula, the Umsobomvu Trust, etc, they have not helped the
people out there. Thank you, hon Chair.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, I agree with the hon member about the
frustration with regard to access to finance.

Again, regarding how we intensify our efforts in the second economy, we are
looking at taking an approach that is very specific with regard to micro,
small and medium enterprises, because each one of them requires a different
strategy.

I think that one mistake we have made – and I have to own up to that,
having been a Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry myself – is always
lumping them together and sometimes following a broad approach.

Your micro-entrepreneurs sitting on the sidewalk - mainly retailers, very
good traders and they are streetwise - demonstrate a lot of resilience and
staying power when they embark on an initiative, but they need to do things
differently. We are trying to formalise them, but not to overformalise them
too fast because that would burden them with too much red tape. However,
many of them need support so that they can have start-up capital.

Therefore, we would like to scale up microcredit below R10 000. As you
know, we do have institutions already supported by government as well as
some in the private sector. Some are very bad, and some are doing okay.

So we are planning to get all of them together, just to look at how we can
actually scale them up. What we’ll be looking at is how much appetite there
is for this kind of credit in South Africa, so that we can say that we
probably need to support 1 000 institutions annually, for instance. In that
case we’ll have to work out how much resources do we have now, to what
extent do we reach out and how much scaling up do we need to do.
As you know, the National African Federated Chamber of Commerce has already
committed itself to supporting 100 000 SMMEs per annum. That’s an ambitious
programme, but I love ambition. So we are going to engage with them so that
we can understand how they got to those figures.

If the figures look credible, I will tell them to count all of us in and
that we’ll be part of this process of ensuring that we support 100 000
SMMEs per annum. It would be great for the economy if we could achieve
that.

However, we have to make sure that these will be credible ideas; we are not
going to be throwing money at the problem, and that we can generate the
amount of money required for support.

They are looking at stabilising between micro and small enterprises, which
is where our interest as government lies. However, we are also interested
in those people who are looking for start-up capital between R10 000 and
R250 000, and those in general who are looking for credit below R1 million,
because there is such a gap in the market.

In government and the private sector, there isn’t a dedicated support
mechanism for people in that category. So we are working with the Financial
Services Charter to come up with a business plan so that we can intervene
in that area.
We are also going to look at co-operating with Business Partners, that is
the former Small Business Development Corporation, SBDC, in which the
government is a very small shareholder and has therefore not been as robust
as we needed to be. We are going to be working with them so that we can see
how we can use their very good and well-established practice to scale up
their impact. Their infrastructure and knowledge of the sector is such that
it is possible for them to have a much greater impact.

Again, our timeframes are very short. By some time in the first quarter of
next year, we should know whether we are coming or going – not that we’ll
have all the solutions, but at least we must have a fair understanding of
where we want to be. Khula is also restructuring itself so that it can fit
into this plan. Thank you.

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, I’m not sure whether it is correct to ask
whether the people of South Africa see the future the same, because in 1994
there were those who saw a bright future and those who saw a gloomy future
as far as the economy of this country is concerned. However, recently one
of the people who were negative said that the economy of South Africa has
never been so good.

Again, I’d like to understand those who feel threatened by the strength of
the rand and are not happy when the rand grows stronger. They are happy
when the rand weakens. There are those who are happy when the rand goes
strong, and I’m one of them. Those who export are not happy because they
don’t get enough dollars for what they export. How do we move forward?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Well, your question does touch only slightly
on what the Deputy President said, but I don’t want to rule it out if the
Deputy President wants to respond to it.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, because it is a moruti, a reverend, who
is asking the question – I want to go to heaven – there’s no way I’m not
going to answer a question from a reverend. [Laughter.]

You know, the issue of a strong rand or a weak rand, to some extent, is an
academic debate because we do not have control over it; the markets decide
the strength of the currency. We have taken a decision as government that
we’ll not set the rand artificially, but – as the Governor of the SA
Reserve Bank indicated – we want to increase our reserves to make sure that
we strengthen our position as government.

Yes, those who export get less when the rand is strong. But, can you
imagine what would happen in South Africa if the rand were to weaken to as
low as R13 to a dollar, given the oil prices? We, including those who
export, would be facing a much bigger problem. So you know, every cloud has
a silver lining.

What we want to achieve in South Africa is a situation where the rand is
stable, not volatile, and is competitive so that exporters can plan
realistically. When the rand was very low, pessimists thought that that was
where the rand belonged and that we were going to have a weak currency,
which in the minds of some people, is supposed to be the norm in developing
countries. Therefore they began to develop business models that were based
on an economy with a weak currency: ha ha ha! Our economy and currency have
strengthened, and it’s a good thing that we have achieved that. But now
those pessimists are struggling to adjust their business models in order to
have a realistic business model that is based on the strength of this
economy.

But I have to say that those who were crying the loudest were those in the
gold mining industry. As you know, when I was Minister of Minerals and
Energy, I used to deal with them a lot, and it was very difficult because
the gold sector employs so many of our people.

However, I think that over time, they themselves have learnt a lesson.
Somebody like Bobby Godsell has already said that, “Well, the issue of the
strength of the rand is no longer an issue for us. We are now on top of the
situation. We are working very hard.”

Obviously, they can always do with a weaker rand, but they’ve learnt to
adjust so that if ever the rand weakens the windfall is just a short-term
one. They must not change their business plans; their business plans must
always be premised on a rand that is strong and on a more optimistic
outlook about our economy. Thank you.

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, I’d like to find out from the Deputy Minister . .
.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy President.

Mr B J TOLO: Sorry, Deputy President, . . . what impact the realisation of
the whole question of controlling the circulation of money inside and
outside the country will have on the economy, if there is liberalisation?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Well, you are not a moruti, so don’t smuggle a new
question! You can’t get me to heaven.

You know what, the exchange controls in place in South Africa now are
minimal. It’s more sentiments now, and you know that the markets operate on
sentiment.

People have always wanted a `big bang’ approach to exchange controls
relaxation. The approach of the Treasury has been very systematic and
careful, because they first had to understand that we do not create a
situation where there’ll be flight of capital. But, with the slow
relaxation that we have experienced, we have not seen that.

People have realised that doing business and keeping your money in South
Africa is actually a very good business move. Our country has been rated
much higher by all the rating agencies and, therefore, people’s intentions
to take money out of the country have instead turned into intentions to
bring money back into South Africa.

So we do not have real fears in that regard. However, the fact that there’s
so little left in the form of controls is really neither here nor there.
The sentiments of the markets are sometimes very unpredictable. [Applause.]


                 SIXTEEN DAYS OF ACTIVISM: ACT AGAINST ABUSE


                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, hon colleagues,
friends from the old Senate days, I do see some faces here from the distant
past. Of course, I need to greet my colleagues from the Free State,
showing, of course, no preference whatsoever. We are all feeling pretty
confident after the recent rugby wins that came our way. [Interjections].
It makes us feel good.

Hon Chair, I thought that the best way to approach today’s input was to
report back to you on how the campaign has grown since the last time that
we had this very important debate, because the one thing that the President
made us commit to last year was to this programme as a 365-day event. What
he wanted us to say and to recognise is that government is committed to
this programme and this is one element of government’s response.

What the President also recognised, and I think this is what we have seen
in the response from people we have worked with, is that across the
political spectrum, the class spectrum and the race spectrum, the good
people of South Africa are responding in a way that is perhaps
unprecedented.

We have put in place legislative mechanisms. Laws on their own do not
protect people. Our police spend far more money than they did 10 years ago
on training people specifically. Whilst so many people remain vulnerable,
particularly our women and children, to violence, the government is
increasingly concerned that the response needs to be greater and faster and
that, given the current constraints that exist, we recognise and
acknowledge that we cannot do this alone.

Therefore, wherever I go in the country, in our prison systems we see
people from civil society saying to government, in many ways, ``How we can
form a partnership that makes a difference in the lives of the most
vulnerable?’’

And so we decided to build on that campaign. It was very important. Our
strapline for the campaign is simply: Act against abuse. It is a call to
action. It is a call because perhaps, in this debate, we will say that it
is also time to acknowledge that the men have perhaps been alienated by the
vocabulary in the past. We need to find a positive role for the good men in
this country. Ninety-seven per cent of the perpetrators convicted in this
country are men, but not 97% of men are perpetrators. On the contrary, the
vast majority of this country’s men and boys are good men, but as Nelson
Mandela told us, being a good person is not enough if you stand by and do
nothing. If you stand by and do nothing, really bad things can happen.

And so, we need to mobilise all the sectors of this country. We have to
speak across 11 languages, which in itself is a challenge. We have to speak
to people across the urban and rural divide. We have to bring the same
messages about values, about positive values, because we know that after 10
years of saying ``don’t do this’’, it does not work. But if we can say to
people: Imagine a South Africa where violence in the home did not occur, do
you know what we would achieve?

The British have set the cost to the economy of domestic violence at 23
billion pounds annually. We are a developmental state and we have
undertaken that role consciously. The prerequisite for development is the
absence of violence. This is why we are all involved. We all have a role to
play. Many of us are the parents of sons. What are we saying to them, as
parents, about their definition of their manhood in this new country? What
are we saying? How are we supporting working parents amongst ourselves? Too
frequently we hear about children going missing or hurt when they are sent
on errands to the shop or to do this or that. These are not parents who do
not care. These are parents who are working, frantically trying to keep
things together and, in a moment of blind faith, make a fatal error that
results in the hurt of their children.

So, Chair, we’ve tried to take this incredibly broad campaign and identify
various constituencies. We have spoken to the traditional leaders. They are
working on producing a four-phased plan. We have not undertaken to write it
for them. That does not help. We have said: What is it that you honestly
feel you can do to make a difference? They have come up with a four-phased
plan that will be produced, popularised and launched at the Sixteen Days
Campaign, but will be popularised in the year to come as well.

Active plans around rape, the abuse of children and how to protect boy
children as well is a very important issue because abused boy children
almost invariably become perpetrators later. How to deal with women is
actually a discussion actually about the restoration of dignity to
individuals and communities. It is a serious discussion.

The focus of our work as the national co-ordinator - we are just a
mechanism, my department has been honoured with this task – is to just co-
ordinate. We cannot possibly produce a campaign. That is what marketers and
advertisers do.

What we do is consult and try to find synergies. For instance, how does the
protection of women speak to our housing policy? Do we prioritise single
female parents who are at risk of, for instance, domestic violence, for
housing? How do we respond in terms of economic empowerment so that women
are not economically bound to the perpetrators who are beating them daily?
How do we discuss this with men who feel threatened because they do not
understand this discussion?

On the discussion, for instance, of black economic empowerment, people who
feel threatened by it do not understand that the empowerment of the nation
is going to be better for everybody. Men have to see this problem, which
speaks to the heart of the equality debate, as something that will be
empowering and affirming to themselves as well. The achievement of
substantive equality and dignity lies at the heart of this campaign.

We have spoken to lawyers about how they use their pro bono time to protect
these vulnerable groups. We have spoken to perpetrators because the cost
model for Britain not only speaks about the cost to economy but also about
the cost to the state to provide response services, cost to the victim and
cost to the perpetrator. There are costs involved, huge costs. How do we
bring perpetrators on board to say, ``I need a change?’’

We have had those discussions. We have put programmes in place that are
specifically directed. When I say ``we’’, please - we are not taking the
credit; those line departments have done that. We have spoken to the moral
regeneration movement. How does this speak to our notion of positive
values, our notion of the new South Africa that we are trying to build?

In addition, and I am delighted to say this, we will in the coming months
speak to all the media houses because it is very easy, at this time, to
find sensation in the terrible stories that we read in the newspapers. But
if the public is inundated with sensational stories, they are not equipped
with the underlying mechanisms that assist them to deal with this issue,
and for this reason we have spoken to the media houses. Yesterday we
launched to the media, to say to them this is what we are going to be doing
and we need you to substantively empower people to deal with this problem,
deal with the issues, talk about ``opposite the editorial’’ pieces.

I invite you all as members to write to the newspapers to express the views
of your constituencies, not in sensationalist, haphazard ways but in how we
mobilise ourselves as one. At this media launch, Rev Tsele indicated to us
that he has mobilised the National Forum of Religious Leaders to say that
they are going to present one unified message, the religious leaders of
this country, across religious denominations and faiths. They are producing
one values-based message.

Our cyber dialogues are once again on the go and all you have to do is get
onto the Internet, sign up and express your views. We are bringing these
conversations, we are bridging the digital divide - I heard the discussion
just now - to the rural communities of this country by giving those people
and communities computers and a facilitator who will be the keyboard and
fingers to the discussions with the specialists, and we are doing it across
the SA Development Community region. Anything is possible where there is a
will.

You have all been given these postcards. I will just read what it says,
because you should not sign it if you cannot do this. Do not sign it if you
cannot do this.

  I reject violence against women and children. I pledge to expose and act
  against all forms of woman and child abuse at home, at school, at work
  and in the community.

We are not asking you to change the world. We are asking you to change your
immediate environment, because if we start with the small frontiers, if we
make our homes safe, half the battle is won.

We have spoken to these many constituencies . . . I am going over my time,
I do realise that. I will draw to a close. I have so much to tell you. I
could speak for another six hours at least, but I know you have such a huge
programme.

We have spoken to organised labour. We have really tried to bring everybody
on board. There is an opportunity here today in this House to decide on a
plan of action. You can come together and say, ``We will make a
difference’’, or else you can use this as an arena to score political
points. I appeal to you that this goes beyond politics. Let us ensure that
in the upcoming session, we produce that piece of legislation on sexual
offences. Let us drive that process. This is in our power. We are
parliamentarians. Let us talk about how we get it through. Let us make
those decisions and make real those rights that we espouse to have
delivered in the lives of the majority of the people.

One final thing: You can make a tangible difference. On 21 November, turn
on your cell phone. Turn it on. You should SMS ``16 days’’ to the short
code number 31616. That’s our campaign number for all the coming years.
Your call will raise R5. All the mobile operators are not charging any
fees. The people who are managing that programme are not charging us any
fees. Of the money that is raised, the only thing that comes off that
amount is VAT. The government always takes its share. VAT comes off there.
The R5 goes to the Foundation for Human Rights. This money is earmarked and
pledged to non-governmental organisations in rural areas where government
services have not yet been expanded, so they meet a real need.

I appeal to you that when you speak at public occasions between now and
then - we have put it in an independent space where people with
partnerships exist. They exist and they work, and they are small
organisations that normally do not benefit from this kind of support -
before you tell everyone to turn their cell phones off, say to them, ``Now
I am going to attract your attention. Turn your cell phone on and SMS ``16
days’’ to the number 31616. You will make a real difference. That R5 will
go to the foundation and help victims of violence.’’

It is an important campaign for everyone, and we need you to champion this
cause. Let us, together, wage peace instead of war. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs E S MABE: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, hon members and our
guests, the 16 Days of Activism Of No Violence Against Women is the United
Nations’ campaign which we as the South African government amended to
include issues related to violence against children as well.

This campaign takes place annually between 25 November and 10 December. It
is through campaigns such as these that our country shows its commitment on
seeking to achieve a peaceful and secure country for all its citizens,
young and old. Again, it is through campaigns such as these that our
government realises the culture of caring societies within our communities
and our country.

The purpose of this campaign is to increase the level of awareness amongst
South Africans to challenge perpetrators of these offences to change their
behaviour and to enhance an increased partnership between government, the
private sector, civil society, organised labour, faith-based organisations
and other groups of people who believe in the culture of a peaceful and
caring society that our ANC-led government seeks to achieve.

The other purpose is to engage actively with men and boys in the discourse
about combating violence in our homes, where we live, and our communities,
where we socialise, and in the workplace, where we share ideas.

In order to achieve success in institutional mechanisms through public
education and awareness campaigns such as 16 Days of Activism, the
following institutional mechanisms have been created to address violence
against women: Domestic violence courts have been established in each
magistrates’ court; 52 specialised sexual offences courts have been
established nationally; 7 Thuthuzela Care Centres, which are 24-hour one-
stop services for victims to have access to police, counselling, doctors,
court preparations and prosecutors, have been established and more are
being planned; 41 Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences
Units and 20 Child Protection Units have been established in the SA Police
Service.

Various co-ordinating mechanisms to support integrated planning and
implementation have been established and include role-players such as the
police, health practitioners, probation officers, social workers and
prosecutors.

On victim empowerment, various measures have been implemented to support
victims, including the service charter for victims of crime and the minimum
standards of service for victims of crime, and law reform to strengthen the
protection of victim’s rights and various victim support services. The
proposed sentencing framework Bill proposes improved provisions for victim
involvement in the sentencing framework.

The campaign has brought together civil society, organisations, government
and business to raise awareness by organising events to raise funds. The
funds are to be disseminated to organise and help the people who are
working in these fields now to help the affected people.

This campaign is done through the spirit of ubuntu by government in trying
to reach the objective of restoring the human dignity of individuals who
have been victims of these bad deeds and this will then allow victims to
live more secure lives with their families and communities.

In conclusion, a lot of events related to this campaign will be taking
place around the country. These events are hosted by government
departments, faith-based organisations and progressive political parties,
such as the ANC Women’s League, who will be supporting the campaign fully.

As in previous years, we still emphasise that we do not only encourage
people to be aware or be active only during this period of 25 November to
10 December, but that this should be a campaign which suggests the adoption
of a certain way of life to all citizens of our country. Let us all act
against abuse. [Applause.]

Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and members, South Africa
has achieved much in the field of human rights in the past 11 years, but
there are still serious challenges in implementing the laws that should
bring law and order to our society. We cannot claim that our country is
completely free, that human rights and dignity of all are respected, when
293 children were murdered during the first three months of last year and
roughly 17 000 rapes of children are reported each year.

What is even more frightening to hear from prosecutors and social workers
is that the age of those committing the offences, especially sexual
offences, is decreasing. Can you believe that some children as young as 9
years old are committing rape, particularly in rural areas? This is a
tragic set of circumstances.

What gives rise to this? It is deprivation, lack of secure and supportive
family structures, extreme poverty and the scourge of alcoholism. Now, how
does one deal with offenders who are still young children? Imprisonment is
clearly inappropriate. More rehabilitation centres are needed, more
counsellors and social workers, using the techniques of restorative
justice, where interventions empower victims and their extended family
networks and involve perpetrators in the restorative process.

Family group conferencing must be offered to help families work through
issues of domestic violence, helping them to decide what to do about
children who are causing difficulties. Restorative justice is about helping
people take responsibility, repairing harm caused and finding ways of
keeping people supported within their communities.

Opportunities need to be created to find better solutions on a case- by-
case basis. It’s a way of helping wrongdoers do better and so, in the long
run, the victims and society also benefit. This can only happen if we
seriously review the resources and funding given to welfare and the court
system, and the promotion of the right ideals. Underfunding, and sometimes
underspending, is at the root of the problems in the judicial system.

Why is it that forensic services are not able to deliver the results that
prosecutors need to secure convictions? Vital DNA results are simply not
made available because of staff shortages in the DNA laboratories.

Sometimes children who are victims of abuse arrive at court in a suicidal
condition when having to testify against their perpetrators. This is
because social services have not had the staff or the resources to remove
the victims from the place of danger and they had to continue living with
the perpetrators who committed the abuse. Can you imagine the fear that
these people have to live with?

The appointment of a children’s commissioner, for which there has been
provision in the Western Cape provincial constitution since 1998, could
assist in dealing with the problem of the high incidence of child
offenders.

Family lawyers tell us that the courts and the police do not receive
specialised training for dealing with people who have experienced extreme
trauma. They are often unable to deal with the victims sensitively because
of the pressure under which they work. People who are hurt are again
victimised in the court system. They see no justice done and there is no
change to their lives.
Many women are victims of physical and psychological abuse even after
divorce. Power play becomes very important, and many women have to struggle
to obtain their maintenance payments, having to prove that their ex-
husbands have the means to pay.

It is unacceptable that there is no legal aid for maintenance cases. Many
mothers and their children suffer extreme deprivation while trying to prove
that their spouses can afford to support them. These double standards need
to be stopped.

I appeal to the Deputy Minister to investigate these matters and to
implement changes. Having more divorce courts, staffed by sympathetic and
understanding women prosecutors and magistrates, would help to reduce the
backlogs in the system and reduce some of the stress suffered. Obtaining a
divorce in these courts as opposed to the High Court is also more
affordable, so the numbers of these courts should be increased.

While I acknowledge the need to create an awareness of the abuse of women
and children, and applaud the Deputy Minister for her initiative . . .
[Time expired.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Can I appeal to members to note that there
is a clock on the podium, and if your time has expired, you just have to
leave.
Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, I thank the Deputy Minister for this
enlightening debate. Where there is abuse, children are the first to suffer
because they do not get love and sometimes do not even get food.

These children may also grow up to be adults who abuse others because they
did not get love. Today we are debating the 16 Days of Activism against the
abuse of women, children, men and society at large.

When we talk about abuse, we do not only refer to one form of abuse, just
women only, but it includes men as well.

Abuse can be physical, economic, emotional and spiritual and all these
aspects have got to be taken care of. Maslow’s theory of needs states that
one has to satisfy the primary needs of anyone and this is where the
babies, because they cannot help themselves, find themselves marginalised
because they cannot say ``I need food’’ or ``that and that’’, if the
parents are poor or the mothers are not working.

So, we really appreciate that the department has taken it upon itself to
have this campaign, and we hope all the departments and in fact everybody
will join hands and make sure that this campaign is a success.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I just wanted to check if the hon
member is prepared to take a question?

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Yes, I am prepared to take a question.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: The question is basically related to the
extent to which that child is being suffocated and, therefore, the child is
being abused. Is she not finding it very ironic that she is abusing that
child through the way she is holding it?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Continue, hon member.

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Thank you very much.

Many of us have lost our human dignity because of living silently with the
scourge of abuse. Our government needs to develop programmes that are going
to deal with this. One will also note that in these days when there is such
a high prevalence of HIV/Aids, we have got to start by caring for children,
giving them all the love, comfort and training of the communities, because
some people do not know that the children who are orphans need so much more
love than children who have parents.

Drop-in centres have to be provided and the communities may provide these
by offering their rondawels but they would need to support them. Family
members have to love and care for each other and stop hitting each other,
and then extend their love to their neighbours and communities, thus
preventing or lessening abuse by diluting conflicts with love.

Now, we have to pick up that bundle of love and joy, and bond with it so
that it will be able to give love to other people when it is older. [Time
expired.] Thank you very much. The campaign is supported.
[Laughter.][Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, please, hon members. I will call on
hon Mohlaehela, and I believe this is her maiden speech.

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: Chairperson, hon Minister and members of the House,
thank you for giving me this opportunity to bring out my vote against this
abuse in our community.

I want to mention a very sensitive point with regard to the abuse of
children. It relates to the child grant, which is abused by unemployed and
drunken fathers. They use this money for themselves instead of using it for
their children. Thus the grant becomes the unemployed father’s grant rather
than that of the child. There are also mothers who participate in these
deeds. The child will go hungry for most of the month. This is a great
abuse against the child. Social services officials do not monitor and
follow up on these situations properly. Where there are organisations
trying to act against these practices, we find leaders, local ANC members,
who act against organisations who stand up against this. I speak from
personal experience. [Interjections.] Hon members may laugh, but I speak
from personal experience, where members of organisations are threatened.
[Interjections.] I support the action. [Time expired.]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, thank you for your
introduction. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon members.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: I think it was heartwarming.

We are looking at a very serious problem in our country. While this
campaign has heightened awareness about sexual and other forms of abuse of
vulnerable groupings, much still needs to be done to give the necessary
effect to the programme. Too many children in gaols still get sexually
abused. I want to stop here, and I am glad the Deputy Minister is here. If
my figures are correct, we are talking about 20 000 children in gaols. That
is one child too many, and I think now that we have a cluster situation, we
need to look at that very seriously.

Much needs to be done about the overcrowding and miserable conditions that
lead to abuse. Increasingly, male abuse victims are not being given the
same treatment as females, yet some counselling centres report increasing
male abuse. How can we create a safer and more secure societal environment
if the overall government policy arena in some departments is not
facilitative of the process?

Furthermore, the aged and disabled still remain soft targets of attacks.
Indeed, while policies may be encouraging, government needs to have a zero-
tolerance approach to perpetrators of violence against these vulnerable
groups. There needs to be a social contract between communities, government
and business that will drive moral regeneration towards advancing the cause
of these groupings. I also want to add that our television programmes are
not helping us very much at the moment as far as violence is concerned.

Various issues relating to the girl child growing up in an increasingly
hostile world where she could end up on the wrong side of statistics
require serious attention. [Time expired.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, hon members, I would first
like to say to hon Mohlaehela that she still needs to learn what the 16
days of activism is all about. It is the ANC that made it possible for this
society to realise that there should be 16 days of activism.
[Interjections.] It means that during these 16 days of activism, there will
be no violence against women and children. The campaign will start on the
25th of this month and end on 10 December. This is an international
campaign seeking to raise awareness and mobilise solidarity with women
exposed to abuse and violence, more often than not perpetrated against them
by men. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Ms M P THEMBA: I hope that this period will indeed assist all of us, as
South Africans, to take up the fight to uproot the evil of violence,
directed especially at women and children, as well as the elderly and the
disabled. I am confident that we all realise that to defeat this monster we
need to unite, combine our resources and work together, as government, as
civil society, the private sector and the churches. We need to create a
powerful force that will give no space to those who commit these inhuman
acts.

We need to bring about a consciousness amongst our men and boys - and women
also – indeed, amongst all of us, that abuse of women, children, the
elderly and the disabled does not only inflict injury on the victims, but
through these deeds the perpetrators deprave and debase themselves to such
an extent that they will never lead a normal life.

These 16 days will provide us with another opportunity to take stock of our
progress in dealing firmly with violence and abuse. It also presents us
with another chance to look at different strategies and measures to involve
all South Africans in these in order to be more effective in dealing with
the challenges facing each vulnerable group. We need to ask ourselves
whether there has been any progress, and if not, what the reasons for our
failures are.

We must again look closely at whether we have managed to align our work
with other processes undertaken by government and other structures of civil
society. We need to make an inspection in order to avoid duplication. We
all agree that we need to integrate our programmes as government, civil
society and the private sector. It is encouraging that over the years,
since the inception of the 16 days, it has grown to include all government
departments in South Africa, and by government departments I mean the
gender focal point in every government department. The Deputy Minister said
the offices on the status of women in all the provinces supplied us with
the programme of action of each and every province. I know that on the 25th
of this month, there will be an event at Schoemansdal. I know that there
will be an event in my own constituency, at Masoi. I ask all members to
look at that programme of action so that we can support all the activities
that will be taking place in the respective provinces.

Furthermore, we should engage in our work in a manner that ensures that the
victims or survivors of abuse and violence do not themselves become trapped
in the cycle of violence by becoming abusers and perpetrators of violence.
What makes it possible for the perpetrators of these acts of violence and
abuse to continue is the culture of shame and silence surrounding abuse and
violence, especially when it is committed by a family member or someone who
is trusted. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I would like to
thank the colleagues for their inputs. We have all heard the emphasis on
trying to create families because this is the basic building block of a
society that is strong and resilient to crime.

The hon Mabe described the need for that and we must respond in a way that
is so important. I think this is one issue where we see communities that
are so vulnerable and often compromised by poverty. Poor people are not
bad. Poverty knows no class boundaries.

We make some strange straight-line associations. There are thousands of
very good people who have safe homes and who provide safe and caring
environments for their children.

We know that poverty puts people and families at risk. We need to talk
about how we get a critical mass of this country’s people who are firmly
committed, in the daily experience, to the values that underpin our
Constitution in spite of the many challenges that face us.

The hon Robinson described an incredibly bleak picture. I need to remind
her that it is this government that has put all the reform legislation into
place. I seek no beef with you. I am not trying to attack you. What I am
trying to say is that the problem with your description does this. In the
face of the incredible and remarkable delivery over ten years on the
legislative phase, we have over 50 specialist sexual courts and the
Thuthuzela care centres, and we have still not managed to reach all our
people. That is our tragedy and the thing we mourn over most.

The President always stands up in Cabinet and says to us: ``Have you made a
difference today?’’ In terms of child support alone, literally millions and
more than 40% of this budget go to the basic social care of people in this
country. This is an extraordinary shift in expenditure that speaks of care,
of transformation.

We do admit that in the face of the challenges that face us in terms of the
numbers of children that need basic health care because of the deprivations
of the past, we have yet to push harder still. In the face of our
understanding that while we would enjoy diverting even more funds in this
direction, we will do it at the expense of housing and other services that
are critical.

I am appealing to you, hon Robinson, and my other colleagues in this House,
to consider what those partnerships are that are going to assist us to
improve the response. How are we, in our own communities, providing family
support systems when we know that we can stand up here and say social
services is lacking? What are we doing about providing support systems for
families at a local level in helping and assisting? These are the symptoms
of a caring society, trying to make government work and change the lives of
the critical mass of our people.

Our government has put its commitment behind these children and women that
very often face dire levels of violence. Each one is a tragedy for the
state. How do we, as public representatives, but also as fellow human
beings, assist in trying to ensure that additional partnerships are put
into place, so that we reach more people together? This is the stuff of
nation-building.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Deputy Minister, could you round off,
please?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: The hon Mchunu spoke about
poverty and its effects. I would like to congratulate the hon Mohlaehela on
her first input. It is easy to describe children whose drunken fathers
abuse them. It’s an atrocious situation. The majority of the children that
benefit from this assistance do so in good families. How do we get those
values that are entrenched in families to spread to others?

Hon Hendrickse, your statistics on children are absolutely incorrect, by
thousands. Last year the highest point was 3 000 children. Let me just say
that in terms of our law, it was 3 000 too many. It is not 20 000. We have
a task team that has brought this down to 1 600. My view is that we need to
do better. I will agree with you, but we are doing a lot better than you
were describing. You are quite right. How do we make these restorative
justice models reach those young perpetrators who do stand a chance? How do
we give them a second chance?

We talk about the awareness campaign. We need to change behaviour and
attitudes. Let us take this beyond awareness and make the mechanisms that
the state has put in place meaningful. Let us assist in creating mechanisms
to reach more people, find positive values that unite us and ask people in
this room – the men - to use their peer pressure to say to other men, I am
sorry, but we won’t associate with you, unless you will get help. Be
supportive. People don’t do it.

Don’t support those shebeens and bars in all our towns and cities that
allow underage drinkers, or report them to the police. This requires
practical action. I call upon you to assist us in putting the very good
mechanisms we have in place, to make them reach more people. I thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I would like to thank the Deputy Minister
for opening and also closing the debate. Thank you very much.

    REPEAL OF BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, hon
members and delegates, comrades and friends, you have just heard the
conclusion of the debate on 16 Days of Activism, which in essence is a
campaign to create greater awareness for the values enshrined in our
Constitution. It is a campaign to create awareness of the fact that
violence and abuse are unacceptable in a constitutional state like ours.

I am to lead a debate on the Repeal of Black Administration Act and
Amendment of Certain Laws Bill, and I would like to say that there is a
connection between the debate we have just had and the very Repeal of Black
Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Bill. I want to say that
it is an indication of government’s commitment to strive to create a better
life for the people of South Africa.

The repeal before this House, in honesty, is that of laws that have caused
so much suffering amongst our people. I thought it is apt for me to cite Mr
Cyril Ramaphosa, today a businessman, once a member of this House, who even
led the Constitutional Assembly. I thought I should refer to a very moving
article that he wrote on 18 September 2005, when he heard that government
is to amend the Black Administration Act. This is what he wrote. I thought
this was really moving and it’s something I should share with members. He
wrote that:

  The repeal of this law is a moment worth marking, remembering and
  celebrating. It marks a major milestone, albeit largely symbolic, in the
  development of our society from one which justifies the statutory
  subjugation of one person by another, to a society which recognises,
  protects and advances the dignity and rights of each and every person.


   But this is a moment also to lament the wasted decades of colonial rule
   and apartheid. Lives were ruined, human potential was brutally crushed
   and a nation’s prosperity was held ransom to the fears and prejudices of
   a few. Sitting here in a democratic South Africa, it is easy to forget
   the hate and bitterness that laws such as the Black Administration Act
   generated.

Members, it is consequently with great jubilation that I open this debate,
which, I am confident, will be concluded by a unanimous vote in favour of
the Bill. There is much more to what appears to be a technical Bill than
meets the eye. It signifies the disappearance of one of the remaining
racist laws on our Statute Book with an enormous amount of baggage. Not
only are the implications of this old statute discriminatory and offensive
but even its wording is archaic, discriminatory and offensive in the
extreme.

Provinces will play a key role in seeing to the repeal of the Black
Administration Act. Although today we see Parliament approve the mechanism
through which this Act will be repealed, there are some provisions of the
Act that can, unfortunately, not be repealed until such time as substitute
legislation has been put in place.

The incremental approach adopted in the Bill is a necessary evil. We are
adopting this approach not to prolong the life of the Act but rather to
ensure that governance is not affected negatively. I must say part of the
problem with the delay was precisely because people couldn’t find the way
out of the phased approach that we have adopted. I think it is important
that people recognise that we had to speed it up, otherwise we would still
remain with this obnoxious law on our Statute Book.

I think it is important that hon members be reminded of what has to be done
before the Act, in its entirety, can be repealed. And I am not going to
repeat this, because I think the members in the House will do so. You will
realise that, in fact, there are certain provisions that require special
attention and that, apart from the select committee having identified areas
for amendments, work that  still has to be done has to be considered in
relation to some of the sections of this Act.
Let me say that the main thrust of my message today is to representatives
of the provinces, in particular, KwaZulu-Natal, Free State, North West,
Eastern Cape, Limpopo and Mpumalanga. My message is rather a plea to these
provinces to ensure that their provincial legislation, which is intended to
substitute some of the provisions of the Act, is in place before the date
contained in the sunset clauses. That date, as you know, colleagues, is 31
July 2006. However, the sooner all provinces have their legislation in
place, the sooner we can, once and for all, be rid of one of the last
vestiges of apartheid.

I am heartened by the knowledge that most provinces, I am advised, have
reached an advanced stage in promoting the required legislation. It is not
only the provinces, of course, that had to partake in this, but even some
departments. I must say to you that we are in discussion and in
consultation with those departments.

I also would like to say to members that next year is the 10th anniversary
of our Constitution, and the Bantu Administration Act was one of the
cornerstones of apartheid, and that, in fact, we can be creative and use
the occasion - that is, the consultations and the public hearings - to
promote values enshrined in the Constitution. We must allow our people to
draw on their experiences. They are the ones who know and who have
experienced the impact of the Bantu Administration Act. We need to use the
occasion, as we promote the Constitution, to allow our people to really be
part of the new policies as will be indicated, of course, by the laws that
should be before the parliaments of the provinces I have just mentioned.

I have been made aware of the fact that both the portfolio committee and
the select committee dealing with this Bill have, in their reports,
requested various role-players to report to them by 31 January 2006 on
progress made on what they are required to do in anticipation of 31 July. I
shall be taking particular note of the outcome of these report backs, with
the view to taking any remedial action that might be necessary.

 . . . e ne bathong, ga ke batle go dira jalo. Nna ke eletsa gore morago ga
31 Ferikgong, fa le biditse dipegelo tse, e be re kgona go dirisana le
batho ba rona. Re buisane le bona, re utlwe maikutlo a bona. Ka tsela eo e
tlare fa re ntse re ntsha The Bantu Administration Act, e be e le gore re
thusa batho ba ga rona, re a itiisa ka kitso ya ditshwanelo tsa rona tse di
leng mo Molaotheong. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[ . . . this is not what I intend to do. I would like us to work together
with our people after 31 January, when reports are recalled. We should talk
to them to hear their views. In so doing we shall be doing away with the
Bantu Administration Act in such a way that it will help our people to
consolidate their knowledge of rights entrenched in our Constitution.]
We can do a lot, for example, in promoting equality, because inadvertently
we will have to deal with that issue, because part of the repeal also
relates to what were supposed to be powers given to the chiefs and headmen.
In the process, as we do that, let us use the occasion very creatively to
create awareness about the new values that are enshrined in our
Constitution. In that way we will also get a buy-in from our people,
because we would be promoting dialogue.

In conclusion, let me express my appreciation to my comrade, Kgoshi Mokoena
and the members of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Affairs, for their contributions in getting the Bill ready for this debate,
and for the useful amendments of both Houses that they promoted to improve
the eventual outcome of the Bill, the enactment of which will go down in
history as a milestone, but of course, remember that the effects of
apartheid are systemic and we need to keep on moving forward. We chip at
one block and move and chip at another. Thank you. [Applause.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, colleagues and hon members, let me thank
the Minister for outlining and telling us exactly what this Bill is all
about. If I had my way, I would only say: ``Ke laka leo’’ [It is my word]
and sit down.

This Bill, as outlined by the hon Minister, was aimed at controlling the
movements and the type of life black people had to live in this country.
There are pieces of legislations here that will have to be repealed
immediately, and those that have to be repealed on or before 31 July 2006.

During the deliberations, the committee directed departments to investigate
and report back to Parliament on findings of issues raised during those
deliberations. As you have heard, these Acts were aimed at blacks living
under the traditional leaders’ rule. It therefore affects six provinces
where there are traditional leaders, specifically.

There was a time in this country when traditional leaders were at the mercy
of a Governor-General. He could appoint and depose any kgoshi [chief]
without giving any reason. Black people, in terms of this Act, did not have
power over their own land. They were told how to live with their families.
What made it even worse is that it controlled blacks on where to be and
where not to be. It just fell short of telling blacks on how to do “that
other serious stuff”.

Members will recall that some sections of the black community were called
by some derogatory names such as Hottentots, bastards, etc. These clauses
will have to be flushed out of our statutes. The Governor-General was the
supreme chief of all the black people in this country. Therefore, his words
were the law.

Let me warn our interpreters that at some point I will be converting to
Sepedi.

This Bill also determined which kind of medicine had to be given to black
people. That was the law. These kinds of things were done just to make sure
that movement and lives of black people were limited or controlled.

E be e le molao wo o bego o laela batho ba mmala wo moso gore ba swanetše
go šoma kae le gona ba lefšwe bokae. E be e le molao wo o laelago batho ba
baso gore ba ka rua dikgomo tše kae, e sego ka moo bona ba nyakago. Ge o be
o ka fetiša, o be o le molato. E be e le molao wo o bego o beetšwe batho ba
baso gore ba ka tlalea mang, wa mohuta mang, le gona neng. Efela ge e le
motho wa mmala wo mongwe wa go se swane le wa gago, o be o ka se ke wa mo
tlalea.

Molao wo o be o bile o laela batho ba baso gore meetse ao rena batho ba
bagolo re kago a nwa e be a mohuta mang - ke ra digalagala goba wona
madila. Le gona e be e le molao wo o bego o laela gore ge o le motho moso o
be o swanetše go reka madila a mohuta mang. Ke molao wo o bego o beetšwe
rena ba mmala wo moso.

Ka gona, ke nako ya gore molao wo re o tumuleng ka medu, re o lahleleng kua
kgolekgole, ka gore o a nkga! Ke re o a nkga! O a re šišimiša! Ga re sa o
nyaka. Ebile ke molao wo o bego o leka go go dumelela, o le motho moso,
gore ge o sepela go ya madišong goba go ya dipapading, o ka swara thoka
goba sebetša sa mohuta mang. Le ge e se sebetša se bogale seo se kago
tshwenya motho, ba be ba go laela gore o sware sa mohuta mang. Ke molao woo
o bego o beetšwe rena bana ba thari ye ntsho.

Ke a leboga ka gore, go molao wo re re ga geno ke thabeng! Ke kgale o re
swina! Sepela gabotse molao tena! (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs
follows.)

[That was the kind of Act that dictated where Black people should be
employed and how much they should earn. It was the kind of Act that
dictated how many cattle Black people should own and not how much they
could afford to. It was a criminal offence to exceed the expected number.
It was the kind of Act that was meant for Black people to know who they
should report, the status of that person, and when they should report him
or her.

This Act restricted what Black people should buy and drink. I am referring
to alcoholic beverages. The Act was only meant for us, Black people.

It is therefore time to uproot it, and throw it far away because it stinks!
I repeat that it stinks! It is intolerable! We do not want it anymore. It
is also the kind of Act that restricted the kind of weapons Black people
should carry wherever they went. It restricted which weapons we should
carry even if the weapons were harmless. This is the Act that was meant for
us, the African people.
I am grateful that we are doing away with it. It has done enough damage
already. We are done with this Act.]

As you have heard, Chairperson, I am not just trying to fathom all the
issues I have raised. I am doing this because I have confidence in my
detachment that they will fathom out all the issues that I have touched on
in passing. These are advantages of working with dedicated members of this
committee. That is the reason why members of all political parties in this
committee voted in favour, and they were so consistent and reasonable. To
my colleagues, I can only repeat what I said in our last meeting - that no
matter how deep the bottle is, the cream will always be on top.

Hon Minister, in your department we have people who are prepared, willing,
ready and dedicated to serve this country. If we can have more people of
this calibre, this country will be a better place to live in. I am
referring, hon Minister and Chairperson, to people like Mr Lauwrence
Basset, who was leading this team. It was himself, Mr Molalathoko and Mrs
Skhosana. These three musketeers know what they are doing in their
departments. If there is a notch or space for them to be promoted, do not
hesitate to do so. Therefore, to this trio, I can only say ``Teamwork makes
common people attain uncommon results’’. History remembers us not by our
looks but by the work we have done.
Ke rata go fetša ka gore, go ja kudu ga se go bolaya tlala. Ke le
monamolomo, ke boletše, monatsebe o kwele. Ke tšhaba go hlwa kgorong. E re
ke šieleng ba bangwe. Mošate! [In conclusion, I believe that I said a
mouthful. I am sure that you have heard what I had to say. I do not want to
take much of your time. Let me give others a chance. Thank you.]

Ms F NYANDA: Chairperson, hon members, Minister, today we are repealing the
Black Administration Act 38 of 1927, which was one of the principal
mechanisms designed for regulating the lives of Africans under apartheid.

South Africa will never be the same. The ANC government has and will always
address the imbalances created by the former government. We have received
overwhelming support for the repeal of most parts of this Act, such as
section 11, which deals with the legal capacity of black women in relation
to leasehold ownership. Nevertheless, to a few, change is pain.

Let me borrow the words of Charles Anderson Dana when he said, “When a dog
bites a man, that is not news, but when a man bites a dog, that is news.”
Although this was said in a media context, when looking at it literally,
this is the stereotypical way of thinking of certain unrealistic
minorities.

Umfati nakafelwe yindvodza bekutsiwa akahlale phansi, angababuki bantfu
emehlweni - ngobe angumfelokati. Kwakutsiwa akambonywe ngetingubo; kuhanjwe
kuyewutsengwa libhokisi lendvodza yakhe angaliboni nangeliso. Sizatfu
kwakukutsi abegcilatwa umfati.

Nangabe umfati agula aye esibhedlela kufanele kutsi ahlindvwe, bekutsiwa
angeke akhone kutisayinela lifomu lekuvuma, kodvwa kufanele kutsi kubuye
indvodza yakhe itemsayinela. Nome angafa lomfati kungabi nandzaba ngobe
kufe umfati. Siyambonga hulumende we-ANC losikhiphe eGibhithe wasifaka
enkhululekweni.

Nangabe kwentekile umfati kufanele kutsi ahambe ayewutsenga indlu nome
imoto kutsiwe akakwati kutitsengela leto tintfo, kufuneke indvodza yakhe
kube ngiyo lebuyako itemsayinela. Ibuye indvodza isayine nome ngabe
lendvodza ayisebenti, ite nemali kodvwa kutawubhaliswa libito lendvodza
kantsi lemali yalomfati. Siyakubonga hulumende we-ANC. (Translation of
Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[When a woman lost her husband, she would be ordered to be inactive and not
look people in the eyes, because she was a widow. It was said she should be
covered with blankets; they would go and buy her husband’s coffin without
her seeing it. The reason was that a woman was oppressed.

When a woman is sick and she goes to hospital for an operation, she cannot
sign the consent form - her husband must come and sign for her. Even if she
passes away, it does not matter because it is a woman. We thank the ANC-led
government for taking us out of Egypt and giving us our freedom.

Should a woman want to buy a house or a car, she would not be able to buy
such things on her own - her husband must come and sign on her behalf. The
husband will come and sign even if he is not working and has no money. His
name will nevertheless be written there, although the money belongs to the
woman. We thank the ANC-led government.]

I appreciate the vigour and commitment displayed by those who believe in
the liberation of women. To those who still see women as minors, the Act
has now been repealed. Pull up your socks and strive to meet us on the way.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L H FIELDING: Hon Chair, members of the House, visitors, ladies and
gentlemen, at this point in time, we can only make a few general remarks on
the intended removal of certain sections and clauses of this Act, because
it takes time to study all the possible implications that would result from
the repeal of any of the sections or clauses under review.

We should remember that we are dealing here with customs and laws governing
an age-old way of life, which is still the preferred way of life for many
of our citizens.
We advise that nothing should be removed or changed without proper
consultation and consent of the communities concerned.

We recommend that, in the process of consultation, the communities should
be properly represented by competent legal council to ensure that justice
prevails, and that the cost thereof be carried by the state.

We fully agree that all discriminatory and redundant provisions should be
repealed, but with due regard to the protection of vested rights, such as
customary and traditional rights relating to property and land rights.

We caution that although there is a need to remove all racially based laws
and practices as speedily as possible, we should take time to carefully
consider all applications. We are dealing with traditional customs and
values that have been developed over a very long period.

We urge the authorities to treat the question of traditional rights, laws
and customs with the respect it deserve because this has formed a solid
foundation on which our present society has been built.

We specially welcome the removal of restrictive clauses pertaining to the
rights of women and marriages, bringing it in line with the Constitution.
We also appreciate the eradication of restrictive clauses regarding the
property rights of minors, who are governed by customary law and are now
also enjoying the protection of the High Court as the upper guardian of all
minors. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P C McKENZIE (Western Cape): Thank you, Chair. It’s an honour for me to
be in this House and also to speak on this topic. My greetings go to
everyone, also to the Minister.

I want to say that this is of course a historical moment. I stand here
representing the Western Cape, and all the political parties within the
Western Cape have approved this steps. I want to say that it is a little
bit strange, in terms of the hon member who has just spoken before me,
because that was not the sentiments of the DA in the Western Cape. They
were very clear that these laws should be amended and be done away with at
any cost. [Applause.]

Therefore, I want to say . . . [Interjections.] She can say as much as she
wants to. I was chairing that meeting and I have one or two DA members here
with me who were in that meeting and who are supporting what I have said.

Let me say that even though most of the clauses being amended affect the
six provinces, it had an effect even on those provinces that were not
affected, because I remember that we always had a slogan in years gone
by:``An injury to one is an injury to all’’. [Applause.] When our people
suffered . . . [Interjections.] It’s surprising that it’s that very group
that is making a noise. I wonder whether you are sorry that these clauses
are being repealed because it takes away some of your privileges? You must
tell us! You see! [Laughter.]

We want to say that this Bill has hurt all our people. One thinks of one of
the things that had to be changed, which was to give blacks property
rights. It’s a total disgrace that black people, . . . [Laughter] . . who
were born in this . . . [Interjections.] Look at who is fighting against
this! Look! [Laughter.] The person who is fighting against this Bill is a
person who lived under the rights of this area being a coloured
preferential area, stopping black people from getting jobs within this
province.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member. Hon members! Hon Ralane
please! Hon Lamoela. Can I request the member just to be quiet until you
all realise once again that we are in the House. Then we will continue,
because you are making a lot of noise. It doesn’t give you permission to
make a noise if the member is saying things that you don’t agree with. Can
you please . . . Hon Thetjeng and hon Krumbock! Ms Terblanche, you are the
whip of the DA. Can you please make sure that your members respect this
House?

Mr P C McKENZIE (Western Cape): These laws have caused a lot of pain and I
see that it still causes pain to the people who were affected by these
laws. I want to say that what is before us is very good. The fact of the
matter is that women are now getting their normal rights here. We remember
in the 1950s, when women marched to Pretoria for their rights, and
eventually we are seeing those rights being given to them today.

We want to say that these are the people who were treated as foreigners in
the land of their birth. The clauses that are being amended restore their
dignity. And each one of us should be part of supporting something like
that which regulates, makes right and tries to heal the wounds and the
pains that were caused through the centuries.

This is why, Madam Chair, every single party in the Western Cape supports
this Bill, supports these amendments, supports the repeal, and all of them
are supporting it without any reservation. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Ngqongqoshe, malungu ahloniphekile, okubi nje ukuthi
angiliphathanga ipasi lami. Bengizovele ngiwulaxaze laphaya phansi.
[Uhleko.] [Minister and hon members, the sad thing is that I don’t have my
passport with me. I was going to throw it down here. [Laughter.]]

Chairperson, the Black Administration Act is one of those laws and
administration that did not recognise our traditional and indigenous laws.
It is for that reason that laws that were discriminatory to the aborigines
of this country and in the Republic of South Africa do not have a place in
our democracy.

The IFP supports the repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment
of Certain Laws. While we agree with the repeal, we need to be courteous to
certain laws that are our custom and traditional to the indigenous people
of this country as well as other ethnic groupings.

Amasiko esintu ajulile. Ukujiya nokujula kwawo kungechazwe kalula njengoba
ngimi lapha. Asiyishintshe imithetho kodwa akungasilahlisi amasiko ethu.
Lapha sikhuluma kokunye ngemishado noma ngabe eyaluphi uhlanga kodwa
angizwa lapho kukhulunywa khona ngokungena, okungelinye lamasiko omshado
wesintu. Emshadweni wesintu inkosikazi eshonelwe yindoda yethulwa isincwazi
ngabakubo lapho ezalwa khona. Angazi-ke noma emthethweni wasentshonalanga
bayosivuma yini isincwazi - ngoba phela sesivumelekile ukushada nezinye
izinhlanga – ukuthi bayothi isincwazi khona kanye yini khona lokho?

Asikwemukele ukuthi lo Mthethosivivinywa awukaphothulwa. Kusenezinye
izingxenye zawo lo Mthetho okufanele zihlolisiswe phambi kokuguqulwa kwawo
wonke lo Mthetho. Sisalindele umbiko wezinqumo noma nezincomo zomhlaka-31
Januwari 2006. Empeleni besingakhuluma sigeqe amagula ngalo Mthetho. Uke
wakhuluma umame lapha ekhuluma ngabantu besimame. Kwakusenyeza impela
kakhulu uma umuntu wesimame ethi uyofuna indlu bese kuthiwa akahambe
ayoshada manje noma aye laphayana ehostela, akhethe isigqoko abuye
esesiphethe bese-ke enikezwa indlu, emdala engako. Ngale kwalokho kuthiwe
akahambe ayofuna umntwana womfana osenepasi – mhlawumbe uneminyaka eyi-18 –
eze naye afike ambeke phezulu kube nguyena omengamele engunina.
Okwasigqilaza ukuthi amakhosikazi ahloniphekile ashade nabafowabo noma
ayoshada nomunye umuntu nje ngoba kufanele athole indlu. Kugcine ngokuthi
uma esethatha inkosikazi lo mfana bese emxosha athi akaphume esho kunina
ngoba umuzi ethi owakhe. Ngakho-ke sithi nali ibhokisi lo Mthetho obizwa
phecelezi ‘Black Administration Act’ siyawungcwaba. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Our cultures are very rich. Their maturity and richness could not easily
be explained here. Let us change the laws, but they must not cause us to
lose our cultures. We are talking about marriage, among people of whatever
race, but I don’t hear you talking about inheriting your brother’s wife,
which is part of the culture of traditional marriage. In a traditional
marriage, a woman whose husband passed away is cleansed at home, where she
was born. I don’t know if they will allow cleansing in Western marriage. We
are now allowed to have mixed marriages. They will ask what cleansing is
all about.

We must agree that this Bill has not yet been finalised. There are certain
areas that need to be scrutinised before we change the whole Bill. We are
waiting for the report and recommendations of 31 January 2006. We were
going to complete this Bill. A female speaker spoke about women before. It
really terrified us when a female person applied for a house. She would be
told to go and get married or go and fetch a man from the hostel and then
she would get the house. As an alternative, she would be told fetch her
son, if he is 18 years old, and bring him along. In so doing he would be in
charge of his mother. What was hard was that a respected woman would have
to marry one of her brothers or somebody else in order to get a house. When
the young boy gets married, he will evict his mother and claim that the
house belongs to him. Therefore, we are saying: Here is the coffin of the
law called the Black Administration Act. We are burying it. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr A T MANYOSI: Madam Chairperson, I just want to start by saying that the
amendments to any law that emanates from apartheid should not be
inconsistent with the Constitution, with regard to an individual’s dignity,
including the dignity of widows. I’m just referring to the ‘ngena’ custom,
which may not really be protecting the dignity of those that are undergoing
the ‘ngena’ custom. . . [Laughter] . . . and it must not be inconsistent
with public policy.

The repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws
Bill represents giant steps in our long journey towards a society free from
racial discrimination and separate development. In that context, we can
proudly say that today we are celebrating a historic event in the
development of our society, the partial and gradual repeal and erosion from
our statutes of some of the last vestiges of the colonial-cum-apartheid
rule.

I will particularly direct my contribution in this debate at the procedure
employed at the appointment of chiefs and headman, their mode of operation.
I will also touch on the origins and the facts of the Act. Section 2(7) of
the Act provides that the Governor-General may recognise or appoint and
depose any person as a chief of a black tribe, and may make regulations
prescribing the duties, powers, privileges and conditions of service of
such persons. It further provides that the Governor-General may, in certain
circumstances, make an order awarding to or imposing on the person
recognised or appointed as a chief such of the property rights or
obligations of the previous chief as the Governor-General may deem just.

The section further provides that any person affected by an order made as
described earlier may petition the Governor-General for the amplification,
variation and interpretation of the provisions of the order, in respect of
which the governor-general may make such order thereon as he may deem fit.
On the other hand, the section further empowers the Minister or his
delegate to appoint any person as headman over a tribal settlement or as
headman of the blacks in any area, and may appoint any person to act
temporarily as chief or headman in the place of or in addition to the
ordinary incumbent of the post and may also depose such person.

Section 12(1) of the Act provides that the Minister may authorise a
recognised or appointed black chiefs or headman to hear civil cases arising
from the indigenous law and custom, and which arise between two blacks that
are resident within his area of jurisdiction, but he is not competent to
decide on matters of divorce or nullity of marriage.

Another important feature of the law is that it was considered to be part
of the civilising mission of the colonialists to allow the so-called
acculturated Africans exemption from customary law in favour of what was
thought to be the more advanced system of metropolitan law. This policy was
first implemented in Natal and was expanded to other provinces in term of
section 31 of the Act.

The Act neither provides nor elaborates on a procedure for the appointment
of traditional leaders in terms of custom, in which case the communities
would play a major role. Clause 1(2) of this Bill seeks to repeal this
arrogant and arbitrary section of the Act, but such repeal can only take
place once provincial legislation has been passed as envisaged in the
Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, the deadline of which
is 31 July 2006.

I said I would touch on the origins and the facts of the Act and the
justification for its repeal. When the Nationalists came into power in
1924, the colour issue began to assume an urgency and paramountcy in South
African politics that had been on a lesser scale before.
In 1925, General J B M Hertzog, who was both the Prime Minister and the
Minister of Native Affairs, insisted that the African franchise in the Cape
Province had become a danger to the whole of white South Africa. The rest
of the other provinces did not afford Africans franchise. He strongly
argued that in 12 of 51 constituencies where the franchise applied, the
African vote had played a critical role and that such influence would grow
and eventually lead to a demand for the extension of the African vote to
other provinces - an eventuality which, according to his contention, would
not be tolerated by white nationalism because it would mean the eventual
swamping of the White voters.

Subsequent to 1926, Hertzog therefore submitted a number of Bills to
Parliament, amongst them the Representation of the Natives’ Bill, the
Native Council Bill, the Native Land Bill, the Coloured Persons Rights Bill
and, most importantly, the Native Administration Bill, which has over the
years become the Black Administration Act we are now in the process of
repealing.

The underlying purpose of these pieces of legislation was to ensure that,
through entrenchment, the government of South Africa was firmly in white
hands and to keep South Africa a white man’s land. The Native
Administration Act, 38 of 1927, therefore, provided for the first uniform
framework for the system of separate native administration in the union of
South Africa.

It was to be part of a myriad apartheid laws that created a labyrinthine
system of governance of Africans and was one of the principal mechanism for
regulating the lives of Africans under colonial and apartheid rule.

The abhorrent segregationists act, which ensured the exclusion of South
Africans from mainstream South African politics, later found expression in
the Black Authorities Act, the Self-Governing Territories Constitution Act
and the Status Act in respect of the former Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda
and Ciskei, as well as many other laws affecting virtually every facet of
the lives of African people.

The Black Administration Act was to be the basis for segregation and
separate administration and development. Indeed, it had the intended result
that the administration would ensure, as it did, the provision of
significantly inferior facilities for the Chiefs and their subjects, the so-
called non-Europeans, and that resulted in unequal treatment to a
substantial degree of Black and White.

The establishment of a democratic, nonracial and nonsexist state, undivided
by racial prejudices, from the ashes of a racist and undemocratic order has
always been the goal of the ANC. The Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa declares that South Africa is one sovereign and democratic state
founded, inter alia, on nonracialism and nonsexism, which requires one law
for one country.
Chapter 12 of the Constitution provides for the recognition of the
institution, status and role of traditional leadership according to
customary law, subject to the Constitution.

It stands to reason, therefore, that this Council and Parliament, as a
whole, should continuously and relentlessly be seized with the noble task
of ridding our country of all laws that were founded on the values of
racial prejudice and oppression of one human by a fellow human. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Ms Y NAHARA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, the hon Minister of Justice Mrs
Mabandla and members of this House, it has been a problem for me to come
and stand here and talk about these laws. For those who did not go through
the experience of these laws, it might be fine but for those of us who grew
up seeing these laws working practically it is difficult.

I had an argument with my chairperson when he said I must come and
represent the portfolio committee here. But one would like to say this is
one more step. It is another mile in our freedom in this country, a result
of many battles that were fought by our people. On behalf of our martyrs,
today we can say we have done our job. You can live in a free country
because we lost people under these laws. Most of the colleagues here have
quoted some of the issues and I will not go into them because I have to
leave just now but I would like to quote two issues that are a practical
example of what these laws have done to our people. I will start with the
first one and I will come the other one, the exemption of the black people.
KwaZulu besithi amazemtiti. [In KwaZulu we called them ``amazemtiti’’, the
exempted.

Being ``exempted’’ made some of our people see themselves as being higher
than others. Our people used to enjoy life together but when this exemption
came about, they would not associate themselves with the lower classes of
people.

“Kwathi uma kufika indaba yokukhishwa kwabantu eMkhumbane . . .” [When
people started being removed from Mkhumbane] . . . there was no exemption.
All of them had to file on and were told to depart because that was now a
white man’s area.

You can imagine the division that was created by these exemptions where
people would say ``I am a better teacher than another person’’. I am a
principal and I am a better person than a teacher. You were now in the same
boat of this ordinary person, and you have got to leave. I do not want to
say how much damage there was.

The second aspect was the proclamation of the so-called Republic in 1961.
It has left scars that some people here cannot imagine.

With the forced removals of Sophiatown and Newclaire, people were being
removed whether you liked it or not. The GG truck used to stand there and
when it was there, you could not escape. What happened was that by trying
to survive people went to extremes. “Omncube bashintsha baba oCampbell.”
[Mncubes changed into Campbells.] [Interjections.] It is true. I can show
you some of the people now. “Okhoza baba oKoos.” [Khozas became Kooses.]
“OMasango baba oMsajee.” [Masangos became Msajees.] “ONdlovu baba oMohamed
Oliphant.” [Ndlovus became Mohamed Oliphants.] I can count so many of them.
The damage behind these laws! [Interjections.] “Niyangiqhatha-ke manje.”
[You are now setting me up for a fight.] She is not Mohamed Oliphant; she
is Olifant. I will protect my chance. But this was a family who became
Mohamed Elephant to make it even more different.

Now, the damage behind the laws that we are repealing today is the conflict
caused within families. How do you go back to Nquthu to say, `` I am part
of this family, I am Mncube’’. The kids say: Are you insane, Mnkhube, what
is that?’’ And these children’s surname is Mncube. How do you then bring
that? We are repealing the laws. Very well. It is correct. It is nice. It
is time. But what do we do to  assist that family now? There is a conflict
between the parents and the child. The parents say, ``Ayi bo,
singabakwaMncube mntanami. Ekhaya kulaphaya eMaduladula eNquthu.” [No, my
child, we are Mncubes. Our home is over there at Maduladula in Nquthu.] The
child says: “I don’t understand what you are talking about. I have always
been here in Coronation. What are you talking about? I know Coronation and
River Lee. What are you talking about?”
It is a serious matter that we are talking about. It is a serious conflict
within families. You go and tell a child: ``Cha awuyena owakwaKoos,
uwuKhoza. Ekhaya kini kule eSibasa, kusekhaya lapho.’’ [No, your surname is
not Koos. It is Khoza. Your home is at Sibasa, that is where your home is.]
How do we reconcile these things?

I just wanted to highlight these two issues. There are many other issues
where the laws that we are repealing today have left scars and damage
within the families of black people. But nevertheless, having said that, I
would also like to indicate that as a portfolio committee, when this
presentation was made to it, unfortunately we did not have time to really
go through and discuss it broadly but I can assure this House that we
unanimously supported very strongly the repeal of these laws.

In fact, with regard to the ones that are to remain, we were hoping that if
we were to do it our own way . . . “besiyothi namuhlanje kuphelile” . . .
[we would be saying today is the end of it], . . . nothing more, because
these are laws that have really made fools of us as black people.
“Sasingopopayi babelungu . . . ”[We were the white people’s puppets] . . .
in the true sense.

Today we would like to see our people in their own right and their dignity
respected again as human beings, as a proud nation of this country. Thank
you, Chair. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, hon member. Unfortunately, the
hon member forgot to explain her surname, Nahara, but nevertheless, I will
call the hon Shiceka.

Mr S SHICEKA: “Lihlabe laphukela.” [Those words had a great impact.]

Chairperson, the Minister, today we are doing another assault on the
apartheid legacy in this country by repealing the remnants of the obnoxious
laws. The law was systematically designed to control every sphere of the
lives of our people.

Other speakers, including the Minister, have dealt with other issues. My
task is to touch on two areas. I will deal with these areas in terms of the
ownership, occupation and usage of land by blacks and also of the
indigenous courts.

We agree, all of us, that land is a primary resource for development.
Development takes place on the land or underneath the land. That is why
other parties say ``land first; all others shall follow’’.

Our people were dispossessed of their primary resources throughout the
years of dispossession, which were last fought by Bhambatha kaMancinza at
Nkandla in 1906.

The 1913 Black Land Act was a defining moment in terms of the ownership of
land by our people in this country, further consolidated by the 1927 and
1936 Acts. They gave all the powers to the Governor-General to give and
take the lands as he wished from blacks. Using the proclamations in
exercising his power, he delegated his powers to the chief commissioner,
who was used as a front man because he was a man. There wasn’t any woman
who was given any power at that time.

Blacks were given poor, barren land in areas that were called tribal
settlements. No black was allowed to own any land in urban areas. The least
that could happen was that you would be given a 99-year leasehold but not
the ownership of land. Now, how many of us can survive for 99 years? What
history tells us is that the people do not survive that long, meaning that
if the system wanted your piece of land, the chief commissioner with the
powers vested upon him would take away your land using only a proclamation.
No process had to be taken in that way. The people of this country through
our forbears said:``The land shall be shared among those who work it’’.

The democratic government established a constitutional state that promotes
and encourages the rule of law, ensuring that everyone is equal before the
law. This government has developed a system that protects the rights of
people including the property rights.

We know that the DA in particular, as a party, is a party that clings onto
this issue because, by and large, they are refusing to share this important
resource, this resource that was taken by undemocratic means.

This government has developed these systems that are transparent,
representative, with fair procedures of decision-making that can be
reviewed by our courts, particularly the highest court of the land, the
Constitutional Court. If people feel treated unfairly by the decision of
the state, they have areas where they are able to take up those issues.
Never shall we go back to this system.

Regarding indigenous courts, Minister, your department has been requested
to develop and add legislation that deals with this issue. A discussion
should take place about the foundation of our law. As I speak, the law of
this country, the law of the land, is based on Roman-Dutch Law. That is the
foundation, the cornerstone of the law of this land. Now, the question that
we must ask ourselves is: Is that in line with the African Renaissance?
“Uma sithi mazibuye emasisweni, zibuyele emakhaya konina . . . ”[If we say
let the rightful owners reclaim what is theirs] . . . is it in line with
that?

A system of indigenous law and indigenous courts has to be developed. In
Botswana, our neighbour, 80% of cases are handled by indigenous courts. The
indigenous courts promote restorative justice rather than retributive
justice.

Our correctional services are overcrowded; our courts are experiencing
backlogs. Therefore, it means that we require alternative ways of dealing
with people who are in conflict with the law so that this country is able
to deal with its own disputes and can handle its issues. Therefore, we
require creative solutions to issues that are affecting us.

We have also agreed that, regarding all other apartheid laws, by 31
January, the SA Law Review Commission must present on those laws so that we
can know whether, after 12 years of democracy, we are still going to have
laws that are in conflict with our Constitution or not. Therefore, we hope
that the department, Minister, will be able to deliver on this task. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, hon
members . . .

“ . . . siyavumelana ngokuthi asiyingcwabeni. Senikhulumile.” [ . . . we
agree to bury it. You have spoken.] Let’s meet the deadline of 31 July
2006.

I don’t think that there is anyone here, any African person above the age
of 50, who hasn’t experienced, closely or remotely, pain and suffering
because of this bundle of legislation. Now I’m talking about the whole
package. So we have to conform to the new values, to our constitutional
dispensation.

Ubaba uMzizi usekhona? Lalela-ke mfowethu, engifuna ukukusho ukuthi niyazi
ukuthi ingxoxo ngamasiko ethu noMthethosisekelo sayiqala kudala. Sayiqala
kungakafiki ngisho u-1994 engakafiki kodwa into eyenzakalayo ukuthi
izingxoxo lezi sizenza ngokwehlukana. Kuba khona inhlangano yabesifazane
nabo baxoxe bodwa namakhosi axoxe odwa.

Kufuneka ukuthi uma sesigubha iminyaka eyishumi yoMthethosisekelo wethu
sihlanganiseni le nto sibone ukuthi . . . (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Is Mr Mzizi still here? Listen, my brother; what I would like to say is
that you know we started dialogues about our cultures and Constitution a
long time ago. We started before 1994. What is happening is that these
discussions are held separately. We have women’s organisations that are
having discussions by themselves and chiefs are also having discussions by
themselves.

When we celebrate 10 years of our Constitution, we have to put this thing
together and see . . . ]

As we prepare for July, or whatever date is set, or 31 July . . .

“ . . . sisebenzise lesi sikhathi ukuthi sibe nengxoxo . . . ”[ . . . we
must use this time to have discussions . . . ] . . . which are dynamic
amongst our people. “Inkathazo ukuthi asixoxi thina.” [The problem is that
we are not having dialogues.]

We don’t dialogue qualitatively, and I’m saying this is an opportunity for
that to happen.

Uqinisile ubaba uMzizi uma ethi amasiko ethu ajulile kodwa uma kukhulunywa
ngokungena, sisho ukungena abantu ngoba bevumelana noma sisho ukungena uma
kuyisiko ngendlela yokuthi uyacindizelwa ukuthi uvume ukuthi kufanele
uthathwe umuntu othile. Baba uMzizi, ngixoxa nawe. [Uhleko.] Ngithe uma
ngikhuluma ekuqaleni ngiye ngathi sigubha iminyaka eyishumi yokuba khona
koMthethosisekelo ngonyaka ozayo ngakho asisebenzise leso sikhathi ukuthi
sixoxisane. Ngithe saqala kudala ukuxoxa namasiko ethu kanye
noMthethosisekelo.

Enye into futhi ebengiyikhuza ukuthi sikhuluma ngokwehlukana. Amakhosi
akhuluma wodwa laphaya namakhosikazi ezinhlanganweni zawo akhulume wodwa
laphaya. Ngithi nasi isikhathi masixoxisaneni ngalezi zinto futhi
sibonisane. Makube yisikhathi sokuthi sifunde kabusha sibheke ukuthi yini
efanele iNingizimu Afrika ngoba abantu bethu kufanele sibavumele ukuthi
babe nesandla ezinguqukweni ezintsha. Uvumelana nami? Ngishilo-ke ngathi
vele sonke siyavumelana ukuthi masiwungcwabe lo Mthetho we-Black
Administration Act.

Okunye futhi ebengifuna ukukusho ukuthi ngimzwile uqabane uShiceka.
Engizokusho nje ukuthi . . . (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Mzizi is correct when he says that our culture is very rich. When we
talk about inheriting your brother’s wife, we are talking about inheriting
by agreement or inheriting by culture, forcing that person to be taken by
somebody. Mr Mzizi, I am talking to you. [Interjections.] When I was
talking before, I said that next year we are celebrating 10 years of our
Constitution. Therefore, let us use the time to dialogue. I said we started
long time ago to discuss our cultures and the Constitution.

The other thing  that  I  want  to  condemn  is  that  we  are  holding  our
discussions separately. Chiefs are holding their discussions and  women  are
holding discussions in their organisations. Now is the time for us  to  talk
about these things. Now is the time to look again at what is  necessary  for
South Africa, because people must contribute to change from now on.  Do  you
agree with me? I have already said that we  have  all  agreed  to  bury  the
Black Administrative Act.

Another thing that I want to say is that, I understood comrade Shiceka.
What I would say is that . . . ]

We mustn’t romanticise new measures as opposed to what is current. Justice
is very complex. It’s true that we need restorative justice and that we
need to apply multipronged strategies and therefore programmes. I have had
this debate and I just want to caution against it, namely that we have to
get rid of Roman-Dutch law and go back to traditional law.

Ngazile ukuthi ubaba uMzizi uzoyithanda le. Niyabona-ke? Baba uMzizi . . [I
knew that Mr Mzizi was going to like this one. Do you see? Mr Mzizi . . . ]

What I want to say is that they are not mutually exclusive, and that in
fact we cannot overlook the jurisprudence that we have accumulated. The
Roman-Dutch law system that you have talked about is in our system and in
our way of life; it anchors our economy.

It will evolve new norms and standards, as informed by the new
constitutional dispensation. Dynamic interaction, both socially and
economically, will affect and influence changes in our society. Changes
don’t happen overnight. But to help you, we are having a criminal review
process, as the whole cluster, and we will embark on it effectively next
year.

Finally, I would like to say Kgoshi Mokoena we “ . . . ngwana gaetsho . . .
” [Kgoshi Mokoena, my brother . . . ]

 . . . I think that you must secretly write me a recommendation when
you want me to give officials some kind of benefit; otherwise they will
give me trouble. I have only promised them a Christmas party and now I
think he will be expecting more, but unfortunately he’ll have to look to
the DG . . . [Laughter.]

In Justice, I’ve inherited working with very good people. We have been
joined by very efficient, new persons on the team, such as the DG, and I’m
confident that, working together with the Deputy Minister, we will deliver
justice in this period. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: That concludes the debate.

I shall now put the question. The question is that the Bill be agreed to.
As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present?
They are.

In accordance with Rule 71 of the National Council of Provinces, I shall
first allow provinces the opportunity to make declarations of vote if they
so wish. Is there any province that wants to make a declaration of vote?
There is none.
We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Abstain.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Gauteng e ae sapota. [Gauteng supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: iKwaZulu-Natali ithi elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo province?

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Re a thekga, Motlhomphegi. [We support, Chairperson.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga re ya ethega. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Kapa Bokone re a dumelana. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr P C McKENZIE: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Eight provinces, with the exception
of one, which has abstained, voted . . . What is your issue, hon Kolweni?
Can I hear your issue? [Interjections.]

Mr Z S KOLWENI: The Free State abstains.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, you are out of order.
[Laughter.] You must first wait for me to make a ruling. You have a right
to dispute my ruling, but you cannot interrupt at the beginning of my
ruling. I am therefore making a ruling that out of nine provinces, only one
province abstained, which is the Free State province. All eight other
provinces voted in favour, and therefore the Bill is agreed to. [Applause.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                           PATENTS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Mhlalingaphambili, ndifuna ukutsho kusekutsha kunje ukuba
lungisani iindlebe zenu ngoba ndiza kuthetha IsiXhosa. [Chairperson, I want
to state at the outset that you should open your ears, because I am going
to speak isiXhosa.]

Chairperson and hon members, it is a great honour for me to table this
statement on behalf of our committee. This will further make sure that . .
.

 . . . abo bazi iingcambu nemithi ethile nabo bayafunjathiswa zezo nkampani
zenza ngabo imali. Ngamazwi apheleleyo, lo Mthetho-sihlomelo wenza ukuba
iingqondo zemveli zabantu nolwazi lwabo lukhuseleke. Ukuba ubungcaphephe
babantu bakuthi abukhuselwa, baya kuba ngamaxhoba oohlohlesakhe abazimisele
nje ukwenza imali nenzuzo bengacingi kubabuyekeza nangeqhekezana abo
bangabona banini-ngcambu okanye mithi. Amazwe anjengeBrazil kunye nePeru
anayo indlela ethile athi . . . (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)
[ . . . those who know indigenous medicines receive financial compensation
and those who are from the companies that are making money out of them. In
other words, this amendment bill seeks to protect the organic and
traditional knowledge of the people. If the expertise of our people is not
protected, they will be left vulnerable to these fat cats, whose intentions
are just to make money and profits, without thinking of compensating the
real owners. Countries like Brazil and Peru have their own way of . . . ]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Just a minute. Can we be assisted
with interpretation?

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Mhlalingaphambili, ndithi: Esi sihlomelo sinamabakala
amane. Okokuqala, lowo wanikwa ulwazi, makaxele imvelaphi yechiza okanye
ingcambu. Okwesibini, makafumane imvume enolwazi kwabo bahlali bamncede
ngechiza elo. Okwesithathu, mayingabi yimveliso yakhe yedwa kodwa
mabakhankanye abona banikazi nanjengoko yena eza kufakelela nezikhumshayo
iindawo zeelaboratory nezinye ininto eziza kuba nobunzululwazi kweli chiza.
Okokugqibela, abanikazi-ngcambu mabaxhamle ngokwasezimalini njengoko ingabo
abona bantu bavelise le ngcambu.

Ngale ndlela, urhulumente weli uya kukwazi ukukhusela abantu bethu
abanengqondo yemveli nokunyanzelisa ezi nkampani zinkulu ukuba zixhamlise
abantu bakuthi. Umzekelo ke Mhlalingaphambili ngulo uthi apha kuthi
esiXhoseni kukho ingcambu ekuthiwa sisicakathi. Andizi kukwazi ukuyikhumsha
ke. Le ngcambu iphekelwa iintsana. Yenza le nto kanye yenziwa yigripe water
elusaneni. Sithetha loo nto ke kuba igripe water asingomanzi nje anentwana
ethile eyongezelelweyo phaya esuka engcanjini ethile.

Siphila kwilizwe elityebileyo zezi ngcambu, amaxolo omthi kunye namagqabi.
Ngokwenza olu xhobiso lubesemthethweni silungiselela nokugxotha ikati elele
eziko sikwaphelisa noxhatshazo lolwazi lwabantu. Ngako oko
Mhlalingaphambili, ndiphakamisa ukuba iNdlu yamkele, kwaye ixhase esi
sihlomelo. Enkosi. [Applause.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, I am saying that this amendment has four
arms. Firstly, the one who was given the knowledge should divulge the
original of the herb or root. Secondly, he or she should get a permit, with
the knowledge of those communities who are providing him with the herb.
Thirdly, it should not be his product alone, but the actual owners should
be mentioned as he is going to add Western ingredients and other synthetic
ingredients to this herb in the laboratory. Lastly, the real owners of the
herb should benefit financially because they are the actual producers of
the herb.

In this way our Government will be able to protect the indigenous knowledge
of our people. And it also compels these big companies to reward our
people, and the example I want to give the Chairperson is this. In isiXhosa
we have a kind of herb called “isicakathi”. I am unable to say this in
English. It is boiled for babies. It does the very same job as gripe water
for a baby. That is what we mean, because gripe water is not just water
with a little something from a certain herb.

We live in a country that is rich in roots, bark of trees and leaves. By
making this empowerment legal we are preparing to alleviate poverty; we are
also bringing to an end the abuse of our people’s indigenous knowledge.
Therefore, Chairperson, I move that the House adopt, and support, this
amendment. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: That concludes the debate.

Debate concluded.

I shall now put the question. The question is that the Bill be agreed to.
In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow political parties to make
their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any political party
that wants to make a declaration of vote? The DA does not intending to,
neither does any other political party.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. Those in favour say
``Aye’’.

HON MEMBERS: Aye!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Those against say ``No’’

HON MEMBERS: No!

The ``Ayes’’ have it. The majority of members have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the
Constitution. [Applause.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                  INTERNATIONAL PLANT PROTECTION CONVENTION

                          (Consideration of Report)

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson and hon members, my topic is: Statement on the
International Plant Protection Convention. It is within our mandate and
resolve that South Africa, as a sovereign state, should ascribe to
international principles that result in benefiting the citizens of our
country and further result in enhancing their lives for the better, and
supporting the principle of poverty alleviation and job creation. That is
why we are now also a signatory to the International Plant Protection
Convention.

This exercise, important as it is for our country, is not legally binding
but it obliges signatory states to adopt laws consistent with their
international obligations, assumed through international treaties and
agreements. The principle enunciated within the respective environmental
conventions provide a framework to guide management policies and serve as a
legal foundation for institutional development, enabling groups to
challenge domestic laws that would cause the state to violate its
international treaty obligations.

The third exercise may also lead to ensuring that, at all times, we have
the necessary and appropriate framework for the management of the
environment and sustainable development, improved legal and administrative
co-ordination of the diverse sectors, and initiatives on the management of
the environment forming the principle instrument of government in the
implementation of all policies relating to the environment.

We cannot run away from the fact that we cannot overlook the possibility of
the emergence of new diseases in the coming years. There have already been
several important reminders of the need for vigilance. In recent years we
have had to cope with a number of very worrying new challenges - for
instance, mad cow disease and the recent ban on the export of ostrich
products, which has recently been lifted. Therefore it needed to be said
that the clear priority is facing up to the challenge of previously unknown
diseases in the protection of human health.

There is, however, a particular complication. The full implications for
human health of new diseases, by their nature, are highly uncertain. In
such cases, there is natural reaction of extreme caution until the full
extent of the real risk arising from these challenges can be established.

Being a signatory to the World Trade Organisation agreements on the
application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, the Protection
Convention requires that, first, we should set up basic rules for global
agricultural trade. Second, we should recognise the three standard setting
bodies for plant, health, animal and food safety.

This again requires that we should adhere to the rights as enshrined by the
WTO - that of protecting humans, plants and animals within their
territories from harmful foreign pests. It should also be remembered that
the WTO expresses some obligations on its members, amongst other things, of
basing all regulatory majors on scientific data, which should be
technically justified and appropriate.

Chairperson, lastly, in 1948, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
stated in Article 25 (1) that everyone has the right to a standard of
living adequate for health and wellbeing of himself and of his family,
including food. I take this opportunity to place before this House this
convention for adoption. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question, the
question being that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all the delegation heads are present.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration of vote?

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Eastern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [Supports.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Elethu. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 MEMBERSHIP TO INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL INFORMATION
                                   (ICSTI)

                          (Consideration of Report)

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: According to my speakers’ list, I need to
call upon the hon N D Hendrickse.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: I think I have more than two minutes this time. I want
to speak about our membership of the International Centre for Science and
Technical Information.

The participation of South Africa in various science and technology
initiatives needs to be encouraged, given the dearth of skills in this area
and also for improving our research and development capacity.

The membership of such forums adds value to the country’s own science and
technology programme; training and assimilation must be supported. Given
that South Africa is in the forefront of the technological innovation on
the continent, and given our leadership role in the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development, having such linkages add value to our broader
technology and science family, from which various support programmes could
emerge.

While the membership fee is marginal, the benefits far outweigh the cost in
terms of what South Africa could potentially gain from its terms of access
to networks, database and refinement of our country’s collection, analysis
and dissemination.

The opportunities that this membership will bring to this country will give
South Africans an opportunity to gain access to information and unleash
their potential because, after all, South Africa is alive with
possibilities.

Let the doors of learning be open. The United Independent Front therefore
supports South African’s membership of the International Centre for Science
and Technical Information.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question, the
question being that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all the delegation heads are present.
In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration of vote?

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Eastern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Elethu. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ea e seketela. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?
Ms F NYANDA: Iyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Re a dumalatsana. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 ADDITIONAL PROTOCOL TO TRADE DEVELOPMENT AND CO-OPERATION AGREEMENT (TDCA)
  BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC) AND
                             ITS MEMBER STATES.

                          (Consideration of Report)

Mr D D GAMEDE: This will be the statement of the Select Committee on
Economic and Foreign Affairs. The EU, which is the European Union, is South
Africa’s largest trading partner, and our main source of foreign direct
investment.

The South Africa EU Trade Development and Co-operation Agreement, which is
known as the TDCA, which governs South Africa’s relations with the EU, was
initially signed on 11 October 1999.

The TDCA also provides a legal basis for continued EU support on
development co-operation in South Africa, through the European Programme
for Reconstruction and Development. It also provides for political co-
operation.

On 1 May 2004, the EU expanded from 15 to 25 member states, with a
membership of 10 new countries in central and Eastern Europe. The important
point is that trade concessions in the TDCA will automatically be extended
to these new EU members, which are Poland, Czech Republic, Slovenia,
Hungary, etc.

The additional protocol was signed on 25 June 2005 in terms of section 231
of the Constitution of the Republic. It has to be ratified before it can be
binding on the part of South Africa.

In conclusion, the extension of the TDCA to the 10 new member states will
ensure that South Africa exports to them and will benefit from the same
conditions currently enjoyed in the original 15 member states of the EU.

It also implies that imports from these countries in South Africa will
benefit from the preferential conditions contained in the TDCA. It means
that our trade relations with a very large part of Europe will be
harmonised and disciplined by the TDCA. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question, the
question being that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all the delegation heads are present. Are all delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration of vote?

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re atela. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Re a dumelana. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE M S E KHUMALO, HEAD OFFICE
                      AT THE AMSTERDAM MAGISTRATE COURT

                          (Consideration of Report)

Rre A L MOSEKI: Modulasetulo, maloko a a tlotlegang a Palamente,
komitikgetho e enkopile go tlisa dipegelo tse pedi, ke di tlise ka gangwe,
ke se dikgaoganye. Ke tlile go dira jalo ka bokhutshwane tota.

Lefapha la Bosiamisi le Tlhabololo ya Molaotheo le tlile kwa komiting la re
bolelela ka seemo sa ga Magiseterata Mathe le Magiseterata Khumalo, la re
bontsha gore go na le bothata ka bomagiseterata ba babedi ba. Go na le
dipuo tse di reng Magiseterata Mathe o jele madi a a kana ka R16 000, a a
neng a tshwanetse go tlhokomela dikhutsana. Se, se akaretsa le rre Khumalo.
Madi a gagwe ke R240 000. Se ke bothata jwa bomagiseterata ba go buiwang ka
bona fa.

Komiti fa e reeditse lefapha le bua le re, fa motho e le modiredisetšhaba,
setšhaba se tshwanetse go mo ikanya. O tshwanetse go nna le tlotlo mo
setšhabeng. Jaanong fa go na le melato e e ntseng jana, e e lebaganeng le
ena, mme a tshwere kantoro ya setšhaba, tlotlo ya kantoro eo, e a latlhega.
Modiredisetšhaba yo, fa a tshwanelwa ke gore tsatsi lengwe le lengwe a nne
mo kgotlatshekelo, a sekise disenyi mme le ena go na le bothata jo bontseng
jalo kgatlhanong le ena, selo seo se tlisa thulano ya dikgatlhego, se diga
seriti sa kgotlatshekelo. Ka go rialo, lefapha la re, a e re go sa ntse go
batlisisiwa, banna ba ba tsamaya kwa kgotlatshekelo, ba name ba beetswe kwa
thoko go fitlhela melato ya bona e fela gore ba tle ba kgone go lebana le
melato ya bona sentle.

Tona o dumalana le pegelo e. Komiti ya Bosiamisi le Tlhabololo ya Molaotheo
e dumalana le tsitsinyo eo. Se ke seemo sa komiti mo dipegelong tse pedi
tse. Ke a leboga [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A L MOSEKI: Chairperson, hon members, the Select Committee has
requested me to submit two reports at the same time, and not separately. I
intend to do so very quickly.

The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development met the committee
and updated it about the state of affairs of magistrates Mathe and Khumalo,
which indicated that there was a problem with the two magistrates. There is
hearsay that magistrate Mathe took money to the value of R16 000 meant for
orphans. Mr Khumalo is also involved. The money he took amounts to R240
000. This is the problem facing the two magistrates.

The department explained to the committee that any person who is a public
servant must be loyal to the public. It is important to respect them. When
the magistrate faces a case like this one, he is also facing the integrity
of the office. If this public servant has to attend trial at the court
every day, there will be a conflict of interest and this will also lower
the integrity of the office. The department has decided to suspend them
while investigations are continuing so that they could face the charges
until the case is over.

The Minister concurs with this report. The Committee on Justice and
Constitutional Development agrees to the proposal. This is the position of
the committee on the two reports. Thank you. [Laughter.]]
Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, I just want to bring to
your attention that the speaker who has just spoken presented a report on
two Orders – the Orders relating to Magistrate Mathe and Magistrate
Khumalo. However, I am advised that in terms of the Rules, we have to vote
separately on those matters without any further debate on the next Order,
which concerns Magistrate Mathe.

I will proceed to voting, and put the question that the report be adopted.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present. Are all
delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote if they so wish.

Is there any province that wants to make a declaration of vote? None.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Re a dumalatsana. [We support.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

For procedural purposes, I shall call upon the Secretary to read the
Seventh Order of the Day, which relates to Magistrate Mathe.

   PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE M F MATHE, ADDITIONAL
                           MAGISTRATE AT PINETOWN

                          (Consideration of Report)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: As the report has already been
covered by the previous speaker, we shall proceed to the voting on the
matter. I shall put the question. The question is that the report be
adopted.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present. Are all
delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration of vote? No.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Elethu. [We support.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Re a dumalatsana. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.
    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SOUTH AFRICAN DELEGATION TO THIRD ORDINARY
                    SESSION OF THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

Mr M J MAHLANGU: Thank you, Chairperson, for giving me the opportunity to
speak on the report . . . [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Members are requesting the hon
Chairperson to address them from the podium, and I’ll abide by that
democratic order. [Applause.]

Mr M J MAHLANGU: Thank you, Chairperson, for giving me the opportunity to
speak on the report. I can see the members are tired, so I’ll try to be
very brief. You’ve worked very hard today!

The Pan-African Parliament was established to provide a common platform for
African people and their grass-root organisations to be more involved in
the discussions and decision-making on the problems and challenges facing
the continent. One of the objectives of this continental body is to
facilitate the effective implementation of policies and objectives of the
African Union. The PAP was inaugurated in March last year in Addis Ababa in
Ethiopia, and since then it has held three sessions.

The Third Ordinary Session of the PAP, the report of which is before this
House today, took place from 29 March to 11 April 2005. A number of issues
were dealt with at this session and certain recommendations and resolutions
were taken. I hope the members have had an opportunity to go through the
report so that they keep themselves abreast of the developments and
discussions in the PAP. If, for any reason, there are members who have not
gone through this report, may I please urge them to do so. The report is in
the ATC of 19 August 2005.

The report gives a picture of how far the Pan-African Parliament has
progressed since its inception. I will highlight some of the key issues
that emanate from the Third Ordinary Session of the PAP, but first I would
like the House to note some of the major achievements of the PAP’s second
session held earlier last year.

The first was the adoption of the Rules of procedure to regularise the
internal functioning of the PAP. The Rules of procedure were modelled along
the lines of the institution’s founding instrument that is a protocol to
the treaty establishing the African community relating to the Pan-African
Parliament.

The second achievement was the resolution passed by the PAP at the end of
the second session last year to send a mission to Darfur in southern Sudan
to establish facts about the conflict in the region and also make
recommendations. The mission’s recommendations are contained in the report
we are considering this afternoon. We regard this as a major step which
showed our readiness as a continent to attend to our problems without
relying on external forces.
The Third Ordinary Session of the PAP presented African parliamentarians
with the opportunity to engage in discussions around important issues
pertinent to the development of the continent. These include debates on the
reform of the United Nations, transport, industry, communications, energy,
science and technology, peace and security in Africa, and HIV and Aids, in
respect of which the PAP decided to take a leading role in the combating
and focusing on behavioural changes and development of a continental plan
to fight this disease.

Importantly, the PAP took a brave step towards addressing the issues of
land redistribution in Africa, which traces its background to the wars of
dispossession of Africans by the colonialists. The sessions called for the
establishment of the African land title system that would go a long way
towards addressing problems relating to land dispossession on the
continent.

It would also pave the way for tackling one of the critical issues that
prevent the continent from effectively becoming part of the global
community and crossing the digital divide, namely the improvement of the
telecommunications and information technology as well as the transport
system. To achieve this it recommended the establishment of a new database
in the telecommunications and transport fields within the Nepad framework.

Further, in view of challenges with regard to the availability of the
adequate financial resources to run the PAP, the third session adopted the
motion presented by the committee on monetary and financial affairs to
grant permission for the establishment of a trust fund as an additional
means to mobilise resources to support the work of the PAP. The fund would
assist in building capacity for the PAP as well as enabling it to be
financially independent, therefore reducing its dependence on the African
Union and enhancing its oversight role.

As hon members would know, the work of the PAP is carried out by
committees. In preparation of the Fourth Ordinary Session Of the PAP to be
held on 21 November until 2 December 2005, the committees agreed on the
following priorities: The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline
agreed on a code of conduct for the members of the Pan-African Parliament
and the draft proposed guidelines on the oversight and accountability for
the PAP. I should report that the code of conduct will be tabled during
this coming session for debate and adoption by the PAP, whilst we will be
having a workshop on 19 and 20 November to tease out issues in respect of
the oversight function on the Pan-African Parliament.

The Committee on Co-Operation, International Relations and Conflict
Resolution identified a number of events and resources for mobilisation of
activities in order to co-ordinate co-operation and peace-keeping efforts
within and outside the continent.
The Committee on Trade, Customs and Immigration Matters prioritised the
fact-finding mission to the commissioners of trade and industry and of
social affairs of the African Union commission to get status reports on the
activities, with particular reference to trade regulation, tariff laws,
immigration laws and regulation laws.

The Committee on Transport, Industry, Communications, Energy, Science and
Technology prioritised making inventories of all conventions, agreements,
protocols and treaties governing the various domains, and a study of the
New Economic Partnership for African Development programmes and projects
relevant to the committee activities.

The Committee on Justice and Human Rights prioritised capacity-building for
all members of the committee on their roles and functions in relation to
the overall mandate of committees. In particular, the committee will be
studying and getting first-hand information on human-rights matters on the
continent.

Among resolutions taken by African parliamentarians at the latest session
was the reiteration of the recommendation on the importance of the African
Peer Review Mechanism by the state governments as a demonstration of
commitment to development and the principle of democracy, good governance,
the rule of law and respect for human rights.

This is an important message from the PAP, more especially in view of the
fact that our national parliaments have a critical role to play in the peer
review mechanism process. Our Parliament has embarked on a countrywide self-
assessment and peer review process within the context of the African Peer
Review Mechanism in order to encourage, within the broader context, the
participation of the people of South Africa in this process. This shows our
commitment to one of the ideals of our democratic government, that the
people shall govern. We would like this process of our country’s self-
assessment to benefit our country and the rest of the continent.

Many of the countries on the continent admire our young democracy and, as
host country for the PAP, we believe that the Parliament should always set
a good example as an institution that promotes and advances democratic
principles and practices. The work that we do should assist the PAP in its
endeavours to become a body that is truly representative of the people of
Africa in social, economic and political issues around the continent.

Let me conclude by highlighting some of the challenges that the NCOP will
have to deal with, that is, how do committees of the Council engage with
the report on a particular resolution and recommendation. I would like to
propose that the committees of the Council should consider resolutions and
recommendations of the PAP and propose subjects for discussion in the House
on some of these issues, because this would give delegates to the Pan-
African Parliament a renewed mandate when engaging with their counterparts.
Ek dank julle almal! [Applous.] [I thank you all! [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you very much. That concludes
the debate. I shall now put the question. The question is that the report
be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present. Are all delegation heads present? Yes [Interjections.]

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote if they so wish. In the absence of any
declarations of vote, we shall now proceed to voting on the question. I
shall do this in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must
indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour or against, or abstain
from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?
Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We agree.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Elethu. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Rea e amogela. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Rea dumellana. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in accordance with section
65 of the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES’ RULES
                                  COMMITTEE

Order disposed of without debate.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: As there is no speakers’ list, I
shall now put the question. The question is that the report be adopted. As
the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present?
Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote if they so wish. None.

In the absence of any declarations of vote, we shall now proceed to voting
on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour or against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?
Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Rea dumellana. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Before I adjourn the House, hon members, this is a report that is critical
to the life and functioning of this institution, which deals with the Rules
of the National Council of Provinces, and the report was published in the
ATC of Wednesday, 9 November 2005.

In terms of the Rules of the National Council of Provinces, there are two
options for dealing with any report before the House: either by way of a
statement or, assuming that the report has been circulated in the ATC, it
can actually be decided upon in this House without any further debate and
discussion. So, that was the procedure that was followed.

I am raising this here because I am quite aware that most of the members
were puzzled about what this report was about . . [Laughter]. . . but the
point is, most of the provincial whips are members of the Rules Committee
and they represent the provinces, and in their own right, they are the
heads of delegations from their respective provinces, so it’s a two-way
process: either confer with the head of the delegation from your province
to learn all the details pertaining to the report or refer to the ATC in
question.

With those few remarks, that concludes the business of the day, and the
House is adjourned.

The Council adjourned at 17:35.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                         WEDNESDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 2005



TABLINGS


National Council of Provinces
1.    The Chairperson

     The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, as the
     Chairperson of the Rules Committee of the Council, presents the First
     Report of the Rules Committee of the National Council of Provinces,
     dated 27 October 2005, as follows:


     To amend rule 9 by deletion of the words in bold brackets and insertion
     of the words underlined

     Election of other presiding officers


     9.(1) The Council may elect from among its members a [Chairperson and
     Deputy Chairperson of Committees] House Chairperson Committees and
     House Chairperson Oversight and Institutional Support to assist the
     Chairperson and Deputy Chairpersons of the Council as additional
     presiding officers.


     To amend rule 11 by deletion of the words in bold brackets and
     insertion of the words underlined


     Relieve of Chairperson


     11. A Deputy Chairperson or the [Chairperson of Committees or Deputy
     Chairperson of Committees] House Chairperson Committees or House
     Chairperson Oversight and Institutional Support or another member must
     take the Chair during a sitting of the Council whenever requested to do
     so by the Chairperson of the Council.


   To insert rule 14A after rule 14 with the following underlined words.



   Functions of the House Chairperson Committees



        14A (1) The House Chairperson Committees shall perform the
        following functions -


        (a)      Ensuring  the  compilation  of  the  programme  by  Select
            Committees that are in compliance with their strategic plans.

        b) Providing reports to the Programme Committee  meeting  regarding
           legislation and committee activities.

        (c)      Monitor the support provided by the Committee  Section  to
            committees.

        (d)      Facilitate the drafting of committee budgets.

        e) Tracking the processing of legislation by committees.

        f) Co-ordinate the Strategic and Business Plans  and  Programme  of
           Select Committees’ activities.

        g) Convene and chair the Forum of Chairpersons of Committees and
           Caucus Chairpersons quarterly to exchange information,
           perspectives and discuss, where necessary, issues relating to
           support to members or members interests.


        h) Convenes and chairs the Chairpersons of Committees meetings to
           deal with the business of Select Committees, in particular the
           processing of legislation.

   To amend rule 14 by insertion of rule 14B and of the underlined words.


Functions of the House Chairperson Oversight and Institutional Support


      14B (1) The House Chairperson Oversight and Institutional Support
             shall perform the following functions-

      (a) Co-ordinate the oversight activities of Select Committees.

     b) Ensure the  compilation  of  the  committee  reports  on  oversight
        activities.

      (c)   Ensure that all committees are briefed on the  Budget  Votes  by
         government departments and prove progress reports on such briefings
         to the Programme Committee.

      (d)    Monitor  compliance  by   the   Executive   with   respect   to
         recommendations set out in reports of Select Committees through the
         Office of the Chairperson of the NCOP.

      (e) The facilitation  of  implementation  of  recommendations  of  the
         oversight subcommittee by championing implementation  by  the  Task
         Team on Oversight by overseeing work by officials.


     f) To address members queries regarding Members Interests by liasing
        and ensuring that policies in this regard are implemented
        including:


         (i)      Working with the Deputy Chairperson to review the document
             on Benefits for Members:
         (ii)     continuously monitor and report on the implementation of
             the policy as adopted after reviewing of the document on
             Benefits for Members;
         (iii)    monitor and report on needs of members with disabilities;
             and
         (iv)     monitor and report on implementation of policy in relation
             to former MPs facilities including interacting with those who
             make contact for one reason or another.


      (g) To acquaint himself/herself with policies regarding labour
         relations and be the receptacle of such matters in order to advise
         the Office of the Chairperson and enable it to intervene
         appropriately where necessary.

      (h) To facilitate oversight of, monitor and report on the workings of
         the Public Education Unit. This is informed by the political
         imperative that Parliament should be accessible to the people as
         well as the constitutional imperative of facilitation of public
         participation.

      (i)   To be fully IT compliant by facilitating installation of systems
         to ensure that the institution is technologically ready to deal
         with its functions and to provide report on this matter to the
         Office of the Chairperson.

      (j)   Attend and provide inputs to the Forum of Chairpersons of
         Committees and Caucus Chairpersons quarterly to exchange
         information, perspectives and discuss, where necessary, issues
         relating to support to members or members’ interests.

     k) Ensure finalisation of existing draft policies on Leave for
        Members, Artworks Management, Exhibitions, Library.  Once policy is
        adopted, monitor and report on implementation progress or
        otherwise.


     l) Monitor and report on Household Services work especially in
        relation to Parliament as well as maintenance and security of its
        assets.

      To amend rule 94 by deletion of the words in bold brackets and
      insertion of the words underlined


      Voting on International Agreements

      To insert rule 73A after rule 73 with the following underlined words.

      73A.  (1) No mandate is required when the House votes on International
         Agreements provided in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution.
         However, the head of the provincial delegation must cast a vote on
         behalf of the province.

     2)  In the absence of the head of the provincial delegation a member
        may vote on behalf of the province.


     3)  A decision is agreed to when at least five or more provinces vote
        in favour.


    Meetings of Council committees and subcommittees


      94.   (1) Council committees and subcommittees meet whenever
      necessary and as determined in accordance with these Rules and the
      decisions and directives of the [Chairperson of Committees] House
      Chairperson Committees -


      To amend rule 116(1)(d) by deletion of the words in bold brackets and
      insertion of the words underlined

      Composition
      116. (1) The Rules Committee consists of –
      (a)   the Chairperson of the Council;
                 b) the permanent Deputy Chairperson;
                 c) the Chief Whip of the Council;
        d) the [Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of Committees]House
           Chairperson Committees and House Chairperson Oversight and
           Institutional Support;
                 e) the Programming Whip; and
      (f)   two representatives from each provincial delegation, one of whom
           must be a permanent delegate.


      To amend rule 142(1)(d) by deletion of the words in bold brackets and
      insertion of the words underlined


      Composition
      142. (1) The Programme Committee consists of –
      (a)   the Chairperson of the Council;
      (b)   the Deputy Chairpersons of the Council;
      (c)   two representatives from each provincial delegation  one of
           whom must be delegation whip and the other a special member in
           the delegation;
      (d)   the [Chairperson of Committees in the Council] House
           Chairperson Committees;
      (e)   the House Chairperson Oversight and Institutional Support;
      (f)   the Chief Whip of the Council;  and
      (g)   the most  senior whip of each party represented in the Council.

      (2)   A whip referred to in subrule (1) (f) or (g) who is unable to
           attend a meeting of the Committee may designate another whip to
           attend the meeting.


      To amend rule 157(1)(a) and (b) by deletion of the words in bold
      brackets and insertion of the words underlined


      Composition
      157. (1) The Committee of Chairpersons consists of –
      (a)   the [Chairperson of Committees] House Chairperson Committees;
      (b)   the [Deputy Chairperson of Committees] House Chairperson
           Oversight and Institutional Support; and
      (c)   the chairperson of each select committee or a member of that
           committee designated by the chairperson.

     2) The Committee may co-opt the chairperson of an ad hoc committee as
        a member of the Committee.

      To amend rule 158(1) and (2) by deletion of the words in bold brackets
      and insertion of the words underlined

      Chairperson
      158. (1)  The [Chairperson of Committees] House Chairperson Committees
             presides at meetings of the Committee of Chairpersons.

          (2)    If the [Chairperson of Committees] House Chairperson
             Committees is not available the [Deputy Chairperson of
             Committees] House Chairperson Oversight and Institutional
             Support presides at a meeting of the Committee.

      Report to be considered.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Education  and  Recreation,  on  the
    Membership to the  Centre  for  Scientific  and  Technical  Information
    (ICSTI) 09 November 2005

        The Select Committee on Education  and  Recreation  (NCOP),  having
        considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Membership
        to the Centre for Scientific and Technical Information, referred to
        it on the 16 September 2005, recommends that the House, in terms of
        section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Membership.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Affairs
    on the Provisional Suspension from Office Mr M F Mathe,  an  Additional
    Magistrate at Pinetown, dated 7 November 2005:

        The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
        considered the report on the provisional suspension from office  of
        Magistrate M F Mathe,  tabled  by  the  Minister  for  Justice  and
        Constitutional Development in terms  of  section  13(3)(b)  of  the
        Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993), reports as follows:


    1)     The Select Committee noted from the  report  that  the  Minister
       provisionally suspended Mr Mathe on the 22 August 2005 in  terms  of
       section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.  The  report  of  the
       Minister indicated reasons for the provisional  suspension  and  was
       tabled in Parliament on 23 August 2005, in compliance  with  section
       13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

    2)      The Select Committee invited Mr Mathe on the 30 August 2005  to
        submit written  representations  to  the  Committee  regarding  the
        recommendation of the Magistrates Commission. The Committee did not
        receive any response to the invitation by the 13 September 2005.


    3)      The Select Committee  noted  that  Mr  Mathe  is  charged  with
        stealing monies belonging to a deceased estate in the amount of R16
        200,00 during the period between December 2002 and January 2003.


    4)       In  terms  of  section  13(3)(c)  of  Magistrates  Act,  1993,
        Parliament must as soon as is reasonably possible pass a resolution
        as to whether or not the provisional suspension of  the  magistrate
        is confirmed. The Select Committee considers the allegation  to  be
        of such a serious nature as to make it inappropriate for Mr.  Mathe
        to perform his functions as magistrate while the  inquiry  referred
        to in section 13(3)(e) of the Magistrates Act,  1993  is  held  and
        therefore recommends that the Council Assembly resolve  to  confirm
        the provisional suspension of Mr. Mathe in terms of section 13  (3)
        (c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.
    5)      The Committee further recommends  that  a  progress  report  in
        respect of the inquiry of the Magistrates Commission be  tabled  in
        accordance  with  the  provisions  of  section  13(3)(f)   of   the
        Magistrates Act,  1993  and  the  first  report  to  be  tabled  in
        Parliament by the 13 January 2006.

    Report to be considered.


3.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Affairs
    on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Mr M  S  E  Khumalo,  Head
    Office at the Amsterdam Magistrate Court, Dated 7 November 2005.

        The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
        considered the report on the provisional suspension from office  of
        Magistrate M S E Khumalo, tabled by the Minister  for  Justice  and
        Constitutional Development in terms  of  section  13(3)(b)  of  the
        Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

        (1)      The Select  Committee  noted  from  the  report  that  the
              Minister provisionally suspended Mr Khumalo  from  office  on
              the 22 August 2005  in  terms  of  section  13(3)(a)  of  the
              Magistrates Act, 1993. The  report  of  the  Minister,  which
              indicates reasons for the provisional suspension, was  tabled
              in Parliament on 23 August 2005, in compliance  with  section
              13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

        (2)      The Select Committee invited Mr Khumalo on the  30  August
              2005 to  submit  written  representations  to  the  Committee
              regarding the recommendation of the  Magistrates  Commission.
              The Committee did not receive any response to the  invitation
              by the 13 September 2005.


        (3)      The Select Committee noted that Mr Khumalo is charged with
              stealing monies belonging to a deceased estate in the  amount
              of R240 951,96 during the period between 31 July 1999  and  3
              April 2001.


        (4)      In terms of section 13(3)(c)  of  Magistrates  Act,  1993,
              Parliament must as soon as  is  reasonably  possible  pass  a
              resolution as to whether or not the provisional suspension of
              the magistrate is confirmed. The Select  Committee  considers
              the allegation to be of such a serious nature as to  make  it
              inappropriate for Mr Khumalo  to  perform  his  functions  as
              magistrate while the inquiry referred to in section  13(3)(e)
              of the Magistrates Act, 1993  is  being  held  and  therefore
              recommends  that  the  Council   resolve   to   confirm   the
              provisional suspension of Mr Khumalo in terms of  section  13
              (3) (c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.


        (5)      The Committee further recommends that a progress report in
              respect of the  inquiry  of  the  Magistrates  Commission  be
              tabled in accordance with the provisions of section  13(3)(f)
              of the Magistrates Act, 1993  and  the  first  report  to  be
              tabled in Parliament by the 13 January 2006.


    Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Affairs
    on the Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of  Certain
    Laws Bill, 2005 [B 25B - 2005] (National Council  of  Provinces  –  sec
    76), dated 9 November 2005:

        The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
        considered  the  subject  matter  of  the  Repeal  of   the   Black
        Administration Act and Amendment of Certain  Laws  Bill  [B  25B  –
        2005] (National Council of Provinces – sec 76), referred to it  and
        classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as  a  section  76  Bill,
        endorses the classification of the Bill and reports the  Bill  with
        amendments [B 25C -2005].


    The Committee wishes to report further, as follows:


         1.  The  Committee   expressed   its   concern   that   the   Black
            Administrations Act, 1927, is only being repealed after 10 years
            into the new constitutional dispensation and raised the question
            whether there is still other discriminatory legislation  on  our
            statute  books.   The  Committee   consequently   directed   the
            Department   of   Justice   and    Constitutional    Development
            (“Department”), through the South African Law Reform Commission;
            to  undertake  an  audit  of  all   discriminatory   legislation
            administered by it that is still in force and to report back  to
            it in this regard by 31 January 2006.


         2.  The Committee further instructed the Department to:


              (i)       research  the  question  of   the   protection   of
                 proprietary  rights  of  all  categories  of  women   whose
                 marriages are not recognized as valid marriages in terms of
                 the Marriage Act, 1961, for example, Muslim marriages,  and
                 to report back to it by 31 January 2006 on progress made in
                 this regard, giving an  indication  of  the  scope  of  any
                 legislation that might be necessary in order to provide the
                 protection envisaged;


              (ii)     report back to it by 31  January  2006  on  progress
                 made with the enactment and implementation  of  appropriate
                 substitute legislation which is  currently  dealt  with  in
                 sections 12 and 20 and  the  Third  Schedule  of  the  Act,
                 dealing with the judicial functions of traditional leaders;
                  and


             (iii)     report to it by 31 January 2006 on how the amendments
                 to section 2 of the Administration  of  Estates  Act,  1965
                 regarding the jurisdiction  of  the  Masters  of  the  High
                 Courts over the property of all minors impact on or  relate
                 to, the  Children’s Bill, 2003, and  how  the  property  of
                 minors, particularly minors who have  been  orphaned  as  a
                 result of the HIV/Aids pandemic, is dealt with.


     4. The Committee instructed the Department  of  Provincial  and  Local
        Government, in consultation with  the  provinces  in  question,  to
        report to it by 31 January 2006 on progress made with the enactment
        and implementation of appropriate substitute provincial legislation
        on matters currently dealt with in –


             (i)  section 2(7), (7) bis, (7) ter and (8) of the Act, dealing
                 with the powers of the Governor-General to  appoint  chiefs
                 and prescribe their duties, powers and their conditions  of
                 service; and


             (ii) if applicable, section 5(1)(a) of the  Act,  dealing  with
                 the powers of the Governor-General to define the boundaries
                 of the area of any tribe or tribal settlement and with  the
                 amalgamation of tribes or parts of  tribes  into  a  single
                 tribe or the constitution of a new tribe.

         4.            The  Committee  instructed  the  Department  of  Land
             Affairs, as the lead Department, together with the  Department
             of Provincial and Local Government, in  conjunction  with  the
             provinces in question, and any other  relevant  authority,  to
             initiate  an  inter-departmental  investigation  in  order  to
             determine -


              (i)      whether there will be  any  unintended  consequences
                 which  will  be  brought  about  by  the  repeal   of   the
                 subordinate  legislation  that  has  been  kept  alive   by
                 sections 5 and 8 of the Abolition of  Racially  Based  Land
                 Measures Act, 1991; and
              (ii)     progress made in identifying, repealing or  amending
                 such subordinate legislation, or enacting new  legislation,
                 as may be required by the circumstances,
                 and to report to it by 31 January 2006.

    Report to be considered.



                         THURSDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

      1) Armaments Corporation of South Africa, Limited Amendment Bill  [B
         14 – 2005] – Act No 16 of 2005 (assented to and signed by President
         on 8 November 2005).

2.    Translation of Bill submitted
     (1)    The Minister of Finance


            i) Aansuiweringsbegrotingswetsontwerp [W 37 – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 77)


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Adjustments
         Appropriation Bill [B 37 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 77).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


     a) Report of the Auditor-General on the Information Systems Audits
        performed at the National Treasury and the State Information
        Technology Agency for the financial year 2004-2005 [RP 209-2005].


     b) Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of the
        Management of Sick Leave Benefits at certain National and
        Provincial Departments [RP 215-2005].


     c) Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the
        Special Pensions Board for the year ended 31 March 2005 [RP 217-
        2005].


     d) Special Report of the Auditor-General on the Status of the Delays
        in tabling of Annual Reports and consolidated financial statements
        of National Government for the financial year ended 2004-2005 (as
        at 31 October 2005) [RP 225-2005].

2.    The Minister of Education

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour Relations
        Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 222-2005].


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on  Education  and  Recreation  on  the
    Education Laws Amendment Bill [B23B-2005] (National Assembly – sec 76),
    dated 9 November 2005:
         The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having considered
         the subject of the Education Laws Amendment Bill [B23B-2005]
         (National Assembly- sec 76), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B25C-2005].


                          FRIDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bill submitted


      1) The Minister of Health


        i) uMthethosivivinywa WobuHlengikazi [B 26 – 2005] (National
           Assembly – sec 76)


         This is the official translation into isiZulu of the Nursing Bill
         [B 26 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76).




TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)    Budget and Strategic Plan of the  Auditor-General  for  2006-07,
         tabled in terms of section 38(2) of  the  Public  Audit  Act,  2004
         (Act No 25 of 2004).

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)    Notice No 925 published in Government Gazette No 28058 dated  23
         September 2005: Release of State land  at  De  Mond,  Western  Cape
         Province, which is no longer required for forestry  purposes,  made
         in terms of section 50(4) of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No
         84 of 1998).

    (b)    Notice No 926 published in Government Gazette No 28060 dated  23
         September 2005: Water Tribunals Rules  made  in  terms  of  section
         148(5) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


    (c)    Notice No 945 published in Government Gazette No 28053 dated  30
         September 2005: Proposal  for  the  establishment  of  the  Gouritz
         Catchment Management Agency, made in terms of section 78(3) of  the
         National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


    (d)    Notice No 944 published in Government Gazette No 28053 dated  30
         September 2005: Proposal for the  establishment  of  the  Olifants-
         Doorn Catchment Management Agency, made in terms of  section  78(3)
         of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


    (e)    Notice No 939 published in Government Gazette No 28053 dated  30
         September  2005:  Establishment  of  the  Crocodile   (West)-Marico
         Catchment Management Agency (Water  Management  Area  No  3)  which
         covers the Northern part of the North-West Province,  North-Eastern
         part of Gauteng, the South-West portion of Limpopo Province  and  a
         small portion of Western Mpumalanga and is bordered by Botswana  on
         its North-Western side, made in  terms  of  section  78(1)  of  the
         National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


                          MONDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)


     (1)    The JTM on 11 November 2005 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (i)     Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)


     (2)    The JTM on 10 November 2005 in terms of Joint Rule 160(4),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:
         (i)     National Land Transport Transition Amendment Bill [B 38 –
              2005] (National Assembly – sec 76)


     (3)    The JTM on 14 November 2005 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 77 (money) Bill:


         (i)     Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 77)


TABLINGS


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

      The comments of the National House of Traditional Leaders (NHTL) on
    the Forestry Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2005] dated 11 November 2005
    are hereby referred to the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
    Affairs and copied to the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and
    Forestry for information.


    Copies of the comments are available at the office of the Clerk of the
    Papers.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. Report of Joint Budget Committee on the Medium Term Budget Policy
  Statement (MTBPS) 2005, dated 11 November 2005:

Introduction

South Africa’s growth strategy aims to modernise  the  economy  and  improve
its competitiveness, while broadening  participation  and  enhancing  social
inclusion. The 2005 Medium Term  Budget  Policy  Statement  addresses  these
goals,  outlining  the  expenditure  plans  and  policy  aims  of   national
departments and provincial governments. (Foreword, MYBPS 2005).

The Joint Budget Committee reports as follows:

The Minister of Finance, the Honourable Trevor  Manuel,  tabled  the  Medium
Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) before Parliament on 25  October  2005.
Sitting as the Joint Budget Committee, the Portfolio and  Select  Committees
on Finance were briefed on the MTBPS by the  Minister  of  Finance  and  the
Director-General of the National Treasury.

The Joint Budget Committee also heard submissions from selected  economists,
National Departments, non-profit and research organisations from 27  October
to 02 November 2005 under the following themes:

    • Rural Development and Urban Renewal
    • Justice and Protection Services
    • Employment and Economic Growth
    • Social Services
    • International Trade

The  report  is  divided  into  broad  sections.   Section  1  outlines  the
presentation of the National Treasury, as well as submissions of  economists
on the MTBPS.  Section 2  outlines  submissions  of  departments  and  other
organisations on the MTBPS.   Section  3  lists  the  general  concerns  and
recommendations of the Joint Budget Committee on the MTBPS.

Joint Budget Committee Mandate

The Committee’s mandate regarding the MTBPS  requires  it  to  consider  the
distribution of available expenditure against government policy  priorities.
This mandate is separate from that of the Portfolio  and  Select  Committees
on Finance, which respectively deliberate on the macro-economic, fiscal  and
intergovernmental aspects of the MTBPS.

The Committee has interpreted its mandate to mean that  it  should  consider
the following:

   • The likely impact of expenditure  allocations  in  the  MTBPS  on  the
     effectiveness and efficiency with which  departments  can  respond  to
     government’s stated policy priorities,
   • Whether departments are making the tough choices  required,  tailoring
     their  planned  expenditures   to   priorities,   choosing   effective
     strategies and seeking efficiency in implementation.
The hearings aim to address these  issues  and  prepare  the  Committee  and
Parliament for its deliberations and vote on the Budget itself.

1. Briefing by National Treasury

The Minister of Finance, the Deputy Minister and  the  Director  General  of
Treasury briefed the Committee. The Minister opened with the statement  that
“No country can grow only on the basis of their macro-economic  policy,  but
no country can grow without it.”

The key themes of the 2005 Medium-term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS)  were
targeting of new funding in line with  the  Accelerated  and  Shared  Growth
Initiative (ASGI), while maintaining standing budget  priorities.  The  ASGI
prioritises infrastructure development, education  and  skills  and  second-
economy interventions,  while  standing  priorities  are  housing/the  built
environment,  the  progressive  social  security  net  and  developing   the
capacity of the state. The growth forecast was strongly positive, despite  a
high current account deficit and  oil  price  pressures,  and  inflation  is
expected to stay  within  the  target  band.   Fiscal  expansion  continued,
growing by R78 billion or 6.3%, due to a  strong  economic  performance  and
there  were  significant  increases  in  allocations  for  each  sphere   of
government. Public sector capital formation increases,  while  debt  service
costs continue to decline.

Additional allocations and conditional grants over the MTEF period include:
    • R20 billion  for  investment  in  the  built  environment  –  housing,
      community and physical infrastructure;
    • R12 billion for education, health, libraries, social grants,  cultural
      institutions and sports participation;
    • R9 billion for economic services, including  science  and  technology,
      and development and industrial policy initiatives;
    • R7 billion for improved courts, policing  and  Defence  equipment  and
      access to justice services;
    • R8 billion for improved public administration.
The provincial budget saw R46 billion added, R30 billion to  the  provincial
equitable share, R15 billion added to conditional grants and  a  further  R1
billion to be spent on the provincial  infrastructure  grant.  The  Director
General noted that the  MTEF  includes  an  allocation  of  R24  billion  to
municipalities  to  compensate  for  the  terminated   RSC   levies.   Local
government receives an  additional  R2  billion  over  the  MTEF  period  in
addition to the RSC replacement.

Investment in human resource development, institutional capacity and  skills
development in all spheres of government were a  major  focus  of  Committee
concern. It raised the questions of whether a skills audit  had  been  done.
The recurring problem of municipal-level capacity and skills  deficits,  and
particularly whether  there  was  sustainable  skills  transfer  by  Project
Consolidate, came under  focus.  Underspending  by  and  fiscal  dumping  on
municipalities  were  also  questioned,   and   why   under-performing   and
underspending departments and  institutions  continued  to  be  compensated.
Concerning the impact of skills  deficits  on  underspending,  the  Treasury
team highlighted poor planning systems as  a  cause  of  underspending,  not
merely poor financial management. The  decreased  budget  deficit  reflected
limited  viable  expenditure  possibilities,  according  to  the   Treasury.
Quality  of  proposed  expenditure  programmes  had   to   be   taken   into
consideration when allocating budget  resources.  In  tracking  performance,
there needs to be measurement  of  outcomes  for  effective  oversight,  not
merely the inputs.

2. Economists’ comments

Four economists commented on the MTBPS. All were broadly positive about  the
direction of fiscal policy, though skills constraints and the effect of  the
regulatory burden, especially on small business, were common concerns.

Independent  economist  Noelani  King  Conradie  warned  that  the   current
consumer-led boom cannot achieve 6% a year growth unless matched by  export-
led growth in production capacity. Tax cuts would help create jobs, and  she
believed that there was enough room in  the  budget  to  cut  taxes  without
cutting spending or driving up the deficit. Equally important were steps  to
make it easier, simpler and cheaper to  do  business  in  South  Africa  and
introducing more innovative  and  generous  incentives  to  stimulate  small
business.

Nazeema Moola  of  Merrill  Lynch  agreed  that  the  regulatory  burden  on
business should be lifted  to  stimulate  business  development.  While  the
infrastructure  development  programme   envisaged   by   government   would
encourage some small business development, more could be done to help  small
business by lowering company taxes and deregulating the labour market.

Riefdah Ajam of the Federation of Unions  of  SA  said  the  Reserve  Bank's
recent inflation projections  were  too  negative.  She  believed  inflation
would peak in February 2006 at about 5.5 percent as oil  prices  moved  down
to about $50 (R338.50) a barrel and telecommunications  costs  continued  to
fall.

Cecil Mlatsheni of UCT focused on youth unemployment and  measures  required
to bring it down. Skills training initiatives have limits, given a  lack  of
aggregate labour market demand. However,  lack  of  skills  in  turn  limits
growth. Schooling efficacy is a major cause for concern and FET colleges  an
important intervention, but more information  on  the  effect  of  education
mechanisms on growth and employment is required.

3. Theme 1 (Rural Development and Urban Renewal)
Thursday 27 October 2005

Recurring issues of local and departmental capacity,  and  effectiveness  of
coordination between government institutions, were key  areas  of  Committee
inquiry under this theme.

The Department of Provincial and Local Government
The  DPLG  briefed  the  committee  on  the  Integrated  Sustainable   Rural
Development Programme (ISRDP) and the Urban Renewal Programme (URP),  noting
that their main focus was on the  second  economy.  Rural  and  urban  nodal
areas were defined and identified. Both these programmes of  the  department
were said to be at the centre of fighting poverty and underdevelopment,  and
building  economic  growth  in  communities.  The  department  stated   that
currently the nodal areas were growing at 1,8 % per annum and  that  it  had
already begun mainstreaming  programmes  of  Project  Consolidate  in  nodal
areas. There had been economic profiling of the  nodal  areas  in  order  to
structure economic programmes for them. In conclusion, the department  added
that their priority areas and  programmes  were  concurrent/consistent  with
the current MTBPS.

The department agreed with  the  Committee  that  co-operation  between  the
DPLG, Treasury and DBSA was of importance. In response to a  query  about  a
skills audit, the department noted that its capacity  to  identify  specific
needs requires to  be  addressed.  The  department  added  that  there  were
systems being put in place to measure  success  or  the  extent  of  Project
Consolidate

Department of Water Affairs and Forestry

The department stressed the importance of its three core  programmes;  water
resource management, water services, and forestry, noting that its  business
was to address social, economic  and  environmental  problems,  as  well  as
managing  the  economic  assets  of  water  resources  and   forestry.   The
department presentation concluded by noting that their core principles  were
in line with the MTBPS and in terms of issues of improving quality of  life.
The department also added that it had limited  financial  inputs  for  water
for economic growth and development.

The Committee enquired about  the  recent  typhoid  outbreak  and  moves  to
prevent  another  such  occurrence,  and  the  DWAF  replied  that  it   had
established a task team. On the Limpopo drought crisis, the  department  had
done projects to build dams and six dams have been completed. A  feasibility
study was currently under way for building a dam in Tzaneen. There was  also
a plan to look  at  sourcing  water  from  elsewhere,  and  one  such  place
identified was Gauteng. The department also  noted  that  its  water  crisis
could not be looked at in isolation to the  other  two  countries  (Zimbabwe
and Mozambique) with which it worked and used water.

The National African Farmer’s Union
NAFU started by stating  the  challenges  that  it  faced,  which  were  the
absolute levels of spending in agriculture,  and  also  the  cumbersome  and
slow government programmes. However, it noted that the  share  of  money  to
agriculture  had  in  fact  increased.  Weaknesses  highlighted  were   slow
processes and limited finance. It recommended  that  government  review  its
funding,  and  address  the  problem  of  lack  of  clarity  as  to  AgriBEE
programmes.  The  organisation  urged  that  the  department  stop  creating
complex solutions to simple problems. Lastly,  the  organisation  noted  the
lack of access of black farmers as being of major concern.

Members engaged with the issue  of  NAFU  members  being  unable  to  access
relief funds and asked about issues of profitability and  market  access  of
emerging farmers. NAFU proposed one-stop shops so that people  could  access
these programmes at  a  lower  cost.  However,  NAFU  raised  the  issue  of
Agriculture Department officials managing members’ farms  on  their  behalf.
Its also stressed the need for  government  to  coordinate  service  to  the
people, noting that while the budget  was  adequate,  the  manner  in  which
delivery of services was coordinated limited  delivery,  which  resulted  in
the need for more funds. A Department of  Agriculture  official  then  added
that it was essential to stop creating new  structures  to  solve  problems.
She said that structures were in place and needed to be used.  In  terms  of
NAFU's recommendation that implementation be driven by communities, she  was
concerned about issues of accountability and capacity.

The Department of Agriculture
The presentation was short and the department  was  asked  not  to  continue
with the presentation, as it did not address the issues in relation  to  the
MTBPS.

Members wanted to know what measures had been put in place  to  address  the
issues raised by NAFU and wanted clarity on the weakness of  delivery.  Land
Use Management coordination within district municipalities was  raised.  The
Committee enquired how many beneficiaries requesting assistance from  MAFISA
received it. In terms of underspending on CASP, one member  wanted  to  know
if a performance audit had been conducted in order to assess the  impact  of
MAFISA on intended beneficiaries

The department noted that it was working together  with  the  Department  of
Land Affairs. It then noted that MAFISA was launched in three  nodal  areas,
and  in  terms  of  progress,  it  said  that  it  was  currently  screening
applications. In relation to the criteria used to  determine  allocation  of
funds to provinces for CASP, the  department  said  that  it  considers  the
amount of land in province to the amount of  land  already  distributed.  On
the  issue  of  land  use  and  the  coordination  of  municipalities,   the
department said that it was working closely  with  municipalities  and  that
municipalities were encouraged to identify  land  that  could  be  used  for
agricultural purposes.

The Department of Land Affairs
The Department noted that with a cumulative 1.827 million  hectares  already
redistributed, against the 2014 target of 25  million  hectares,  there  was
cause for concern, and this was one of the main reasons for the recent  land
summit.

In response to a  Committee  question  on  meeting  the  2008  objective  of
settling all land claims, the department  noted  that  performance  was  not
that good and that there were many challenges. The challenges ranged from  a
lack of financial management skills to the fact  that  it  was  now  dealing
with rural land claims, which were more complex.  In  terms  of  state  land
being distributed, the department noted that state land was  negligible  and
that it was dealing with capacity issues. About  funding  for  land  reform,
the department said focus on the medium term would  be  on  restitution  and
that more money for land reform will be made available on the medium term.

One member requested a follow-up on the Spatial  Development  Framework  and
wanted to know what measures were in  place  to  ensure  compliance  by  the
municipalities. Capacity constraints were given as the reason.

4. Theme 2 (Security and Justice)
31 October 2005

The Committee was concerned about coordination and communication within  the
cluster and following up on issues raised in the 2004 MTBPS hearings.

Department of Safety and Security
The Department noted that the SAPS operational priorities are in  line  with
the MTBPS, as well as those of the Justice, Crime  Prevention  and  Security
Cluster. Additional funding enables capital expenditure  on  facilities  and
capacity building for border control, additional personnel and  the  revised
reservist system to take over the SANDF commandos.

The department responded to the committee enquiry saying that  all  spending
priorities identified in the previous year had been  achieved.  In  relation
to Scarce Skills Indicators, the department confirmed that it had  developed
a model, and that the process was currently being  refined.  The  department
stated that reduction in crime by 3, 4, and 5% in the past few years was  an
indication of the  seriousness  with  which  its  officers  took  crime.  To
address crime prevention, the department noted that it was important to  co-
operate with other clusters. On the above point the  department  added  that
it was working with  other  clusters,  in  such  programmes  as  the  Nodes,
Project Consolidate, and the Urban and Rural Renewal programme.

Questioned about commandos, and regarding the relationship between the  SAPS
and the SANDF, the department noted that there was equipment that was  being
transferred to the SAPS from the SANDF.

The Committee enquired about vehicle management.  The  department  responded
by saying that it did make provision for vehicles per annum,  and  that  the
vehicle fleet grew by 3000-4000 units/year. The department added  that  this
process also included replacement. In terms of  resourcing,  the  department
noted that it needed to sustain these vehicles. When looking at the  vehicle
(process) model, the department felt that its model was sufficient.

The Committee recommended  that  current  priorities  be  linked  with  last
year’s, and stressed the importance of integration and the need for  greater
co-operation within the cluster. The department took note of this and  added
that maybe there needed to be greater involved of the  other  units  in  its
cluster in this budget hearing.

The Department of Defence
The department outlined its budget history since 1994 and set out  its  nine
priorities for  the  2006  MTEF.  Key  areas  are  equipment  modernisation;
military skills development; information and communication systems;  Defence
infrastructure and ARV rollout.

The committee wanted to know whether the  department’s  concern,  raised  in
last year’s presentation, about expectations that were not reflected in  the
MTEF, notably peacekeeping, had been addressed. The department replied  that
last year’s presentation was still an ongoing issue and  that  the  National
Treasury was indeed helping them. The funds allocated the  department  noted
as being insufficient, and it  was  considering  topping-up  the  allocation
from its internal budget.

On  bad  conditions  in  military  hospitals,  the  department  noted   that
maintenance was the key and that it was working with Public Works  and  that
there was progress. In terms of personnel in Burundi,  the  department  said
that it could not scale-down on personnel due to elections.  The  department
submitted that there were a total of  1287  members  currently  deployed  in
that operation.

On the issue of land restitution, which  the  department  addressed  in  its
presentation,  the  Committee  wanted  to  know  why  this  matter  was  not
transferred to Land Affairs, as it concerned state land. He also noted  that
the department had said last year that the  Treasury  had  approved  partial
funding for some of its  initiatives  and  wanted  to  know  how  much  this
partial funding was.

On the issue of land restitution,  the  department  noted  that  it  was  in
constant communication with Land Affairs and that it  had  gone  before  the
Land Affairs Portfolio Committee. In  terms  of  other  funding  to  address
shortfalls, the department said that it had a total of  R821  million,  R500
million from the budget, R300 million from internal budget and  R21  million
from external funding, which would be used for  deployment.  The  department
said that there was a shortfall in the amount that it had requested  in  the
previous year. The priorities that the department stated were still  in  the
process of being processed, according to the department

The Committee was concerned about the R1 million which  the  department  had
underspent,  and   the   way   departments   pleaded   poverty,   yet   were
underspending. The Committee said  that  departments  had  to  be  monitored
carefully during the move to the end of the financial year. On the issue  of
Land Restitution, the Committee proposed that the department  be  given  six
months to sort out and hand over this issue to Land Affairs,  and  focus  on
Defence issues. The proposal was accepted.

Department of Correctional Services
In terms  of  the  MTEF  allocations,  the  department  provided  additional
funding to its  Information  and  Communication  Technology  programme.  The
budget allocation saw an increase of 10,2% from the 2005 to  2006.  For  its
spending proposals, the department  mentioned  its  ‘Centre  of  Excellence’
initiative. The department also signed a contract with an employment  agency
to assist in its recruitment drive. The  department  noted  that  it  needed
8000  additional  personnel  to  kick-start  its   seven-day   establishment
initiative by March 2007. It argued that it contributed to job creation,  to
the  second  economy  and  to  the  African  agenda,  but  faced  challenges
regarding anti-corruption measures, overcrowding and detention of children

The Committee’s concern  was  again  the  lack  of  integration  within  the
cluster. He noted that the department had stated in the previous  year  that
the MTBPS favoured other departments in the cluster and wanted to know  what
the department had done to address  this.  The  next  question  was  on  the
financial implications of a seven-day  week,  whether  this  initiative  had
been costed, whether it was  more  economical  than  a  five-day  week  with
overtime. Members put a series of additional questions.

On the issue of recruitment numbers, the department noted that in  terms  of
its White Paper, costing and planning costs were huge, and  that  the  White
Paper was a 20-year vision. On the issue of immediate  recruitment,  it  was
added that pay for overtime in the 2002-03 financial was in excess  of  R200
– R300 million, which showed the overtime system was not  affordable.  Since
the phasing in of the seven-day Establishment there  had  been  direct  cost
savings, which were being used to increase  recruitment  and  to  deal  with
backlogs. With regard  to  possible  continued  corruption  despite  use  of
employment agencies, the department noted that it  had  delegated  to  three
agencies since about 6 million people applied for  1000  posts  at  a  time.
This volume was impractical for the department to deal with. The  department
did, however, note that corruption was concern and that its needed to  speak
to the agencies in order to monitor what was currently happening.

 In relation to the question about its  medical  aid,  the  department  said
that it had a fully funded non-contributory  medical  aid  scheme  in  place
and, like all other  state  employees,  correctional  service  workers  were
contributing 1,5%.

On the issue of restructuring salaries, the  department  said  that  it  was
finding it very  difficult  to  restructure  salaries/income  levels,  since
salary increases had to be looked at in terms of what work was done  by  the
personnel/correctional   service   officials.   Asked   about   a   possible
discrepancy between numbers of personnel the department  wanted  to  recruit
and the number of personnel already recruited, the department noted that  it
intended to recruit 8000 over the MTEF period and up to  3  000  were  being
recruited per year. The estimated cost for this  initiative  over  the  MTEF
was R750 million. In relation to a question on the cost implications of  the
change from the overtime system, the department could not respond.

The department responded to a question about  management  of  awaiting-trial
prisoners that this was due to slow processing  and  low  conviction  rates.
The  department   suggested   that   integrated   planning   occur   between
departments. Even with the remissions which were granted earlier this  year,
only 32 000 awaiting trial prisoners were released,  leaving  a  further  51
000. While the department noted that this 51 000 was still in its  care,  it
said that there were initiatives between departments to address this.

One of the initiatives was participation  between  departments,  even  at  a
local level. Another measure was the possible release of prisoners who  were
granted but could not afford bail  of  R1  000  and  less.  While  the  long
duration of awaiting-trial prisoners was acknowledged as  a  problem,  other
contributing factors were mentioned, such as  persons  being  arrested  with
insufficient evidence.

The  difficulty  was  also  said  to  lie  with  the  judiciary  not   fully
implementing alternatives  to  sentencing.  The  department  noted  that  it
continued to raise these concerns with the  judiciary  and  that  there  was
agreement (in a meeting in September) amongst  all  departments  that  there
needs to be improvement.

Another measure taken by the department was  to  put  together  a  proposal,
which would be addressed to the government legkotla next January  about  the
detention of awaiting-trial prisoners.  In  terms  of  the  Inmate  Tracking
initiative,  the  department  noted  that  it  did  encounter  problems  and
therefore the projects were not fully implemented yet.
The department added that a Task Team  was  established  to  report  on  the
effectiveness (and cost) of an Inmate Tracking System. The idea of  the  new
correctional service (‘New  Generation’)  facilities  was  to  have  smaller
units of no more than 60 offenders grouped by age and  programmes,  etc.  In
terms of their design, consultation was done with Public Works, in order  to
ensure that these facilities would  be  escape-proof.  The  department  said
that it was in the process of getting  tender  bids,  which  was  done  with
Public Works. It became apparent that the bidders had very high prices,  and
almost doubled what the department had  budgeted  for.  The  department  had
then submitted the bid offers to an independent quantity surveyor  and  will
reconsider alternatives once the quantity surveyor’s  report  is  available.
The process would also be put on hold  until  then.  In  terms  of  the  two
private prisons, the department noted that an investigation was done of  the
two contracts and that the department was advised that there  was  no  value
for money in these two initiatives.  The  department  added  that  this  was
realised after it had already signed  the  contracts.  What  the  department
said it  would  and  could  still  negotiate  was  the  money  in  terms  of
insurance, as cost of buying out of the contract was too high.  In  response
to the question of capital underspending, the department said  that  it  was
due to the delay of building.

Department of Justice and Constitutional Development

The department identified capacity building,  and  especially  prosecutorial
capacity building, in leading to reduction in awaiting-trial prisoners.  The
department acknowledged underspending in some respects  and  mentioned  that
it was addressing the capital budget underspending as well.

The department’s report was commended  for  taking  into  consideration  the
cluster approach. On the  issue  of  capital  underspending,  the  Committee
urged  that  something  be  done.  Referring  back   to   the   department’s
presentation  from  the  previous  year,  the  Committee  noted   that   the
department had said that it would increase access to the justice system  for
all, particularly vulnerable groups. On this issue the Committee  wanted  to
know how far the department was in terms of dealing with these issues.

Questioned about underspending on capital items,  the  department  responded
that it was also concerned. However, by dealing with  issues  of  personnel,
it was dealing with  infrastructural  capacity,  and  that  it  was  filling
posts. In  terms  of  improving  access  and  building  infrastructure,  the
department said that courts had been  built.  Responding  to  concern  about
lack of financial statements, the department  said  it  was  undertaking  an
advertising bid for a consortium to handle money and trust funds.

In terms of personnel expenditure, the  department  noted  that  there  were
areas with insufficient personnel, and a process  was  being  embraced  that
separated judicial and administrative functions so  that  judicial  officers
could perform only those functions directly relating to  their  jobs,  which
the  department  believes   will   increase   efficiency.   The   department
highlighted the commitment made by the Treasury to assist it  by  increasing
the number of police and prosecutors.

About  the  current  status  of  awaiting-trial  prisoners   and   diversion
alternatives, the department said  that  it  was  addressing  and  exploring
mediation and arbitration  alternatives,  and  increasing  the  capacity  of
advocates. The department also said that it was working on  improving  court
efficiency by  working  on  details  for  the  rollout  of  their  Reagoboso
programme. In terms of providing access and service  to  vulnerable  groups,
the department said it had already  rolled  out  secure-care  facilities  in
some provinces, and that these would be rolled out in the others.

The department noted that there was improvement in the dealing  with  sexual
offences but  that  there  still  needed  to  be  further  strengthening  of
capacity. In its interaction with Public Works, the  department  noted  that
there was still room for improvement and that as soon  as  it  was  able  to
address its infrastructural issues it would be better able to interact  with
Public Works.

Institute for Security Studies

The ISS made a written submission. It viewed the MTBPS positively and
endorsed the emphasis of government on the need to find an appropriate
balance between personnel numbers and salary levels, and between support
and front-line delivery staff in the Defence sector. It supports South
Africa’s growing role in African peacekeeping, but is concerned about the
reduction of landward defence, and urges the SA Army’s need for
modernisation of main equipment.

The ISS welcomed the paid-reservist system for the SAPS, but again urges
reconsideration of the phasing out of the territorial reserve, arguing for
its role in coping with natural disasters, as well as its rear area
protection role.

5. Theme 3: Employment and Economic Growth (MTBPS Hearings)
01 November 2005

The Committee inquired in some detail into the  performance  of  departments
and was  concerned  when  presentations  did  not  address  the  Committee’s
mandate and when issues raised in 2004 were not dealt with.

Department of Transport
Transport  services  and  infrastructure  are  the  veins  and  arteries  of
economic growth, according to the Department of  Transport.  The  department
stated that in terms of its priorities, it aimed for  economic  growth,  job
creation and bridging the gap between the first and second economies.

Also as a department it stated that it wanted to improve  access  to  public
transport, starting with rail, which carries 2,2, million passengers  daily.
There has been a 31,9% growth in rail passengers. The  ‘Gautrain’  would  be
integrated with the existing rail network. The department mentioned that  58
contracts had already been awarded for bus subsidies  and  that  R7  billion
would be spent on the taxi  recapitalisation  process.  Some  100,000  taxis
would be recapitalised at a cost of R50 000 each. This R7 billion  was  said
to include that  training  of  traffic  officers.  The  conversion  of  taxi
permits to route- based licences was seen as  a  way  to  reduce  inter-taxi
association  conflict.  The  department  stated  that  Eastern  and  Western
corridors would be rolled out at all the  provinces.  The  department  noted
that the restructuring of the Road Accident Fund  was  underway.  SANRA  was
said to have taken over provincial roads. In preparation for the 2010  World
Cup, the department  noted  that  an  additional  R241,7  million  had  been
allocated to the department in adjusted allocations, and an additional  R3,5
million  was  allocated  for  infrastructure.  For  rural   transport,   the
department noted that R90  million  was  allocated,  which  the  department,
amongst other things, was going to use for the rollout of bicycles in  rural
areas.

The Committee was concerned about the 25% rise in vehicle purchase (car
sales), which was causing huge congestion in national road networks,
infrastructure and maintenance. Underspending in provinces was also a
concern. On the issue of the 2010 World Cup, the member wanted to know how
sure the department was that its programmes would be done by 2010.

Responding to a question on bus subsidies, the department stated that in
all countries, public transport was subsidised, and that this was value for
money and reduced the cost of public transport to commuters. The department
also noted that subsidies to smaller vehicles would drive subsidies to the
second economy.

On the issue of conversion  of  taxi  permits  to  operating  licenses,  the
deadline remained and taxis were expected to comply. Those taxi drivers  who
did  not  meet  the  deadline  would   not   be   included   in   the   taxi
recapitalisation process. The department confirmed that its 2010  programmes
would be finished on time. On the ‘Gautrain’,  though,  the  department  was
not sure that the project  would  meet  the  deadline.  It  noted  that  the
national government would be assisting the provincial government.

On Basic Management Plans, the department noted that it  was  still  rolling
out bicycles. The department also acknowledged the issue of  bad  roads  and
the  need  to  provide  infrastructure  and  said  that  it  was   providing
alternatives. One option that was being considered was that of  animal-drawn
carts. On access to public transport, the department admitted  that  it  was
facing difficulties: not all  public  transport  was  being  subsidised  and
there  were   fiscal   constraints.   The   department   hoped   that   taxi
recapitalisation would help in this regard. The department said that it  was
aware of the rollover of R30,9 million and said that  a  number  of  factors
contributed to this.

On the issue of train accidents, the department mentioned that  it  had  set
up a railway safety regulator to investigate the  causes  of  the  accidents
and  to  devise  safety  regulations.  Rail  infrastructure  would  also  be
upgraded. On taxi recapitalisation, the department said  that  R250  million
was allocated although  not  a  single  taxi  had  been  recapitalised.  The
department reassured members that systems were in place and that  agreements
have been concluded with manufacturers in this regard. The  department  said
that the manufacturers would only be able  to  provide  vehicles  from  June
2006 and that  the  department  was  still  helping  provinces  prepare  for
recapitalisation. On the issue of Limpopo being unable  to  provide  licence
renewal notices, the department said that the province’s problems  were  due
to  administrative  shortfalls,  which  fell   outside   of   the   national
department’s operations.

Department of Housing
The department emphasised that housing development is one of the most
important economic indicators in South Africa, and the NdoH is the most
important constructor of residential property, producing on average 200 000
subsidised housing units, worth R4,5 billion, and 40 000 in the private
sector per annum. Labour-intensive housing programmes create jobs and
investment opportunities, while the department prioritises women and youth
empowerment.

Concerning issues raised in 2004, the Committee  wanted  to  know  what  had
been  done  to  ensure  effective  monitoring  of  fund  transfers  to   the
provinces. The department had responded in the previous year that there  was
limited  monitoring.  In  line  with  the  Human  Settlement  Strategy,  the
Committee wanted to know what the department had done to ensure  interaction
between all relevant government departments and regarding  accreditation  to
municipalities, in terms of capacity issues.

The department responded that there had been discussions but no  conclusions
in terms of integration and alignment of resources with  other  departments.
On the issue of  accreditation  of  municipalities,  a  framework  had  been
developed and finalised by MinMec, but at the end  of  the  day  it  is  the
provinces that drive accreditation. On this the department also  noted  that
the MinMec and SALGA came to  an  agreement  as  to  housing  delivery.  The
Housing Sector Plan in the IDP was also said to  assist  with  planning  and
getting information  from  communities  to  help  the  department  plan  and
respond appropriately.

On the issue of unfinished or blocked projects,  the  department  said  that
MinMec was working on the unblocking of projects and that  guidelines  would
be provided to emphasise that those  who  are  accountable  should  account.
With regards to the monitoring function, the department stated that a  Chief
directorate was in place and was efficiently capacitated.  On  the  question
of the previous year’s prioritisation, the department said that  it  was  in
interaction with other departments. It had noted the importance of  capacity
building and  had  established  a  unit  and  directorate  in  this  regard.
Unintended consequences were those of the constant  influx  of  people  from
rural to urban areas in search of jobs. The department said that it had  now
recognised the need to consider quality. For this the department added  that
it had a rectification process in  place,  which  was  designed  to  improve
poorly built houses.

Questioned about unfinished or  blocked  housing  projects,  the  department
said that MinMec was working on unblocking of projects and  that  guidelines
would be provided. These would emphasise  that  those  who  are  accountable
should account.  With  regards  to  monitoring  of  performance  of  housing
institutions, the department stated that a chief directorate  was  in  place
for this purpose and was efficiently capacitated. It also noted that  MinMec
and SALGA came to an agreement as to housing delivery.  The  Housing  Sector
Plan  in  the  IDP  was  in  place  to  assist  with  planning  and  getting
information  from   communities   to   help   Housing   plan   and   respond
appropriately.

Questioned about the exact number of houses built, the department said that
it was not sure and that some of these houses included in this number may
still be under construction. Asked whether under construction meant already
transferred, the department said that it did not know. On the issue of
monitoring, the department said that it was dealing with this. The
department said that it was aware of the local authorities’ lack of
capacity and that it was taking this into account. On the issue of rural
housing the department said that policy was being formulated and that it
hoped that it would have a rural housing policy. On the issue of bursaries,
the department said that it was in constant contact with the universities
in Gauteng, the Western Cape and KZN.

At the end of the presentation the Committee gave the department seven  days
in which to provide a proper indication of how many houses  had  been  built
in each province.

Department of Public Works
The department’s presentation summarised highlights from the MTBPS.

The Committee enquired whether the department had considered the MTEF
before it came to this hearing. The Committee wanted to know what
interaction the department had with business and other government
departments and asked how the department intended to deal with the
obstacles to service delivery in some provinces.

The Committee also questioned the department about  its  devolving  budgets,
including service budgets, to clients. The  department  explained  that  the
responsibility of paying for services had been with  Public  Works  for  all
government departments, but because this led to inefficient or wasteful  use
of services,  responsibility for paying for  services  is  now  devolved  to
departments  and  provinces in the hope of assigning more responsibility  in
the use of services.

Also by devolving budgets to client departments via service agreements,  the
department argued that  this  gave  the  client  department  the  option  of
choosing another agency should it feel the department of  Public  Works  was
not performing well.

The department noted that there was a general concern about its  performance
across the board and added that there needed to be greater co-operation  and
joint planning between Public Works, Health, and Education.  The  department
added that unless it improved its  service,  other  departments  would  lose
faith in it. When building, the department noted  that  it  dealt  with  the
department concerned but not with the public, which could be problematic  if
the department had not fully considered the public in its planning.

The department was also asked whether it would not be useful to  create  its
MTIP (medium term infrastructure plan) sooner. It responded that  there  was
still on-going discussion on the MTIP and that it was not finalised yet.

Department of Communications
The department noted that its priorities and programmes directly affected
the second economy. These priorities are Sentech’s infrastructure
investments, the SA Post Office network expansion, rollout of regional
television broadcasting services, strengthening of ICASA, uncapping the
Universal Services Fund, operationalising the Meraka Institute and
restructuring itself.

The Committee posed a number of questions regarding institutions. The
department noted that it had been following up issues of SAPO providing
social grants. The department noted that R750 million was allocated to the
SAPO in 2003. On the question of the department requesting more funding yet
underspending, the department said that the money underspent was committed.
The department said that it was fighting underspending by aligning its
planning and implementation processes and hoped to reduce it. The
department noted that the issue of compliance to ICASA was important and
that in terms of new legislation, the plan would be to register licences
speedily, and for this ICASA would require more money.
On costly telephony in rural areas, the department suggested that wireless
technology was the way forward and that it did note the challenges when it
came to the rural areas. The department said that it had been speaking to
SALGA and had noted that in district municipalities’ concern was more for
things such as water and housing provision and not for communication. There
was a ‘battle between food and telephones’, meaning that people did not see
a direct gain in such communication technologies. The department also
acknowledged that there was potential for link up between departments. On
the issue of huge spending towards the end of the financial year, the
department said that it was on target with its spending.

FEDUSA Presentation
The Federated Unions of South Africa (FEDUSA) focused on employment and
skills issues in its presentation. A major constraint noted was the lack of
skills in the public sector. The organisation suggested that public-sector
salaries be addressed and professions such as teaching and city planning be
promoted. There should be more spending on infrastructure programmes in
order to enhance the ability to deliver and business should be brought on
board. FEDUSA added that Public Works programmes needed to reconsider their
wages and allow for sustainability of people. It also proposed more
spending on child and old age grants, better salaries for police, nurses
and doctors, etc.

With regard to SETAs, when asked about FEDUSA’s contribution to skills
development, FEDUSA said that it was undertaking initiatives, such as
learnerships, together with SETAs and National Boards, and had an input
into other sectors as well. On the issue of Public Works wages, FEDUSA
noted that there was some progress but found that people were using up
their wages just to get to work.

Business Unity South Africa (BUSA)
BUSA endorsed the target of a 6% growth rate and emphasised  the  importance
of enterprise development in attaining this. Small  and  Medium  Enterprises
in particular should be encouraged,  especially  by  cutting  red  tape.  In
ascending order, regulatory burdens were RSC levies and  SETA  levies;  PAYE
and UIF deductions;  SARS  tax  administration;  labour  laws;  CCMA  cases;
bargaining councils; and VAT. BUSA urges adoption  of  a  regulatory  impact
assessment strategy by government. It noted that although the broad  outlook
is optimistic, local level partnerships are required for  service  delivery,
as well as increased savings and foreign direct investment.

Asked about the issue of CEOs’ pay and accountability, BUSA added that  CEOs
were accountable to  shareholders  and  board  members.   Concerning  skills
deficits, BUSA said that  there  was  not  enough  skilled  decision-making.
Price-setting too had to  be  looked  at  in  context  as  a  percentage  of
investment. When considering the ideal corporate tax  rate,  BUSA  suggested
that the issue was how South Africa  compares  with  other  countries.  BUSA
noted that there was a case for bringing rates down  further.  When  looking
at assistance to small businesses, BUSA said that it was important  to  look
at where the responsibility lies for slow delivery. It noted  that  meetings
were often held at national level and asked why there were no meetings at  a
local level. BUSA noted many gaps and suggested that a joint initiative  was
needed. BUSA also suggested that the political sphere  at  the  local  level
have an open door, noting that the local level is not always as open as  the
provincial and national levels.

6.Theme 4: Social Services (MTBPS Hearings)
02 November 2005

The Committee posed  detailed  questions  about  delivery,  particularly  to
rural areas and the poor.

Department of Home Affairs Presentation
The department is made up of two core services, namely civic service and
immigration. In immigration, the department hopes to attract scarce skills
to the country, in order to contribute to overall economic growth. The
department is in alignment with the government’s plan of action, and of the
seven points highlighted in the State of the Nation Address, the department
said that its core focus was on number four; that of enhancement of social
security. The department sees itself as playing a fundamental role in the
Social Cluster by providing essential documents. On its impact on Social
Cluster issues, the department said that it was in partnership with other
departments in the provision of social services.

The Committee was concerned about the department’s budget adequacy to  serve
rural areas, especially with identity documents. The  Committee  noted  that
the  department  underspent  by  R388  million  in  the  previous  year  and
therefore wanted to know how the department would ensure  that  this  year’s
budget would be spent. Another question was raised on the  issue  of  scarce
skills and what the department was planning on doing  about  South  Africans
living abroad who had these relevant skills.

Concerning the adequacy of its budget for identity document campaigns in
rural areas, the department responded that the expenditure trend in the
department had been low, as it was mainly allocated to capital/IT-related
programmes, which were important for service provision.  But now the
department said that it was looking to the future and servicing of rural
areas, and mobile units activities will be extended to December.

It was important to enhance human capital through staff  recruitment  rather
than  merely  requesting  additional   resources.   On   the   question   of
underspending, the department noted that it was currently  standing  at  41%
expenditure of this current budget. In comparison  to  the  previous  year’s
expenditure of 34% by September, the  department  felt  that  it  was  doing
well. It was also noted that there were currently on-going  projects,  which
would be receiving further funding in the next six months.  On  facilitation
of recruitment of South Africans in other  countries,  the  department  said
that this was a catch 22, in that it could not do much about those who  were
not patriotic and could not force people to move back. The department  noted
that through the Immigration Act, it was trying  to  import  scarce  skills,
and together with the Department of Trade and Industry,  it  was  trying  to
build those skills capacity within the country.

Questioned about the influx of illegal immigrants, the department said that
it did acknowledge this as a challenge and that the BCOCC was created in
order to address this problem and to ensure co-ordination between
departments (such as SAPS) to deal with this issue. The department added
that it was also involved in deportation, noting that another problem was
that of people who come into the country with legitimate documents and then
disappear once in the country. On the issue of capacity building, the
department clarified that it was talking about the capacity to fill posts,
and strategic capacity, such as IT systems and infrastructure (offices in
certain areas). On the issue of utilising youth structures, the department
assured the committee that the department was part of internship programmes
and that some of these interns go on to fill posts in the department. On
some initiatives the department interacted with uMsobomvu, who funded the
programmes. The challenges of duplicated IDs the department hoped to
address with the introduction of the ID smart cards, which it said would be
implemented by September of the following year. The problem of children
having more than one birth certificate the department said was sometimes
due to mothers registering their children more than once. The other problem
here is that the department does not take the fingerprints of children and
is therefore unable to trace this.

Department of Social Development
The Department’s presentation said that it promotes opportunities for
marginalised communities in economic activity to improve the quality of
life of the poor. It maintains a progressive social security net and
invests in community services and human development. It significantly
improves the capacity and effectiveness of the state by promoting service-
oriented public administration. Consolidated social development spending
grew by 28,8% in the three-year period to 2005/06, and will grow at an
annual rate of 11,6% in the coming MTEF. The largest portion spent is on
social assistance, which consumes 92% of the total budget.

The Committee raised the issue of eligibility for social grants  and  skewed
allocation. The department responded that there were different  grants,  the
eligibility for which differed. On the issue  of  delays  in  processing  of
grants, the department answered that it had set up agencies to  do  this:  a
grant application should ideally take two days, but that there were  delays,
which were mostly caused by the skewed staff-to-beneficiary ratio, which  in
some provinces was at 1: 1800. The department acknowledged the fact that  it
did not have enough staff on the ground level,  but  said  that  there  were
some improvements and that even more  were  underway.  On  the  question  of
using the SAPO to distribute social grants, the  department  said  that  the
SAPO would be the service provider of choice  but  that  it  would  have  to
demonstrate that it could provide this  service  at  a  cost  effective  and
efficient manner.

Altogether 6,3 million children are at present  receiving  grants,  and  for
those children whose documents were still being  processed,  the  department
said that provision was made for them and  it  could  still  obtain  grants.
Research done showed that a significant number of people were  living  above
the poverty line because of the social grants provision by  the  department.
The department stated that it did have a plan/strategy in  place  to  retain
and recruit social workers and is looking at salary issues and  the  working
conditions of social workers. It is working with the  Department  of  Public
Works to ensure an increase in  the  stipend  for  volunteers/  care-givers,
from R500 to R1 000.
Department of Health
The department’s key initiatives are upgrading and revitalisation of
hospitals, additional funding for medical equipment and information
systems, and consolidation of primary health care services under provincial
administrations.

The Committee commented that in the training of  health  professionals,  the
department  had  to  interact   with   health   councils.   The   issue   of
accountability of managers was also raised. On this  issue,  the  department
stated  that  there  were  strategic  obstacles  and   management   capacity
problems. Clinics in the rural areas face challenges and upgrading  them  to
medical centres was not possible for lack of doctors.  This  reiterates  the
Human  Resource  question  yet  again.  The  department  said  that  it  was
considering a strategy to  expand  the  mid-level  workers  pool;  therefore
focusing on increasing the number of pharmacists,  medical  assistants,  and
training medical aides for nursing work. It noted that emphasis  on  numbers
might also undervalue quality. As  part  of  its  retention  strategies  for
nurses it was looking at reviewing structure of training.

On the issue of training colleges, the department  said  that  most  of  the
tutors for these were by now in the UK and  were  discouraged  by  the  fact
that  it  would  have  to  start  at  the  lowest  level,  as  per   Nursing
Regulations.

The department said  that  it  was  on  track  with  its  malaria  reduction
targets. Similarly, regarding the ARV roll-out, the department said  it  was
on track. On its competence to do DNA forensic analysis  at  hospitals,  the
department said that this was a very specialised  field  and  could  not  be
provided at all hospitals,  though  it  was  being  done  in  Pretoria.  The
department is trying to decentralise this to the hospitals in provinces.  In
the case of suspected rape, especially of children, testing has to  be  done
through the police, who had more competence in this regard.
Department of Education
The department summarised the increases to the national baseline and to  the
provincial Equitable Share as set out in the MTEF.

      Responding to questions, in terms of higher education  the  department
      noted that there was  a  throughput  problem  and  that  the  Minister
      contemplated an enrollment planning initiative. On the  issue  of  its
      difficulty  in  retaining  temporary  and  substitute  teachers,   the
      department agreed that their conditions  were  unacceptable  and  said
      that some provinces were moving speedily to ensure sure that temporary
      and substitute teachers were absorbed permanently.

The department noted the importance of  FET  and  technical  skills,  adding
that this was not only a South African problem. The department  assured  the
committee  that  once  good  FET  colleges  were  set  up,  a   considerable
improvement  would  be  seen.  On  the  issue  of  teacher  shortages,   and
especially  schools  with  no  mathematics  teachers,  this  was  said  most
probably to be  a  problem  of  the  management  systems,  with  the  School
Governing Bodies having the final say on who gets appointed. In relation  to
the Early Childhood Development, 600 000 children in rural areas  were  said
to be on this programme and it was still expanding.

On the issue of no-fees schools, the department said  that  this  would  not
happen this year, but that no-fees schools would  formally  be  declared  by
2007. It also noted that not  all  schools  would  be  no-fees  schools.  On
school  transport,  the  department  said  that  this   was   a   provincial
competency, although the department  acknowledged  the  challenges.  On  the
issue  of  safety  at  schools,  the  department  said  that  it  did   have
initiatives in  place,  but  also  stressed  that  it  encouraged  community
involvement and participation in this regard.
The People’s Budget
The People’s Budget approved the expansionary fiscal policy of the MTBPS
and awaits the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative to see if increased
spending will translate into benefits for the majority of South Africans.
Relatively high housing expenditure is good, though current programmes are
inefficient and replicated apartheid settlement programmes. There is a
concern that the Treasury does not review the ARV rollout in the MTBPS. The
People’s Budget is concerned about the low budget deficit and questions
expenditure trends within the period of reducing the deficit.

With regard to fiscal discipline, the People’s Budget argued  that  compared
to other countries, the deficit could have been relaxed  more  in  order  to
allow for spending. On the issue of  expenditure  trends,  the  organisation
noted that there were capacity constraints.

SALGA
SALGA endorsed the MTBPS measures to boost socio-economic activities and
expand social services and income support. It noted that some needs were
not addressed, such as the next phase of the National Skills Development
Strategy, the expansion of the Child Support Grant and allocations on
environmental health services. Clarity is needed on devolution of bus and
taxi subsidies to municipalities.

The Committee noted that SALGA raised challenges and wanted to know whether
SALGA had any plans of overcoming these obstacles. SALGA was also asked
what it thought about the lack of skills and whether it thought that the
budget would address this issue. SALGA was asked to comment on the issue of
skills and the competence of municipal managers in relation to the level of
service provided. One member added that SALGA needed to look at training of
councilors rather than leaving problem articulation to the community.
SALGA mentioned that even in the apartheid era, skills deficits at the
local level were a factor, but that together with the DPLG it was
addressing this issue. On the competence of municipal mangers, SALGA noted
that a performance contract has now to be signed by these managers, and
that there were key performance measures and indicators. SALGA said it was
aware of the issues of capacity at local level and also noted that most of
the local government service challenges lay in the provision of housing. On
the issue of youth involvement in the IDPs, SALGA mentioned that it had a
roll-out plan for youth programmes. On the question of child-headed
families, SALGA said that there were initiatives in place to help in this
regard, such as the provision of food parcels to the children, through the
social workers, and that it did have other alternatives.

IDASA
IDASA submitted its review of spending in the MTBPS, noting that the
redistributionary effects of social spending do show effective targeting
towards the poor. Inter-group inequality is falling, but there is a net
increase in inequality within groups.

IDASA argues that more spending is possible by increasing  the  deficit.  It
reviews infrastructural  spending  implications  and  the  need  to  improve
effectiveness of public spending. It reviewed the MTBPS in the light of  its
consideration of HIV/AIDS and the rights of children.

7.Theme 5: International Trade (MTBPS Hearings)
02 November 2005

Department of Trade and Industry
The DTI’s presentation focused on its foreign trade interventions. The
DTI’s key policy initiatives for the year are the launch of the Angola and
DRC strategic development initiatives; preparation for and participation in
the African Peer Review mechanism; further development of bilateral
relations with key African countries; continue with US FTA negotiations and
the launching of China and India negotiations.

The department mentioned that it wanted  to  build  structures  for  greater
regulation and interaction. The department mentioned that the  role  of  the
International Trade Agreement was to  open  up  markets  for  South  Africa,
Although it was noted that South Africa has some competitive advantage,  the
department mentioned that there were other elements  that  influenced  trade
issues; such as import duties in  other  countries,  multi-lateral  and  bi-
lateral barriers. The department  said  that  it  was  looking  at  securing
preferential agreements through bilateral agreements.  The  department  said
that it did not differentiate between FDI  and  portfolio  flows,  but  that
their main focus was on services and trade.

When questioned about the accessibility of the department to rural areas,
the department responded that there was an initiative for rolling out to
provinces and municipalities, so that products of the department could be
made available at municipalities. There was close co-operation between DTI
and local government on the issue. The department also noted the difficulty
of accessibility to markets and said that it was looking into it.

Recommendations

The Committee recommends as follows:

1. The Committee recommends that Parliament enhance  its  effectiveness  in
   monitoring  the  capacity  of  departments  to   implement   progressive
   policies.
2. The Committee recommends that Parliament pay particular  attention  over
   the medium term to the effectiveness of facilitating policies  regarding
   the key MTBPS priorities of human and institutional capacity development
   and  infrastructure  investment,  as  well  as  the  focus  on   growth,
   macroeconomic stability, raising the employment capacity of the  economy
   and reducing the gap between the first and second economies.
3. In considering the Budget documentation of key departments such  as  the
   Departments of Home Affairs and Social  Development,  Parliament  should
   satisfy itself that such Departments have monitoring systems  in  place,
   ensuring that their implementation  supports  their  policies  and  that
   their policies have the  required  outcomes.  This  will  enable  timely
   policy adjustments.
4. The Committee  recommends  that  Parliament  strengthen  monitoring  and
   oversight  of  expenditure  trends  between  National  MTBPS  functional
   allocations and Provincial budget allocations to  the  smaller  spenders
   supportive of social  and  rural  development  and  job  creation  (i.e.
   housing, land affairs, tourism and agriculture) to address  concerns  of
   adequate financing at provincial level.
5.  Parliament  should  explore   ways   to   influence   cooperation   and
   complementarity   rather   than   competition    between    departments,
   particularly coordination of planning between departments  in  the  same
   cluster.
6. Parliament should follow up on the amendment of strategic plans in order
   to align them with the MTBPS.
7. The Committee should carry out oversight visits, in particular to
   development nodes.

Report to be considered.

National Council of Provinces

 1.  Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs  on  the
    Precious Metals Bill [B 30B - 2005] (National Assembly  –  Section  75),
    dated 14 November 2005:

    The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having considered
    the subject of the Precious Metals Bill  [B 30B – 2005] (National
    Assembly – Section 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint
    Tagging Mechanism as a Section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with proposed
    amendments as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 1


    1. On page 2, from line 31, to omit “; or such other refined precious
       metal as the Regulator may prescribe “and to substitute “, or such
       other refined precious metal as may be prescribed”.


                                  CLAUSE 24


    1. On page 13, in line 25, to omit “certificate,”.


    2. On page 13, in line 28, to omit “certificate,”.

    3. On page 13, in line 33, to omit “certificate,”.


 2. Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
   Additional Protocol to the Trade, Development and Cooperation Agreement
   (TDCA) between the Republic of South Africa and the European Community
   (EC) and its Member States, dated 14 November 2005:


      The  Select  Committee  on  Economic  and  Foreign   Affairs,   having
      considered the request for approval by Parliament  of  the  Additional
      Protocol to the Trade, Development and  Cooperation  Agreement  (TDCA)
      between the Republic of South Africa and the European  Community  (EC)
      and its Member States, referred to it, recommends that the  House,  in
      terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approves the Agreement.

   Report to be considered.

 3.  Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs  on  the
    National Credit Bill [B18B - 2005] (National  Assembly  –  Section  76),
    dated 14 November 2005:


       The  Select  Committee  on  Economic  and  Foreign  Affairs,   having
       considered the subject of the National Credit Bill  [B  18B  -  2005]
       (National Assembly - Section 76), referred to it  and  classified  by
       the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a Section 76 Bill,  reports  the  Bill
       with amendments [B18C - 2005].

 4. Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign  Affairs  on  the
    Diamonds Amendment Bill [B 27B - 2005] (Reintroduced) (National Assembly
    – Section 75), dated 14 November 2005:

       The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having
       considered the subject of the Diamonds Amendment Bill  [B 27B – 2005]
       (Reintroduced) (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and
       classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a Section 75 Bill,
       reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


                          TUESDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 15 November
 2005:

             i) Patents Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2005] (National Assembly –
                sec 75)

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson


1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council
     (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 11 November 2005 and
         transmitted for concurrence:

     (i)    Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 28B – 2005] (National
Assembly – sec 75)
     (ii)   Auditing Profession Bill [B 31B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
75)

     The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of the
     National Council of Provinces.

     (2)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 15 November 2005 and
         transmitted for concurrence:

         (i)     Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B 33B – 2005]
             (National Assembly – sec 74)

         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

         (ii)    Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 37 – 2005] (National
Assembly – sec 77)

         (iii)   Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2005] (National
Assembly – sec 77)

         (iv)    Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2005] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)

         The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
         the National Council of Provinces.
         (v)     Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29B – 2005] (Reintroduced)
              (National Assembly – sec 75)

         (vi)    Diamonds Second Amendment Bill [B 39B – 2005] (National
Assembly – sec 76)

         The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on Economic
         and Foreign Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

2.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

       (1)  The following paper is  referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
           Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs  for  consideration   and
           report:

               a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 – Department of
                  Defence for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
                  General on the Financial Statements of Vote 22 for 2004-
                  2005 [RP 159-2005].

       (2)  The following paper is  referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
           Labour and Public Enterprises and the Joint Monitoring Committee
           on the Improvement of Quality of Life and  Status  of  Children,
           Youth and Disabled Persons for consideration and report:


               a) Report and Financial Statements of the Umsobomvu Youth
                  Fund (UYF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
                  Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-
                  2005.

       (3)  The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
           Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:

               a) Group Annual Financial Statements of the National
                  Empowerment Fund for 2004-2005, including the Report of
                  the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
                  2004-2005.

               b) Report and Financial Statements of the Micro Finance
                  Regulatory Council (MFRC) for the year ended 31 December
                  2004.

(4)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Local
       Government and Administration:

      a) Report of the Auditor-General on the Submission of Financial
         Statements by Municipalities for the financial year ended 30 June
         2005 [RP 221-2005].


(5)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Finance:

      a) National Treasury Consolidated Financial Information for the year
         ended 31 March 2005, including:

(i)   Report of the Auditor-General on the Consolidated Financial
Information of National Departments, National Revenue Fund, State Debt and
Tax and Loan Accounts of the National Treasury (“Department”) for the year
ended 31 March 2005;

(ii)  Report of the Auditor-General on the Consolidated Financial
Information of Constitutional Institutions, Schedule 2, 3A and 3B Public
Entities and Trading Accounts (Entities”) for the year ended 31 March 2005.

(6)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Labour
and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

   a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 – Department of Labour for
      2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
      Financial Statements of Vote 17 for 2004-2005 [RP 113-2005].

   b) Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance Fund
      (UIF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
      the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

(7)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Public
Services for consideration and report:

   a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
      Corporation Limited for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
      Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

(8)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Land and
Environmental Affairs for consideration:

   a) Government Notice No 763 published in Government Gazette No 27846
      dated 05 August 2005: Correction Notice to amend Government Notice No
      533 published in Government Gazette No 27641 dated 10 June 2005 to
      substitute the word “Calitzdorp” for “Ladysmith”.

   b) Government Notice No 767 published in Government Gazette No 27846
      dated 05 August 2005: Notice of List of Protected Tree Species, made
      in terms of section 15(3) of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84
      of 1998).

   c) Government Notice No 780 published in Government Gazette No 27859
      dated 01 August 2005: Rates and charges, made in terms of section 11
      of the Water Research Act, 1971 (Act No 34 of 1971).

   d) General Notice No 1391 published in Government Gazette No 27877 dated
      05 August 2005: Publication of draft Forestry Laws Amendment Bill for
      comment.

(9)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land and
Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

   a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Veterinary
      Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
      Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

(10)  The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Economic
and Foreign Affairs and the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement
of Quality of Life and Status of Women for consideration and report:

   a) Special Report from the South African Women Entrepreneurs – A
      burgeoning force in our economy for 2005.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries Sector
        Education and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2004-2005, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
        2004-2005 [RP 90-2005].


2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

   a) Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
      Inspectorate for 2004-2005 [RP 125-2005].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

   a) Report of the 51st CPA Conference held in Nadi, Fiji from 1-10
      September 2005.

   b) Report of the 36th CPA Africa Region Conference held in Yaounde,
      Cameroon from 28 July – 6 August 2005.

   c) Copies of the Reports are available from the office of the Clerk of
      the Papers

   d) Notice of dissolution of Abaqulusi Municipality in terms of section
      139(3)(a)(ii) of the Constitution, from the MEC for Local Government,
      Housing and Traditional Affairs (KwaZulu-Natal).

Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration for
consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces, as joint co-chairpersons, present the First
Report of the Joint Coordinating Committee on the African Peer Review
Mechanism dated 15 November 2005 as follows:

   1. Introduction

President Mbeki formally submitted South Africa to  a  peer  review  process
under the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) on 28 September 2005.

The APRM is an African-owned and driven initiative  that  seeks  to  improve
governance and national management.  It is voluntarily  acceded  to  by  the
Member States of the African Union as an African self-monitoring  mechanism.
 The main purpose of the APRM is to encourage  participating  Member  States
to  ensure  that  their  policies  and  practices  conform  to  the   agreed
political, economic and corporate governance values,  codes  and  standards.
It further seeks to ensure that the mutually  agreed  objectives  in  socio-
economic  development  elaborated  in  the  New  Partnership  for   Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) are achieved.

   The process of self-assessment and review would take approximately nine
   months to complete (October 2005 to July 2006) and is divided into five
                                   stages:

   1. Stage One:  A review of the country in terms of the four areas of  the
      questionnaire.  The Draft Self-Assessment Report and  Draft  Programme
      of Action on key  issues  identified  during  the  self-assessment  is
      developed for submission to the  APR  Secretariat.   The  Draft  Self-
      Assessment Report and Draft Programme of Action are sent to Parliament
      for comment (December 2005), before finalisation (February 2006).  The
      Secretariat develops an Issue  Paper  based  on  the  country’s  self-
      assessment  report  and  programme  of  action  and  background  paper
      prepared  independently  by  the  APR  Secretariat.  (October  2005  -
      February 2006).  The Issue Paper will highlight the key issues in  the
      country for the furtherance of democracy, good governance  and  socio-
      economic development.

   2. Stage Two:  Visit by the APR Team for extensive consultations with all
      stakeholders.  The country also consults widely to build consensus  on
      how to respond  to  the  Issue  Paper.   These  consultations  include
      Parliamentarians.  Parliament may also have an opportunity  to  submit
      comments on the Issue paper to  the  APR  Secretariat  and  the  Focal
      Point.  (February 2006 - April 2006).

   3.  Stage  Three:   The  APR  Team  develops  its  report  based  on  the
      consultations conducted with Government,  Parliament,  civil  society,
      business sector community groups etc., country self-assessment  report
      and programme of action, Issue Paper  and  responses  thereto.  (April
      2006 - May 2006).

   4. Stage Four:  The APR Team submits its report to the  APRM  Secretariat
      and the APR Panel.  After deliberation by the  Panel,  the  report  is
      submitted to the  APR  Forum  for  consideration  and  formulation  of
      actions. (May 2006 – June 2006).

   5. Stage Five:  Public tabling of the report and related  actions.   This
      occurs six months after consideration of the report by the APR  Forum.
      (June 2006 – December 2006).

The  Country  Self-Assessment  for  the  African   Peer   Review   Mechanism
Questionnaire forms  the  basis  of  South  Africa’s  self-assessment.   The
questionnaire is divided into four sections containing specific  objectives,
questions and indicators.  The Sections of the questionnaire  are  Democracy
& Good Political Governance, Economic Governance and  Management,  Corporate
Governance and Socio-economic Development.

   2. Background

In South Africa, the Minister of Public Service and Administration has  been
appointed as South Africa’s Focal Point for the process.  The Minister  will
be responsible for the overall management of the process and  will  chair  a
National Peer review Governing Council  comprising  five  Ministers  of  the
South African government and ten civil society representatives.

On  16  August  2005  the   Acting   Minister   for   Public   Service   and
Administration, Hon. Dr. EG Pahad,  invited  Parliament  to  participate  in
South Africa’s self-assessment and peer review process.

After extensive discussions to  determine  the  most  suitable  location  of
Parliament within the country  process,  the  Presiding  Officers  concluded
that it is imperative that the role of Parliament reflects and  upholds  the
democratic principles of  separation  of  powers  and  independence  of  the
legislature.   Furthermore  the  Constitutional  mandate  of  Parliament  to
maintain  oversight  of  Executive  authority  and  to   facilitate   public
involvement in its processes must be respected.
Parliament is playing an active and independent role in  the  country  self-
assessment  and  review.   This  includes   proactive   responses   to   the
questionnaire to be submitted to the  Focal  Point.   Parliament  will  also
comment on the final self-assessment report and the programme of action  and
make contributions to the country response to the Issues Paper  prepared  by
the APRM  Secretariat.   Parliament  should  also  have  an  opportunity  to
comment on the Country Report issued by the  APR  Team.   The  Parliamentary
processes will be underpinned by a robust public  involvement  campaign  and
public debate on issues and reports to be reviewed.

One of the primary objectives of Parliament’s involvement in South  Africa’s
Peer Review process is to facilitate public awareness and  ensure  effective
public participation.

   3. Structure

Given the short timeframe for the completion  of  the  review  process,  the
Speaker of the  National  Assembly  and  the  Chairperson  of  the  National
Council of Provinces established joint committees  in  order  to  streamline
the Parliamentary  processes.   With  due  consideration  to  the  expertise
required to further the work for Parliament’s APRM  process,  the  Presiding
Officers appointed Members of Parliament to the following joint committees:

     Joint Co-ordinating Committee on the African Peer Review Mechanism

 ❑ Speaker of the National Assembly (Joint Chairperson)
 ❑ Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces (Joint Chairperson)
 ❑ Mr O Bapela
 ❑ Ms F Hajaig
 ❑ Mr DJ Sithole
 ❑ Mr TS Setona
 ❑ Mr J Seremane
 ❑ Ms S Vos
 ❑ The Chairperson of each of the Joint Ad-hoc Committees

The following Joint Ad-hoc Committees based on  the  four  sections  of  the
questionnaire:

        a) Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Democracy & Good Political Governance

 ❑ Mr R Baloyi (Chairperson)
 ❑ Ms H Mgabadeli
 ❑ Ms S Camerer
 ❑ Mr P Nefolovhodwe
 ❑ Dr P Mulder
 ❑ Ms Nkabinde
 ❑ Mr J Sibiya

        b) Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Economic Governance & Management

 ❑ Mr V Smith (Chairperson)
 ❑ Mr Nkem Abonta
 ❑ Mr M Lowe
 ❑ Mr L Greyling
 ❑ Ms F Mahomed
 ❑ Ms J Semple
 ❑ Ms H Lamoela

        c) Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Corporate Governance

 ❑ Ms B Hogan (Chairperson)
 ❑ Ms S Seaton
 ❑ Mr L Labuschagne
 ❑ Mr V Gore
 ❑ Mr I S Mfundisi
 ❑ Ms H Bogopane Zulu
 ❑ Mr MA Sulliman
        d) Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Socio-economic Development

 ❑ Mr R Mohlaloga (Chairperson)
 ❑ Ms L M Mashiane
 ❑ Mr SJ Njikelana
 ❑ Ms C Dudley
 ❑ Ms S Kalyan
 ❑ Ms U Roopnarain[1]
 ❑ Ms NF Mazibuko

Dedicated administrative, research and committee support staff  assist  each
joint committee.


   4. Mandate of Joint Committees

The Joint Coordinating Committee was established to, inter alia:

 ❑ Develop a broad programme for the Joint Ad-hoc Committees that  parallels
   the roadmap for the review process emanating  from  the  broader  country
   process.  This includes Parliament’s response to  the  APR  Questionnaire
   during the Self-Assessment process, Parliament’s  comment  on  the  Draft
   Self-Assessment Report and Programme of Action submitted to Parliament by
   the Focal Point, Parliament’s Comment on the Issues Paper prepared by the
   APR Secretariat, Parliament’s comment on the Country Report  prepared  by
   the APR Team.
 ❑ Liaise with the Peer Review Governing Council  and  the  Focal  Point  as
   required.
 ❑ Oversee, coordinate and provide direction to the work of  the  Joint  Ad-
   hoc Committees.
 ❑ Present reports to Parliament.
 ❑ Submit Parliamentary reports to the Focal Point as necessary.

The Joint ad hoc Committees were established to, inter alia:

 ❑ Identify key  strategic  issues  for  a  Parliamentary  response  to  the
   specific sections of the peer review questionnaire.
 ❑  Develop  detailed  work  programmes,  including   public   participation
   activities.
 ❑ Draft a Parliamentary response under the thematic  section  of  the  peer
   review questionnaire for which the committee was established.
 ❑ Comment on the Draft Country Assessment Report  and  Draft  Programme  of
   Action.
 ❑ Comment on the Issues Paper developed by the APRM Secretariat.
 ❑ Submit reports to the Coordinating Committee.

   5. Process & Progress

The Joint Coordinating Committee and the Joint Ad-hoc Committees  have  held
regular meetings  to  discuss  Parliament’s  approach  to  the  peer  review
questionnaire and  to  develop  work  programmes.   The  Joint  Coordinating
Committee will continue to meet weekly.  The Joint  Ad-hoc  Committees  will
meet at least once or twice a week.  Hearings and Committee meetings may  be
conducted away from the seat of Parliament.  A  draft  Parliamentary  Report
is expected by mid-February 2006.

Parliament’s  APRM  process  is  supported  by  a  comprehensive  media  and
communications  strategy.   This  includes  print   and   electronic   media
incorporating community radio  broadcasts  in  all  official  South  African
languages, radio and  television  talk  shows  and  interviews  and  popular
information materials.

The following progress is noted:

 ❑ The Joint Ad-hoc Committees are  involved  in  independent  research  and
   networking activities and the collection of secondary data.

 ❑ The Joint Ad-hoc Committee  on  Socio-economic  Development  held  public
   hearings from 7-9 November 2005.  Other Joint Ad-hoc Committees  plan  to
   hold public hearings between November 2005 and January 2006.

 ❑ The Minister for Public Service and Administration made  a  statement  in
   the National Assembly on 13 October 2005.  This was followed by a  debate
   in the National Assembly.

 ❑ The Presiding Officers addressed letters to the  Speakers  of  Provincial
   legislatures informing them of the APRM  process,  Parliament’s  role  in
   South Africa’s self  assessment  and  peer  review  and  encouraging  the
   support and participation of the provinces.

 ❑  The  Presiding  Officers  addressed  letters  to  the  Speakers  of   18
   municipalities (two in each province) informing them of the APRM  process
   including Parliament’s role in  the  process.   Municipal  Speakers  were
   encouraged  to  identify  suitable  municipal  structures  to  facilitate
   Parliament’s engagement with  local  communities  on  the  issues  to  be
   reviewed.

  ❑ The Joint Coordinating Committee met with the Focal Point and  the  APRM
    Country Support Mission led by Professor A Adedeji at  Parliament  on  9
    November 2005.  The meeting exchanged views on the implementation of the
    APRM, particularly focusing on  the  approach  that  the  South  African
    parliament had adopted and the Parliamentary process envisaged.  It  was
    agreed  that  future  coordination  between   the   Parliamentary   APRM
    structures and the National Peer Review Governing Council be  encouraged
    to ensure exchange of perspectives and  heightening  a  quality  country
    process and outcomes.

   6. Recommendations

   1) To ensure the success of Parliament’s involvement in the  peer  review
      process, members of the Joint Coordinating Committee and Joint ad  hoc
      Committees should, as far as  possible,  be  temporarily  relieved  of
      their other Parliamentary duties.

   2) Chief Whips,  leaders  of  political  parties,  Portfolio  and  Select
      Committee Chairpersons should, as far as possible, relieve members  of
      the Joint Coordinating Committee  and  Joint  Ad-hoc  Committees  from
      their political and other tasks in order for  them  to  advance  their
      APRM programmes as much as possible before the festive season.

(3)   Where necessary, the Joint Coordinating Committee and the Joint Ad-
      hoc Committee members should be allowed to attend relevant meetings
      during Parliamentary recess.  Only such an approach will enable
      Parliament to fulfil the APRM mandate within the limited timeframe we
      have.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
   on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
   Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in
   International Business Transactions, dated 15 November 2005:
     The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration, having
     considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Organisation
     for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Convention on
     Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business
     Transactions, referred to it on the 7 November 2005, recommends that
     the Council, in terms of Section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve
     the said Convention.

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
      the Forestry Laws Amendment Bill [B 24B-2005] (National Assembly – sec
      76), dated 15 November 2005:

        The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
        considered the Forestry Laws Amendment Bill  [B 24B-2005] (National
        Assembly – sec 76), referred to it and classified by the Joint
        Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the bill with
        without amendment.

3.    Select Committee on Finance on the National Council of Provinces
      Oversight visit to DBSA-Funded Projects in the Eastern Cape
      Dated: 10 - 15 October 2004 and 07 - 10 August 2005:

      Introduction:
      From the 10 – 15 October 2004 the Select Committee on Finance of the
      National Council of Provinces undertook an oversight visit to the DBSA-
      funded projects in the Eastern Cape. This was a follow-up visit to the
      previous visit that was undertaken from 07 – 10 August 2005.


      The main objectives of the first trip in 2004 was to afford the
      Committee the opportunity to familiarise itself with the activities of
      the above-mentioned institution, to observe the functioning of the
      DBSA and how it complied with its mandate as an institution, aiming to
      build infrastructure capacity by means of major projects in the
      province and local municipalities. Also looking at the value-for-money
      investments currently rolled-out in provinces and capacity building at
      municipal level.

Also looking at the following issues:
·     Corporate Governance
·     Overview of activities under DBSA Supervision
·     Views on project undertaken during 2004 and past years
·      Projects  successfully  completed,  including  problems  experienced,
possible solutions and prospects for the future and how does  the  bank  fit
into the extended public works programme of government.

The report aims to capture some of the highlights  of  the  study  tour  and
does not claim to have captured the detail in its entirety.  All  activities
during the study tour captured in this report aims to  give  a  snapshot  of
the event during the period of our visit.

The follow-up oversight visit to the Eastern Cape in 2005 was to further
exercise oversight pertaining to matters that was raised during the
previous visit and those sites that were not visited at the time.

The report consist of two parts: part A will contain the visit to the
Eastern Cape during 2004 and part B contains the report of the oversight
visit during 2005. Each has its own recommendations and conclusions.

Part A: DBSA-Funded Projects in the Eastern Cape Dated: 10 - 15 October
2004
Monday, 08 August 2005
A. Kwezana Village Interaction
During October 2004 the Select Committee on Finance visited the Nguni
Cattle Project, an initiative between the Fort Hare University and the
local community at the Kwezana Village. During our interaction government
sponsors were also acknowledged.

In 2002 the Kwezana Village people received a heifer from the University of
Fort Hare. Bulls from the community were then used to crossbreed to prevent
in close up breeding. This would ensure good genetic offspring, more
resilient to the harsh conditions in the area, and would secure a well-
defined gene pool.

The chairperson indicated that the committee wanted to be certain that the
people of the community are the real beneficiaries and that the provincial
government has a dual responsibility to this effect with the DBSA. The
provincial government should proceed with the good work.

Comments from the community indicated that it was a painful process but
well worth the effort. At the outset they could not understand the process
or where they would end up with the Nguni cattle. However, the end product
and long-term idea is becoming more real at this stage and they are
extremely proud of the project and process thus far.

Water is a scarce resource and hence boreholes are desperately needed. A
number of promises have been made, coupled with applications to government
departments. The response is just as dry as the area, posing a serious
threat to the Nguni Cattle Project. Department of Agriculture needs to
intervene in this regard. However, the extension officers of the
departments is not of any help and the ward that has to be served in this
regard is not visited.

The provincial government officials that were present indicated that
capacity constraints are a challenge. There are ten wards in the area and
only five extension officers. The officials indicated that if the extension
officers don’t visit, the members of the community must make it a point to
go and see them at their offices.

A further proposal was made by DBSA that the Eastern Cape Development
Agency, IDP and Municipal Infrastructure Grant be engaged to ensure proper
integration, co-ordination and participation.

B. In Summary:
A base for economic development should be created, and the bank must
bolster institutional arrangements;
Infrastructure like the storage of water in dams needs to be looked at;
Issues of roads should be taken up with Department to ensure accessibility
to markets;
Ownership of Nguni cattle individually versus community ownership could be
a problem;
Engagement with Fort Hare at another level is important;
The role of government in the project should be assessed;
The participation of the local portfolio committee that accompanied the
committee was extremely successful. The portfolio committee will further
engage on these and related issues once the committee has left;
The participation between the local community and the DBSA should be a
partnership of choice;
The grazing of the cattle or other input cost should further be examined,
e.g. nutrients and other hidden costs at the expense of the community.
These eat into the profitability of the project;
The primary role of the tertiary institution like Fort Hare cannot be under-
estimated. This includes research. Addressing the basic empowerment of the
poor community to a level of sustainability is extremely important not only
to the project but as their function to the province is concerned. This
should be seen as a role model for other knowledge institutions;
The Standing Portfolio Committee in the province should also be roped into
the oversight activities;
DBSA funding should also leave capacity as a knowledge bank after all is
said and done;
In the interest of food security, a direct link has to be established
between Department of Health and Agriculture;

C. Hegebe Women’s Project: (Empowering Rural Women, Youth and Communities).
Regional Manager: Oupa Mokwena
Gideon Moshewe: O R Tambo and King Sebatha Municipality

Miss Vuyokazi Bodlani and Miss Sandihle Makgaza are the founding members of
the Sithembene Women’s Enterprise. As a result of their customer
acquaintances and referrals, they were brought in contact with the African
Renaissance project that was being run by the SABC as a programme. This
provided exposure that saw them visit a number of countries and taking the
African theme abroad. They took part in the African week, holding
exhibitions in Brazil and other countries. The organisation under-quoted
for this event and was soon found to be in financial difficulties due to
inexperience in business. The Sithembene Women’s Enterprise has good
designers who are currently working with rural women in projects of
traditional wear, doing work for some of the leaders in the communities,
such as. Enkhosi Holomisa and others.

They got partial funding from the poverty alleviation projects in the
province and started a project with Enkhosi Holomisa’s consent. Training
centres are planned in the area, which should include boarding facilities
because the area is rural and accommodation is a concern. At this stage
their own funding is used by these women to keep their projects
sustainable. They are also using students from the technikon who completed
their studies and do not have jobs. Since these students have some
knowledge it would be easier to maintain the standards as internationally
required. The centre that they have in mind will also market and sell the
products so as to remain viable, feasible and relevant.

The first group of trainees will be graduating in September; the second
group will be graduating soon after. A chalet will be built at the centre
to give it a tourism vibe.

Another challenge is to assist those members of the community who did not
pass matric and to assist with further education. Hence, the schools become
essential in the area. For this project they have the full support of the
principals in the area as well as the churches.They are building
partnerships with the private sector and entering into partnerships with
small, medium to micro enterprises. Funds dedicated from the Department of
Arts and Culture is only promised for three years, after which they need to
be self-sustainable.

A task team from the Usuvumbo Fund has been sent to assist in the area,
especially with schools where people can be trained, and to work with and
be in line with Local Economic Development programmes that are also in line
with the Municipal Intergraded Development Projects.
They will also assist with poverty alleviation in schools by aligning these
programmes with school feeding schemes, to assist school building in the
area by providing the skilled labour and the necessary assistance that will
assist with the need for schools.
It is important to allow all co-operatives into the projects to create one
coordinated functioning body that would also facilitate job creation with
departments and to construct a register to allow them to be identified. A
corporate directorate, spearheaded by the MEC’s office, will be set up to
facilitate the process and to prevent all the red tape around these and
related projects.

The Department of Labour indicated that they will bring other departments
on board, but to no avail. This includes the Department of Social
Development. The Department of Arts and Culture promised to assist in his
regard but promises made were never kept. The centre endeavours to link up
with Aids-related issues because the lost of good skilled workers is a
concern. This includes the untimely death of their designer a week before
the committee visited the centre. Another challenge is that the Umsobomvu
Fund operates like a bank that benefits more specifically the urban
entrepreneurs and leaves the rural development behind. A revised strategy
has been proposed by the Director of the fund, Nkululeko Somhlahlo, in the
area in order to clear the barriers to entry and to ensure public
representation and participation.
An urgent and immediate need that was identified is the provision of office
equipment and stationary, which should include internet, phone, fax
facility and other facilities that would assist with the day-to-day
operation of the centre and projects. The response of the Development Bank
to this end was that these basic essential would be supplied, funded from
the chief executive fund.

The municipality, through its Local Economic Development (LED) programme
unfortunately does not make provision for these types of activities since
the Integrated Development Programmes and LEDs does not cater for these
projects, hence it  become difficult for the DBSA to fund these projects.
The inflexibility of the mandate creates concern for the Bank to become
proactive in some of the social development projects. The function of other
funding agencies creates problems in that they do not function as they
should and pose a problem which spills over into the mandate of the bank.
Integration of other funding agencies and its lack of providing the basic
services that start-up businesses need is of serious concern.

The Select Committee on Finance will further engage the Social Development
Committee in the province to become our eyes and ears in the province to
monitor progress on a constant basis.

Tuesday, 09 August 2005
D. Visit to Great Place as Part of the Hegebe Women’s Project
The community women who attended the gathering raised challenges that they
face. These include: available water supply, funds for raw materials,
creative ideas that exist but do not materialise, access to markets for
their products and transport of goods to proper markets given the poor road
system. They do, however, have a facility to exhibit their products, which
include two small huts for which they do not have to pay any rental. These
also serve as training centres.

The chairperson indicated that the committee’s visit endeavours to bring
all the stakeholders together, to unlock any bottlenecks that might exist
and to source local government funding and, if none exists, to authorise
funds to be made available to communities like these. Councillor Ntisitho
Maqukanya (Member of the Mayoral Committee), representing the Mayor of
Mthatha, was also present.

Other activities include poultry, beadwork, dressmaking and other
activities. Challenges include:

I. Poultry:
Space, medication for chicks, feeding, sawdust, and transportation
challenges to markets.
The profits realised do not match the expenditure to maintain these types
of farming. It is a possibility to sell to Umtata Hospital and other
government institutions.

II. Dressmaking:
Not enough machines are available to all the women who are willing to work.
These shortages cause tension among the women, all the women have skills
and wish to prove their ability.
Integration of children into the economic activity in order to deal with
the persistence of crime in the area is of importance. The one big
challenge is to bring all relevant departments together to ensure progress
in these and related areas. Another challenge is to work across boundaries
in the interest of development and economic progress in the area.

The committee took note of responses by community members of persons in
powerful positions of government, making promises that never materialise.
It is a fact that skills do reside within rural communities and these
skills have to be exploited to its full potential.

A resolution was taken that Mr Robertson will link up with the relevant
communities that the committee has visited and monitor the situation. The
chairperson has pledged that the Eastern Cape is the committee’s special
project and is determined to see these projects that the committee is
visiting to its successful conclusion. The committee is also mindful of the
DBSA’s mandate and the flexibility thereof for projects that are
economically viable but seemingly fall outside of its mandate, hence the
flexibility of the board of the DBSA to take decision in this regard that
would have a meaningful impact on the lives of the rural communities.

Constraints facing the DBSA is that the bank has made a R1 billion offer to
the Eastern Cape government for social infrastructure development but there
seems to be a stalemate on this matter. R500 million was also availed for
the Coega project but the banks still awaits a clearance certificate. That
seem to stifle the process and hence delay valuable investment and job
creation.

Although the bank has offered funds for development, departments are not
taking hold of the opportunity, especially for capacity development. The
only possible solution could be to request DBSA, National Treasury and the
Eastern Cape Government to engage in a round-table exercise in the interest
of poverty alleviation, job creation and growth in the province. The bank
is thinking of ring-fencing the money available to the Eastern Cape to keep
it specific to the function it is appropriated for.

E. Further Issues Identified by the Committee and the DBSA were as follows:
To do an evaluation of infrastructure expenditure and to call the MEC on
Finance to account.
Getting a solid response from the National Treasury and EC Government on
outstanding issues as indicated.
To assess the capacity of the Eastern Cape to budget in terms of the Medium
Term Expenditure Framework. If not, why?
In terms of the Thuba Makoti funds, how many schools were build.
Outcomes of the first-quarter expenditure.
Request the Fiscal and Finance Commission to assist with some of the
Eastern Cape research issues.
Dealing with the DBSA Annual Report in September.
The status of the unoccupied houses in the Fort Beaufort area.
Looking at issues of accreditation.
Dealing with mother bodies instead of individual bodies, also working with
other organisations to match them rand for rand.
Request LED officers to present during oversight visits and MIG officers to
present at hearings.
To invite the National Development Agency to the next set of public
hearings and oversight visits.
To have some form of integration with other relevant departments when
exercising oversight in the province.


Wednesday 10 August

Visit to Coffee Bay
During our visit at Coffee Bay, the following issues were strongly noted:
The private sector and the community, with co-funding by DBSA, initiated
the project at Coffee Bay.
Poverty-alleviation funding was also approved for the communities in the
area.
Plans are in the pipeline for the construction of 50 lodges, to be
implemented by the O R Tambo District Municipality through the Ntinga
Development Agency.
It is noted that the camping ground at the Coffee Bay area still belongs to
the government. The rest is communal ground that is in trust.
The Maphuzi area will be upgraded to a slip where boats can be made to
dock. Due to unregulated access of 4x4 vehicles, the ground is eroded
around the area.
The area falls outside the nodal area of the province and should remain
natural and untouched, hence special permission is required. Ripple
development is discouraged; all development should be in one go.
DBSA’s position is that no development is agreed too if government is not
in favour and laws do not permit.

A. Meeting with Community Headman / Members
Presentation: King Sabata Dalindyebo  District Municipality

The following issues were discussed:
The involvement of more people in projects.
Crime in the area and the understanding that it drives tourism out.
Residents understand the importance of tourism to the area and are
protecting the visitors.
Environmentalists are important to assist with impact studies to retain the
areas beauty and to advise on matters of development.
An environmental impact study has been done in the area. However, a spatial
development framework is non-existent at Coffee Bay and Hole in the Wall.
Environmental Affairs contributed R100 000. However R300 000 is needed and
application was made through the O R Tambo Municipality.

B. Response by the Headman: Mr Jonkikhaya
All are in favour of development, although he initially opposed the idea.
Five of the villages held meetings and it was accepted that development
should take place.
It should be in consultation with the community.
A matter for concern is that developers want to develop in the area but
protocol procedures are not adhered too. Instead of first coming to the
Headman, they go straight to the chiefs.
Mr J Joja, a sub-headman, agreed with this arrangement.

C. Response of Mr Lenox, a member of the Trust at Chazi
He is not opposed to the chiefs and their views.
Although development has been accepted, in principle no development is
taking place.
He requested the committee to scrutinise the developers on their behalf.
They are fisherman and do not /cannot initiate any development.

D. Mr Moletana: KSD Municipality
Coffee Bay is identified as one of the development nodes of KSD
Municipality – ward 1 (Umtata Mouth – Hole in the Wall and some kilometres
of the Wild Coast)
He indicated that, firstly, the land needed to be assessed.
The council approved the development of the land in ward 1.
Most planning will be along the coast and then inward.
Local municipalities and departments want development but no development
framework exists. Hence problems around development arise, resulting in no
development.

E. Enkhopo Wild Coast Developers (BEE Company)
Mr Bossie Bosman: Manager
They are of the opinion that the Eastern Cape Development did not get very
far with development in the area.
A policy was provided that indicated the intended development around the
area: Wild Coast Development No: 720 Policy: (Coffee Bay – First Nodal
Development and Hole in the Wall)
He stated that they were told to go to the Chief and that the Spatial
Development Initiative process had started.
Development was proposed from Umtata to the Hole in the Wall.
This report was sent to the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism. Up until the committee’s visit no response was received, more
specifically with respect to the “record of decision”.
Since the community and the developers could not facilitate progress,
members of Parliament were requested to intervene in this regard.
A poverty relief application was forwarded and received in the sum of R5
million, which will be managed by Ntinga.

F. Development Bank Response:
Adhering to the presidential call for development in the Eastern Cape Wild
Coast area and other areas in the region, the Bank wants to invest.
The Local Investment Agency, in partnership with Old Mutual, is currently
funding activities in the Eastern Cape.
DBSA helped with the environmental impact study, which was funded by the
Bank.
The Bank indicated that they would be in discussion with the National
Department of Environment Affairs and the provincial environmental affairs
department as well as the United Nations Development Agency to look at
issues of development and bio-diversity.
The bank advised communities to submit individual projects from their own
training needs and bigger projects.
Partnerships – Community, developers and governments have to work together
but the challenge is the legislative framework and the role of the local
leaders.
To ensure that spatial development laws, in consultation and relation with
the community, work to benefit the poor.

G. Alex Wallace: DBSA
A project viability study was undertaken at a cost of R400 000.
Environmental assessment was approved, the Department of Environmental
Affairs now has to issue a ROD (record of decision).
Spatial Development Framework, once it is approved will have the support of
DBSA .
Should all the necessary papers and certificates be issued, Maphuzi, the
projects will continue.
The camping site: an impact study has been conducted. However, the ROD is
still outstanding, hence no development can take place.

H. DBSA Environmentalist: Ms Julie Clarke
Human rights issues, land issues and other challenges stall progress.
Conservation plan has been identified, next is the spatial development
framework and strategies for environmental assessment – these issues should
be dealt with by August, hence people in the area need to make input in
this regard.
Get smaller projects underway while bigger projects are in the pipeline.
The environmental impact studies have been completed. They are with the
National Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism and a response in
this regard is still forthcoming.

I. Further Discussions:
It was noted that although all the stakeholders are present, the
Environmental Affairs Department was not present, even though they were
invited.
Poverty relief was given to the area by the national department.
The independent developers indicated that the community share in the
development would be 45 percent.
The record of decision is still an issue and creates the bottleneck in the
process of development.
The independent developers indicated that seven males and one female was
representative of their BEE criteria. This was unacceptable to the
committee and they need to revisit their directorship component. This could
be equated to fronting which the committee strongly opposes.
The composition of the 45 percent is a matter for concern to the committee.
A record of decision for the hole in the wall site is still outstanding
from the Environmental Affairs Department.
The feasibility study of the camping site is still outstanding.
Representation of the youth and of women is one of the issues to be dealt
with. Disabled involvement is also of concern. The absence of the
Department of Environmental Affairs is a matter of concern since they are
party to these projects in the decision-making process. The committee
decided that they would be engaged at another level.
The Bank agreed to participation in spatial development but requested that
all decisions be tabled in the council of the municipality to protect the
DBSA when they do commit themselves to the         R200 000.

Mr Basophu will take the initiative to follow-up matters in this regard and
to take issue on these matters with the MEC.
The developers are of the opinion that the 45% share holding is a gift to
the community in line with their vision and mission. The bank was of a
different opinion and indicated that the only giving is from the community
side since the land itself is an invaluable gift. The DBSA indicated that
they would monitor the funding arrangement between the community and the
outside developers while committing itself to assist with technical
assistance, especially with the campsite arrangement.

J. Response by Mr Basopho
    • He made a pledge that this will not be the last of his visits to the
      area.
    • Elected officials need to be present at these engagements and not
      loose structures.
    • To see if councillors are really functioning or if they are just there
      in theory.
    • Although the Department of Environmental Affairs is primary in
      development in the area, other departments should also be brought in
      as they might also have funding that the communities are not aware of.
    • Councillors and chiefs need to work together
    • The bank wants to encourage the local community and people of the area
      to submit their applications for smaller projects while the bigger
      projects are underway.

K. Summary of the Day
    • More responsive decision-making from government departments is
      problematic.
    • Economic Affairs chairperson of the Provincial Standing Committee
      should own the process.
    • Policy frameworks should be looked at more closely.
    • Government agencies should be involve in all projects over which we
      exercise oversight.
    • The community was docile around the decision of the chiefs in favour
      of development that must take place in the area and it would seem that
      they do not want to oppose the chief.
    • The board of directors of the developers and the community involvement
      is questionable.
    • The way forward is unknown; the community needs to be empowered to be
      able to see the outcome of the development and the benefits to the
      community and area.
    • The bank will provide the full details of the impact assessment study
      once it is completed.
    • Tender processes should be re-looked.
    • Spatial development framework, political management, current
      developments and tendering these are matters that have to be attended
      to by the O R Tambo and KSD district municipalities and they should
      own related processes.


Thursday, 11 August 2005

Presentation By Ntinga indicated the following issues:
    • In terms of employment creation, 296 jobs could potentially be
      created.
    • Projects will be labour intensive, although not of a permanent nature.
    • Possibility of funding beyond the OR Tambo municipal region is not yet
      possible.
    • Cross-boundary initiatives, where both municipalities could contribute
      in the interest of job creation via sustainable projects, are being
      explored.
    • Agriculture via maize production is currently being re-introduced in
      the area.
    • The district would take it upon themselves 100% to cover input costs
      to initiate the project. The district municipality would work with the
      emerging farmers to cover all inputs to initiate the farming project.
    • O R Tambo has been identified as the first nodal area of development.
    • O R Tambo District municipality will collaborate with other
      departments eg. Social Development Department, in the area as well as
      with local municipalities, which will include other sector departments
      to avoid duplication.
    • The level of collaboration is not well structured, which poses
      problems.
    • Regional bodies, local municipalities and ward committees are party to
      the development. However, a serious problem resides with the ward
      committees.
    • The maize crop for this year will be a good harvest although there are
      still maize left from last year, which poses a storage problem.
    • Silo’s are in short supply and pose a challenge for further crop
      production.

A. Coffee Bay Issues
    • The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism has opened a
      tender to companies for development around the area.
    • Other consultants prepared business plans.
    • Ntinga got the tender from DET and is currently putting a programme in
      place.
    • The O R Tambo Municipality has yet to engage the community at Coffee
      Bay, so the level of interaction is still at the primary stage.
    • It has been noted that all the DET projects had to become part of the
      IDP, which will facilitate O R Tambo to further engage the process.
    • The relation between maize and cancer in the area has to be
      investigated further.

B. Chairperson’s Comments
    • The matter at Coffee Bay is urgent and needs serious attention.
    • Opportunistic persons use the legislated policy of government to
      pounce upon the communities by making use of grants earmarked for the
      poor people, for example.
    • An urgent meeting needs to be convened between the DBSA and other
      departmental stakeholders and the communities to deal with issues of
      structural arrangement, to clarify who will apply for funding, who the
      recipients will be and the implementers of the projects.
    • There is currently no knowledge on the O R Tambo side of the situation
      at Coffee Bay.
    • Councillors were not present at the meeting at Coffee Bay, hence Mr
      Basophu has pleaded with officials of O R Tambo to get together, to
      include DBSA and to relieve the situation at Coffee Bay in the
      interest of development and the poverty-stricken people in the area.
    • This is the committee’s second visit and yet nothing constructive is
      happening. The committee would not want to come back for another visit
      and tell the community that development cannot take place just because
      the projects are not linked to the government’s plans and to theIDP’s
      plans when development is sourly needed.
    • Ntinga needs to get its act together work closely with KSD
      Municipality to get the project at Coffee Bay started. The committee
      should monitor the progress very closely and call officials if non-
      performance is the order of the day.
    • R5 million rand was deposited in the account of Ntinga and they need
      to start working now. Officials of the Ntinga development agency have
      indicated that they are in the process of moving forward.
    • The Ntinga officials will engage in discussions with the Departments
      of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Land Affairs and Economic
      Affairs. After this discussion the issues will be taken to the
      communities and discussed further.

C. Constraints
  • Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme – at the local level
    this programme is not taken seriously. This poses a challenge.
  • Unregulated structure – If programmes are implemented, the IDP of the
    municipality guides relations and the framework. This creates a protocol
    constraint.
  • Some confusion exists between the district and regional municipalities,
    bringing about constraints.
  • O R Tambo and KSD boundaries create a problem, especially in regard to
    road construction, where construction would continue only as far as the
    boundary of a particular municipality. Hence the perception of the
    people that construction work on roads never finishes.
  • Anchor projects are non-existent, most of the money spent in the Eastern
    Cape area does not benefit the local industry as most raw material are
    bought in the neighbouring provinces, eg. KwaZulu-Natal.
  • A major challenge is that the province, 11 years later, still does not
    have an accurate asset register. Capital stock that could be used by the
    municipality gives to waste and expensive rental agreements are entered
    into.
  • Silos in the area, which belong to government, are also a constraining
    factor since they have been leased out for many years for low rates.
  • How far the municipality has progressed in terms of accreditation is
    another matter for concern.

D. Chairperson’s Response:
    • In view of poverty in the area, the Eastern Cape Development Committee
      has to be convened to bring all the issues to the table.
    • District and local municipalities need to come to an understanding of
      the issues facing them and to open up channels of communication.

Conclusion:
The Select Committee on Finance satisfied itself with the follow-up visit
to the Eastern Cape that the activities not visited last year and visited
during this activity were actually bearing fruit. The committee was,
however, concerned about the Coffee Bay development and the complex nature
of getting development going in the area.
The commitment of the DBSA is without equal, but it is hoped that the
Eastern Cape government and relevant role players will approach this matter
with greater urgency and make use of the natural resources and beauty that
the province has to offer to the benefit of the poor in the area. This form
of interaction is not the first of its kind and will most definitely not be
the last for the committee. The Select Committee on Finance regards the
Eastern Cape as its personal project and will engage these and related
matters further.

The committee thanked the DBSA once more and hopeed to proceed in making
development, job creation and poverty alleviation a reality not only in the
Eastern Cape but in the whole of South Africa.

Part B - Select Committee on Finance of the National Council of Provinces
Oversight visit to DBSA-Funded Projects in the Eastern Cape 10-15 October
2004

Monday, 11 October 2004
1. Visit to the Bethelsdorp Development Trust
The Bethelsdorp Development Trust (BDT) in its present form is a community-
driven entity, whose agenda is to preserve the community heritage, to
mulate tourism and create employment through its creative industries
cluster concept. The incubation of small micro industries is also high on
the agenda and ther is a core focus on the environment, especially the
fauna and flora, as well as on water preservation and utilisation.

The visiting delegation was briefed by the founder members of the
Bethelsdorp Trust at the heritage centre, also said to be one of the first
schools in the area.
Amongst the many tasks set before the Bethelsdorp Trust were:
    • Tourism site in the “Kloof” – to highlight the heritage of the
      community and to conserve the environment;
    • To engage in activities that would ensure economic benefits to the
      community and to use eco-tourism, for example in the four biomes where
      the Strelitzia Juncea plant flourishes, involving six locations in the
      Eastern Cape.

1.1 Progress of the Bethelsdorp Outreach Programmes includes:
     • Taking school children into the Kloof area to get a feel and love for
       nature and to protect and preserve the heritage;
    • The weaving factory, as part of arts and culture and forming
      partnerships with the community;
    • To restore the village setting and set up a museum with a research
      component and archive section to preserve the information that is
      still in existence;
    • Impacting on school curricula – to advance nature conservation and
      heighten the understanding of development versus endangered species.

The delegation noted with concern that a vast area of natural beauty was
under the watchful eye of only one conservation officer, which indicated a
capacity constraint.

1.2 Development Bank of South Africa Involvement
The involvement of the DBSA is not very clear in terms of the projects
underway, although a development total of R470 000was committed. The
weaving factory which is envisaged to provide jobs for disabled persons,
youth and women alike, has not yet been put to the test.  The project was
due to start in July 2004 but although the building is available, the
capital infrastructure is non existent, putting strain on the idea of job
creation in the area.
It should be noted that DBSA will provide money for capacity building and
organisational development but a pro-active approach from the bank could go
a long way in assisting initiatives of this nature especially when there is
no lack of genuine commitment from the side of the community.

1.3 Member’s Input
The chairperson indicated that all partners and stakeholders should play
their part in order to make this project a success. It was further
recommended that since most herbs are currently found in the “Kloof” area,
education programmes should take place in consultation with herbalists and
traditional healers in the area to ensure that the scarce plant
types/endangered species are not wiped out as a result of greed.
Conservation must receive priority and proper regulatory measures be taken
to preserve the natural assets to the benefit of the youth and the
community at large.

2. Visit to the Coega Industrial Development Zone (IDZ)
On arrival at Coega, Mr Lionel Billings (Project Manager) briefed  the
visiting party on the detail of the project. It can in no way be
underscored that this is clearly one of the biggest projects of its kind on
the African continent. The involvement of the DBSA in this regard is
clearly felt on three fronts:

    • Loan funding of R20,7 million to co-fund the Coega Construction
      Village, with the National Housing Finance Corporation - R62 million
      and the Coega Development Community (CDC) R43,3 million;
    • A letter of intent has been provided to the CDC by DBSA, offering an
      amount of R500 million towards infrastructure development for the
      Coega Aluminium Smelter as part of the incentive to secure ALCAN to
      develop the project at Coega;
    • A memorandum of understanding has been signed between the DBSA and the
      CDC with regards to strategic support between the two organisations
      for infrastructure development within the Coega IDZ area as well as
      development and capacity support.

This nationally driven project, funded out of the national fiscus’ is
currently experiencing constraints in certain areas of the project due to a
belt-tightening exercise in the Eastern Cape Province.
With the main project objective being to beneficiate raw materials for
sustainable jobs and job creation, more then just partnerships are needed.
The following should be in place:
    • Public sector commitment;
    • National Ports Association participation;
    • Clear planning of Integrated Development Zones (IDZ);
    • Eskom power upgrade;
    • Skills development and appropriate labour participation and
    • National and international foreign direct investment and many other
      factors.

The approach of clustering industries and services seems to enjoy
acceptance on all fronts of engineering and economic development, as it
would facilitate co-dependence, product development and maintenance. This
development does put pressure on, for example, rail systems and other forms
of transport. Hence Coega has consulted other stakeholders to allow exports
via the Coega port. Further upward pressure is placed on water resources
hence a desalination project is in the process and will be completed in the
near future.This is being done to avoid mistakes made by the Cape Town
Metro, which is currently experiencing sporadic water restrictions.

2.1 Socio-Economic Impact
    • Total People Employed – Construction phase since 99/2002
      10961
    • Total People Employed – Construction phase of project currently
      3514
    • Number of individuals registered on job-seekers registration programme
      57361
    • Total number trained under job-seekers register programme
      2232
    • Candidates in labour pool                                     2946
    • Total Business Registered                                     4441
    • Total Subcontractors                                          411
    • Total Number of SMME Development Contracts                    43
    • SMMEs enlisted on Mentorship Programme                   68

The statistics speaks volumes in terms of the projects currently ongoing at
Coega. However, it would be even better still to see the surplus labour in
the Job Seekers Database being absorbed into the labour force. These people
could be trained in the appropriate industry skills, be it services
delivery or technical, to be absorbed back into the full sectoral cluster
of activity when all industries at Coega are operational.

2.2 Private Sector Opportunities
    • Single site developers for investor already considering locating
      industries in the IDZ;
    • Developers with an interest in secure light industrial park;
    • Developers with experience in the logistic industry and distribution
      centre;
    • Office-space developers.

2.3 General Observations
The level of expectation is always raised above the ceiling of delivery and
becomes a challenge and a balancing act of managing people’s expectation of
job creation and poverty alleviation versus time. A project of this
magnitude does create, amongst others, a fair amount of expectation, not
only in the Eastern Cape but also in the county, especially when
unemployment is a common phenomenon. It does, however, raise the hope of
government, via the Coega Project, making an effort to tackle the issue of
poverty and unemployment.

2.4 Challenges
    • Embedded pessimism exists
    • Funding Constraints
    • Declining FDI to Africa
    • Distortions of BEE
    • Low Domestic Investment

2.5 Further Assistance is Required
    • Upgrading of the Rail Line (Sishen to PE)
    • Project Funding
    • Alleged negative statement by Provincial MECs
    • Advertising amongst associates
    • Distribution of promotional literature
    • Site visits, eg by Parliamentarians, to further gather understanding
      of projects
    • Not talking positively about this national project
    • Ensure government continues to view the initiative as a national
      priority
    • Ensure success of the project

3. Motherwell Urban Renewal Program (MURP)
The Motherwell Municipality was identified as a nodal point that would
benefit from the expanded Public Works Programme as prioritised by
government.
The area has a backlog in development that amounts to over R1billion and
has no lack in poverty and crime.

The level of unemployment in 2000 (June) was estimated at 40,7% and is
escalating up to the 60% level. The income per month is at R520 and 50% of
the resident population is unskilled and unemployed. The community is
attempting to become self-sufficient and sustainable by means of community
food gardens which have been successful and seem to be economically viable.
As a result of the high levels of  unemployment and poverty the indigent
policy is applied. However, the effectiveness thereof is still to be
determined.

Currently the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism is in
consultation with the University of Port Elizabeth to do a feasibility
study on the following MURP projects, which commenced in September 2004:
      • Xhosa Cultural Village
      • Nelson Mandela Peace Park
      • Paving of and greening of Motherwell cemeteries
      • Addo Eco Tourism Project
      • Work for the Coast
      • Motherwell Fish Factory

The estimated value of all these projects amounts to R20,5 million and they
are expected to be implemented under the guidelines of the Expanded Public
Works Programme for the approximated 365 000 pupils in the area, only 30
schools exist, with only one library is currently in use. A skilled labour
force with a desire for life-long learning is unattainable if this
situation is allowed to continue.

The Motherwell Presidential Police Station Project and Courts is a project
that was earmarked for the Chief Tswete Village and initiated upon a
presidential visit to the area. The area for this project has already being
prepared and will follow the route of making use of local labour to begin
to tackle the problem of unemployment.

The provision of water seems to be a persistent problem as a result of the
flat gradient, hence the provision and the pumping of water becomes costly.

3.1 Motherwell Urban Renewal Programme
The main project within the programme is as follows:
    • Motherwell Integrated Transportation Project
    • NU 2 Sport Stadium
    • Urban Agriculture / Ploughing fields
    • Xhosa Cultural Village
    • Social Development Project – Youth Capacity Building
    • Small Business Incubator
    • Employment Centre
    • Stock Farming
    • Water meter installation in NU 10, 11 and 12
    • Ikomvelihle Pedestrian Bridge

3.2 DBSA Involvement

The DBSA has been supporting the infrastructure development in the
Motherwell area for a number of years, by providing loan funds to the
former Port Elizabeth Municipality and  through the Nelson Mandela
Metropolitan Municipality (NMMM). In terms of promoting the Municipal Urban
Renewal Programme (MURP), a loan offer of R500 million has also been made
to the NMMM to co-fund social and economic infrastructure development in
the greater municipal area.

3.2.1 Development Challenges and DBSA Response
|Challenges                        |DBSA Response                     |
|1. Integration of operational     |Development fund grant for the    |
|system within the greater metro   |NMMM System Renewal Project       |
|area                              |                                  |
|2. DBSA involvement in the        |Sponsorship of the MURP Launch    |
|Motherwell Urban Renewal Project  |Sponsorship of /or a Provincial   |
|and the elimination of            |URP Launch of R500 Million offer  |
|infrastructure backlogs           |made to NMMM to co-fund           |
|                                  |infrastructure development.       |
|3. DBSA support to the Coega ID   |MO with CDC signed R20,7 million  |
|for infrastructure development    |loan for Construction Village     |
|                                  |Project                           |
|                                  |Letter of intent to CDC to provide|
|                                  |R500 million for infrastructure   |
|                                  |development.                      |
|4. DBSA support for community     |Bethelsdorp Development Fund Grant|
|empowerment development           |Loan to Kuzuko Contractual Park   |
|initiatives                       |empowerment joint venture         |
|                                  |Grant to finalise project         |
|                                  |viability studies for four        |
|                                  |community / private sector tourism|
|                                  |project on the Wild Coast.        |

3.3 Presentation by Mr Pillay: Cacadu District Municipality
Cacadu has an approximate population of 376 000. Challenges seemingly are
around towns along Spoornet lines which are in economic collapse due to the
closure of Spoornet lines and rail stations. The revenue stream is reduced
from R150 million to R15 million, the rest of the money goes to the metros.
Approximately 50% of the staff at the municipality is on a contract basis
and has strong performance-driven contracts. When asked if the municipality
owed the auditor general any money, the answer was a confident no. However,
the department of Health owe the Cacadu approximately R12 million.
Department of Roads and Transport owe the municipality approximately R3
million.

Mayor Faku indicated in his speech that unemployment is a major problem.
Due to a lack of proper research in the municipality these poverty
statistics cannot be properly quantified and hence the statistics are
somewhat spurious.

Tuesday, 12 October 2004
4. University of Fort Hare (Town: Alice)
The Acting-Vice Chancellor Prof D Swartz welcomed the visiting delegation
and proceeded with a brief historical rendition of the institution,
highlighting the caliber of leadership that was produced by the
institution. However, enrolment numbers are dwindling hence the university
has been given an urban base, linked to the Rhodes University (East London)
– Fort Hare Rhodes University.

The DBSA interest is around agriculture capacity building. A memo of
understanding has been drafted for the following:
    • Upgrading of Residence / Development;
    • To forge a strategic partnership between the two institutions;
    • The partnership aims to address some of the challenges facing local
      government in the Eastern Cape;
    • To align the development strategy of the Eastern Cape Provincial
      Government.

To date the DBSA has funded initiatives to empower the UFH internally, such
as the centre for Local Government Development, the Change and Cultural
Diversity Management project, the translation of agriculture manuals into
the local language, the re-introduction of Nguni Cattle, amongst others.
Total expenditure to date in capacity building stands at R1,8 million.

4.1 Project Visit: Nguni Cattle Project
The UFH partnered with the local community, as part of a strategy to fight
poverty and improving the quality of life. The Nguni cattle farming project
is instrumental in this. The re-introduction of Nguni cattle is based on
the concept of “passing on the gift”, which implies that the communities
are borrowed a bull and heifers for a certain period and, once established,
they pass them on to the next community. Studies at the UFH have indicated
that the Nguni is an adaptable breed, capable of withstanding the most
adverse circumstances. The concept is proving successful and it is
excellent for environmental management.
It is opening up local economic and skills development opportunities. The
project is also unifying the communities to fight against the destruction
of fences and stock theft. The total funding of the project is R1,2
million, with the DBSA contributing 80% of the cost.

4.2 Further Advantages
    • Approximately 90 families will benefit in skills development in
      production and maintenance of cattle;
    • Mercedes Benz indicated their willingness to use the hides for seat
      covers;
    • Farm management skills will be enhanced as a precursor for future
      farming activities;
    • The full exercise would serve as a knowledge base from which the
      university and community can draw.

4.3 Old Fort Hare Incubator/Nursery
An investment of R800 000 was pumped into this project. The transfer of
agriculture and horticulture skills becomes vital in this regard. A demand
for paprika seedlings was identified, amounting to    R1,6 million, and
would create opportunities to the communities and new possible job creation
and further training.

4.4 Siyakholwa Development Foundation: Keiskama Hoek
The Keiskama Hoek area has an unemployment level of approximately 875,
hence the need for the following projects which are currently in progress:
    • Rabbit-breeding project;
    • Seed nursery and flower growth, for example, cauliflower plants;
    • Peace garden concept gardening – Training/Development of skills
    • Propagation of essential oils, for example rose and geranium
    • Medicinal herbs – to make essential oils.

5. Partnerships are formed with:
-           DBSA
         - Department of Trade and Industry
         - Department of Education and Training
         - Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, etc.

4.6 Keiskama Hoek Women’s Essential Oils Project
The project is aimed at promoting sound agricultural development, which
will include cash-crop production. It will thus involve a paradigm shift in
rural farmers towards high-yield, high-return products, and utilising
natural methods for the production of indigenous crops that are in demand.
Women will attend training sessions prior to the start of the programme
with on-site assistance during land preparation and planting.
The total commitment from DBSA to this project is R100 000. The initiatives
are in consultation with community leaders via constant interaction.

4.7 Critique of Keiskama Hoek Women’s Essential Oils Project
During intense interaction with members of the community it emerged that
the physical size of the projects does not correlate with the amount of
money that was pumped into the project. The total participation of women in
these and related projects seem to suggest that no women empowerment is
taking place because the presence of women was notably absent. Although
some of the actual infrastructure was present, the value for money as
committed by DBSA is not justified by the outputs that were identified as
well as the outcomes.
A clear monitoring mechanism is absent, hence the absence of tangible
women’s participation in a so-called women’s empowerment project, which is
non-existent.
Clear audit processes should be put in place so as to assess the profile of
persons receiving funding and to ensure that the possibility of fronting
does not occur, robbing the poor of tangible opportunities to engage in
meaningful poverty alleviation projects. Donor funding / funders eg: DBSA
should further assess what multiple funders are financing the same
projects. Funding seems to take place on a number of fronts with no
tangible outcomes to the benefit of the community.

Wednesday, 13 October 2004
5. Queenstown Infrastructure Project
The project entails the provision of water and sanitation, electrical
reticulation, road and storm water drainage to 260 erven at Madeira Park,
and the remainder of extension 29 in Queenstown. The area covers 2 505
hectares situated within the Queenstown municipal area. The project is
aimed at providing affordable residential plots, with emphasis on
addressing the needs of first-time home buyers (middle income group),
thereby improving the quality of life of the community. The total cost of
the project is R4 560 000.

5.1 Problem with Project
The initial concept was to sell the newly built houses direct to the
public. However, some of the estate agents managed to acquire the right to
sell houses to loan recipients thus charging commission. This further
delayed the conclusion of payments for plots from 3 months to 6 month.
Further development challenges is a lack /limited capacity by
municipalities to take up DBSA loans. Some are currently servicing existing
DBSA /other institutional loans.

5.2 Recommendations
    • In terms of housing projects, a default policy should be put in place
      to ensure that the sheriff’s office does not go to great lengths to
      evict families.
    • An integrated form of development should be taking place, to prevent
      apartheid spatial patterns from emerging within the new urban renewal
      strategic plans and exclusive communities with pockets of opulence
      becoming established.

5.3 Stutterheim Youth Project
The project initiated by a group of youths gave the visiting delegation
much hope as a result of the achievements that are visible. The projects
include:
    • Brick making – for which a tender was awarded
    • Food Garden of which a total of R16 000 was awarded by DBSA
    • Renting out flats that were build – clients include a doctor, spaza
      shop, HIV / Aids training venue, etc

This project is a shining example of what dedication and unselfish hard
work can do, especially if a common vision exists within a poor community
that is committed to enforcing change and striving to eradicate poverty.
Currently a training centre is operational, which also houses a kind of
library. Although the resources are somewhat limited, the idea does seem to
be a winning concept. Training given in the resource centre is SETA
recognised at a NQF – Level 4. HIV/Aids patients also receive training in
food gardening to give them the means to grow basic food types that would
give some sense of self-worth and inner value and to sustain their health.

The Amathola Municipality provided land at a reduced rate to encourage the
cultivation of gardens by the youth group and community members. Good links
have been forged with the municipality to engage in a clean-up project for
which the youth centre was requested to manage and monitor the full project
in the area. The honorable Mr Nelson Raju promised to donate a hundred
books as much-needed reading materials to the library.

5.4 Challenges
Application forms for further funding from the Health Department was
promised to the Stutterheim Youth Project. Up until the time of the visit
these promises had not beenmet with a good response.
The Umsobomvu Fund also declined the Stutterheim Youth Project after an
application was lodged for funding. The bulky application form is a matter
of concern when applying for funding, a hurdle that poses the first
challenge to small organisations.

Although various ways were explored to identify why funding was
disapproved, the return response were that certain criteria were not met.
Follow-up to correct the errors was done, but no response was received. If
institutions that are set up for specific funding, such as youth
entrepreneurs and other small businesses, do not address their mandate and
the procedures become cumbersome, it totally loses it core function in
promoting growth and fighting unemployment.

The chairperson intervened and requested that all applications be sent to
his office in order to do some follow-up on this and related matters of
concern.

5.5 Mdantsane Housing and Electrification Project
A total of 60 contractors are involved in this project, which adds up to a
value of R63 million. Approximately 6 320 transformers were installed,
whereby most of the overhead conductors were replaced. Ninety percent
employment is people within the immediate area, whereby 100% is HDIs in the
community. The contract is a five-year project, which is currently in its
second year.
An agreement was undertaken to ensure that if members of the public fall
into areas with electricity payments, they would then automatically be put
on a prepaid system, which will allow them to buy electricity while at the
same time pay off their areas. As a result of the prepaid initiative,
electricity is paid for before members of the public actually consume it.
This enhanced the revenue collection and reduced the theft rate of
electricity. Illegal connections can easily be spotted in the area. Out of
30 000 households only 18 000 had electricity in the area. This was due to
low maintenance whereby the equipment had to be upgraded in its entirety,
in line with health standards and current regulations.

Every year the municipality re-looks its indigent policy to ensure that the
recipients are truly the needy for which the policy seeks to deliver the
free basic services.
The project has a strong focus on internship training for technical and
varsity students that are looking for further training and employment with
a skills upgrade angle to their studies.

5.6 Evening Activity With Mayor of East London
    • When asked if the municipality owed the Auditor–General any audit
      fees, the answer was an emphatic no.
    • If the IDP were aligned and should be aligned with the Provincial
      Government Development Plan (PGDP)
    • If budget and IDP are aligned – they are still working on these and
      related issues
    • Powers and functions – some functions reside with provincial
      competencies. They were of the view that the municipal manager should
      try to work closely so as to integrate proper services and functions
    • Money owed to municipalities – by the Department of Public Works but
      the status at this stage is not clear since they were an
      implementation agent.

5.7 Response by Mayor S Mclean of Buffalo City to Questions Posed:
    • Buffalo City owes the Auditor-General money;
    • Public entity does owe the city money;
    • Departments owe the city money in terms of Corporate Governance. The
      office of the mayor does not want to cut the electricity;
    • The use of own revenue for the disaster fund was too small, damage was
      estimated at R90 million, funds received was 40% of what they had to
      pay;
    • Urban renewal – infrastructure had to be revamped and millions had to
      be spent;
    • The mayor stressed the point that councillors should become more
      involved to deal with the indigent policy to make it truly work to the
      people’s benefit;
    • Indigent – most people do not have any knowledge of the indigent
      policy.


Thursday, 14 October 2004

6. O R Tambo Municipality: Hegebe Project
The Hegebe Traditional Authority is situated in Mqanduli, a small service
town that is part of O R Tambo District Municipality and is, homogenously,
a one-language geographic population area, with 60% unemployment. It is in
the State Presidential Nodal Zone of the Integrated Sustainable Rural
Development Plan (ISRDP), qualifying it as a priority for economic
development.
Mqanduli climate is particularly well suited to growing maize. However, the
crops currently produced are commercially insignificant even after several
years of active crop promotion and training. In an effort to kick-start
maize and vegetable farming, the soil has to be prepared with a grant to
the Tribal Authority Fund. The project aims to help aspiring farmers
develop business plans, apply for funding and learn how to farm
commercially, through practical commercial and technical training.
A grant amount of R500 000 has been offered to the Hegebe Traditional
Authority by the DBSA to purchase ploughing equipment.
6.1 Discussion with Mr Nkosi Patekile Holomisa
The chief at the Great Place, Mr Nkosi Patekile Holomisa, indicated his
appreciation of the           R500 thousand that the DBSA gave to purchase
two tractors, plaques and seed planters. However his concern was that the
farmers need around six water pumps to pump water to the plowed land and to
ensure sustainable water provision.
The need for DBSA to do a full assessment of the needs around this area is
critical. Projects should be funded in their totality so that the real
benefits are as a result of a full quota of resources instead of partial
funding that creates other needs that might serve as stumbling block to the
successes of the projects in their entirety. Members were of the opinion
that more visits of this kind were needed to get the bigger picture of what
the struggles of our rural farmers are and the needs in financial terms
will be to address the challenges.

Closer co-operation should exist between the bank and other government
institutions such as the LandBank, to view their role in the bigger scheme
of things. The function of the Land Bank is not well understood in these
areas and should be made clearer to the rural people if the full potential
of the rural poor is to be explored.
Mr Nkosi Patekile Holomisa indicated that they are not pushing for money
although the money is needed but that agricultural equipment is provided;
the two tractors are rented to farmers for R100 per day instead of the
market price of R175 per hour. The hiring fees charged is then used to
service the tractors.

The importance of the Agricultural Research Council also came under the
spotlight, especially with the assistance of skills to ensure that the land
is ploughed in the correct manner so as to minimise the effect of soil
erosion. If poverty is to be tackled at its roots, more resources should be
pumped into the rural communities as agriculture is the main source of
income and the sustainer of life.
The visiting delegation was made aware of other projects that were set up
for rural women to generate income by producing good and services that
could be sold to visitors/tourists in the area.

6.2 Recommendation by Chief
In the national budget allocation there should be a bias towards the rural
poor in the equitable formula as prescribed by the FFC and set out in the
Division of Revenue. This approach would go a long way in addressing the
backlogs that currently exist in the Eastern Cape area. As a result of high
unemployment and little or no economic base, an intervention strategy
should be devised.

6.3 Mayor D Mkhatshwa: King Sabata Dalindyebo Municipality
The DBSA commitment in this regard is a infrastructure development of R7,5
million for upgrading of roads, electricity, water and sanitation and
refuse removal.
Technical Assistance (advice) on: Financial Management and Credit Control;
Institutional Development and Leadership Support and Organisational
Structure; Systems and Processes (customer service and management systems)
and Information Technology.

|Challenges                       |DBSA Responses                   |
|Lack of capacity (clients) to    |Grant offer to municipality for  |
|implement projects               |capacity building                |
|Lack of capacity by clients to   |Offer advisory services          |
|package different projects into  |Assistance in the formation of   |
|bankable and viable initiatives\ |focus and steering committees    |
|Co-ordination of developmental   |Grants                           |
|initiatives that will achieve    |Grants for small agro-based and  |
|integrated programmes            |SMME projects offered to         |
|Alleviation of rural poverty     |traditional authorities and      |
|                                 |municipalities respectively      |


6.4 Speech  by Ms Vuyishwa: Wife to King of Thembu People
She indicated that the King is extremely grateful for the contribution of
DBSA in funding development in the area (Thembu Kingdom) and indicated that
strong links can only be forged at this point with the Bank. They view the
gathering as a launch of greater things in the future especially when
legislation like Black Economic Empowerment speaks directly to the Thembu
people. With all the charters that are currently drafted and those already
in operation, they are practical about the idea that things will take time
but that this could be viewed as a starting point.

6.5 The Ridge Tourism Accommodation
Visit to “Hole in the Wall” at Coffee Bay along the Wild Coast
This is an area with immense beauty and potential yet plagued by
unemployment and abject poverty. The scenic beauty of the area provides
little reward to the struggling poor but is an attractive magnet to those
who clearly understand the value of mining and tourism with its economic
multiplier effects.

Although much thought has been given to developing the area, persistent
obstacles, such as land tenure, bribery of chiefs by the rich,for land to
build lavish holiday home low development, no job creation efforts and many
other factors still seem to put a dampner on the huge potential of the
area.
The area also lacks a common vision, no detailed strategic framework for
development, no detailed local spatial planning framework, under-
capacitated levels of municipalities, etc. Other pressures include: poor
management capacity to administer sustained resources used, unregulated
vehicle access to the beaches, informal and unregulated sand mining and
poor municipal service (e.g. waste management).
6.6 Poverty and Unemployment Challenges
    • Rural communities’ subsistence lifestyle and dependency on natural
      resources is problematic
    • Benefit sharing is weak
    • Weak capacity in local community to negotiate equitable partnership
      agreements
    • Unsustainable development to address immediate need for employment.

As a result of poverty, people are bribed hence illegal building is taking
place. This creates a problem where community persons are turned against
government, especially when laws are enforced pertaining to property rights
and land ownership.
Although an Eligible Cottage Task Team has been set up to counter the
problem of people acquiring land by means of bribes - dockets have been
opened - the problem now lies with the Department of Justice to speed up
the prosecution procedures. Hence the need for government to fasttrack
these and related issues.

6.7 Response by Community Members and Further Comments
The members of the community that met up with the visiting delegation
expressed high praise due to the parliamentarians visiting the area and
indicated that this is a first and hopefully not the last visit. They
further re-iterated the poverty and unemployment problem that is extremely
close to their heart.

The committee noted that the sensitivity of the area cannot be
overestimated. If proper planning did not precede development, the
consequences could be devastating. Although the development nodal study
does not give clear indications as to where development along this coastal
stretch should take place, wrong choices in development could be
detrimental to the scenic beauty of the area and could become a dead loss
to society.

Friday 15 October 2004
7. Alfred Nzo Municipality: Interaction with Mayor X Jakaju
The committee visited the Alfred Nzo municipal building that is now in its
second phase of development. The building will host a bank with an ATM,
which is non-existent in the area. This will be a welcome relief to those
pensioners who have to travel long distances for their pension payments.
The building is also very user friendly, especially taking due regard of
disabled persons. The involvement of DBSA in this Integrated Sustainable
Rural Development Project could be taken back as far as 2001. The need for
these and related partnerships is as a result of poverty, large
unemployment, water and sanitation shortages and infrastructure backlogs as
well as telecommunication and electrification capacity constraints.

The mayor indicated that they are currently developing plans around an
agrarian economy to improve agriculture. These plans include:
    • Cultural tourism – eco-tourism
    • Partnership with DTI
    • Umzimkhulu Gateway
    • Business plans around the R56 road to encourage a hospitality
      programme
    • Maluti Hiking Trail
    • Beef production and livestock
    • Fishing cluster
    • By 2009 all communities should be supplied with sanitation and SMME
      promotion

7.1 General Discussions:
    • The municipal manager indicated that no audit fees are outstanding to
      the Auditor General and that the departments do not owe the
      municipality any money. However businesses in the area owe them money.
      The dilemma is that many of these businesses left long time ago.
    • DBSA has provided valuable information to the municipality and
      officials and this has capacitated them in a big way.
    • A current study is underway, in consultation with DBSA, to look at
      better ways of water provision and retaining water during rainfall
      periods.
    • One library was just completed in the Usumkhulu area and would go a
      long way in acting as an information centre and multipurpose centre.

7.2 Challenges Identified
Applications for ID booklets, especially for pensioners, still pose a
problem. Discussions with the Department of Home Affairs to open an office
in the area have been ongoing. The Department of Housing has been pulled in
to ensure the provision of houses, especially in the remote rural areas.
Indigent policy is operational. However, the issue of statistics seems to
be a constant divisive factor in the implementation of this very important
policy which can be to the benefit of poor households.

The transfer of assets from provincial administration to municipal
administration does not come with operational budgets and poses a problem
since most of this capital infrastructure is extremely old and outdated and
pose a problem in terms of maintenance expenses.

7.3 Further Recommendations and Challenges
      • Many of the municipalities visited have huge backlogs that need
        attention, not only physically but in capacity,
      • Bucket system in municipalities persist and are a matter of
        concern,
      • Inefficiencies in rail systems poses problems to export, especially
        with big projects like Coega,
      • Outstanding Fees to the Auditor-General and SARS,
      • Physical monitoring of projects are notably absent eg:
        Keiskammahoek Women’s Empowerment Project,
      • Fronting in some instances regarding empowerment projects,
      • Proper audits should be in place as to monitor who are the actual
        beneficiaries,
      • Funding stream, as many projects receive multiple funding stream
        with only one recipient organisation,
      • Recreation facilities should be considered when planning and
        developing areas where there are a high density of people,
      • Good projects should be encouraged and assisted to proceed further
        eg; Stutterheim Youth Project,
      • Indigent policies should be more visible to those households that
        need it most, people should be educated around making use of the
        indigent policy,
      • Councillors should become more active when it comes to the indigent
        policy,
      • It is questionable if the IDPs are aligned to the Provincial
        Government Development Plans (PGDP), and if the one was drafted
        after the other or vise versa,
      • Departments owing municipalities are a notable concern,
      • By its very nature a project is a holistic process. A missing link
        could stifle the outputs and outcomes, hence the need for more
        comprehensive funding by DBSA,
      • Functions of other Government institutions e.g. Land Bank, HSRC,
        Agriculture Research Council and others should be explored to
        assist rural farmers,
      • Dealing with the Division of Revenue, a rural bias should be
        present in the policy document and this should be further discussed
        with the Treasury and Finance and Fiscal Commission,
      • Unresolved Land Tenure issues poses serious problems to rural
        communities,
      • Bribery to gain access to valuable land along the Wild Coast is a
        matter of grave concern,
      • Department of Justice should be brought into the scheme of things
        when dealing with these and related issues, especially when cases
        are pending and dockets are opened in this regard,
      • Development and the environment is constantly at odds when it comes
        to creating a viable industry,e.g. Wild Coast area,
      • A lack of a common vision in the Wild Coast area is a cause for
        concern,
      • Partnership with traditional leaders in the area is crucial, they
        should in no way be undermined,
      • Proper environmental impact studies should be undertaken when
        embarking on further development especially when DBSA funds the
        projects,
      • Pension payments in municipal areas, especially when no facilities
        are provided e.g. toilets, shaded areas, water provision is an
        urgent matter for municipalities,
      • Closer links with Department of Home Affairs to assist pensioners
        with identity documents is another issue of concern,
      • Procurement should be biased towards women. DBSA should make it a
        point to ensure that this practice is encouraged when funding
        projects,
      • The take-over of fixed assets e.g. water purification plant by
        municipalities from provincial authorities should be transferred
        with a maintenance budget to prevent strain on municipal budgets.

Further Recommendations to DBSA
The profile of the DBSA should become more prominent. The bank is still
perceived by some as a typical bank and not as a development bank. Although
their role is constantly under refinement, their contribution especially
with respect to municipalities cannot be overestimated. A role that we
would like to see is where public goods and services are provided in much
more accelerated forms of infrastructure and capacity building which the
private sector are reluctant to initiate, but to cushion the risk of
development and to form smarter partnership that would be to the benefit of
society and our economy. The committee is aware of the fact that funding is
given in the sincere name of capacity building and should reflect outcomes
to that effect. If unsustainable partnerships are entered into, this will
give rise to a free-rider problem. A situation where some municipalities
take up loans without having a large-enough base to collect money to
service these loans, hence defaulting on their debt and expecting
government to bail them out. The mere fact that the bank has a workout unit
suggest that some municipalities from time to time default on their debt
and leaves one to question the meaning of smart partnership and if this is
not just another form of fruitless and wasteful expenditure on the side of
the bank.

The bank should not be under pressure to disperse money for the sake of
maintaining a good funding record or impressive annual report to
Parliament, but that prudent spending be recognised by outputs and outcomes
that are adding value to the tangible social welfare needs of the poor
specifically.

7.4 Conclusion
The Select Committee on Finance was made aware of the challenges that are
facing our new democracy, challenges that beg for not only verbal
commitment but for constructive participation. To this challenge the
Development Bank of South Africa has stepped up to the task and attempted
to exercise its mandate in an environment where poverty and unemployment
still poses a threat to our fragile democracy. In no uncertain terms did
the bank hesitate to be an “investor, advisor and partner of choice” in the
rural areas of the Eastern Cape, but has shown unselfish commitment.

The realities of the “people’s contract” as alluded to by the president of
our country becomes even more binding in rural areas of which the Eastern
Cape is a prime example. It is a statement of hope and expectation to the
poor, a source of energy to face the challenges that poverty poses and to
show courage in the midst of adverse conditions. Hence the need for the
NCOP to live up to its mandate and to truly represent the provincial and
local spheres of government at a national level by legislating laws that
will ensure upliftment and empowerment to the poor. To exercise oversight
that would ensure that legislated policies becomes a practical tool in the
hands of those that are disenfranchised and to bridge the gap between the
first and second economy that are extremely evident in the rural areas of
our country.

The committee further would want to take this opportunity to note the
unwavering commitment of our colleague and friend Mr. Nelson Raju (IFP) for
his contribution to this report. His input at times were quite militant and
frank yet constructive, synonymous with the passion that he portrays around
issues which relate to sports facilities (stadiums) and education resources
(libraries) in the municipal and local districts that were visited. The
committee is confident that his contribution to our society will linger
long after the memories has faded.

The hospitality and warmth with which the members were received at their
various destinations underlined the fact that the tourism potential of this
nation is yet to be discovered. A special word of thanks to the Development
Bank of South Africa officials for their contribution in making this
oversight visit the success it deserved to be, not for the luxury of
viewing the province but to tap into the potential for capacity building
and partnerships to be forged in the interest of our great nation. We thank
you.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on Provincial Budgets and
      Expenditure Review 2001/02 – 2007/08 Hearings

                            18 – 21 October 2005

Introduction

The Select Committee on Finance engaged in public hearings during the week
of 18 – 21 October 2005 on the Provincial Budget and Expenditure Review
2001/02 – 2007/08. The committee engaged the Members of the Executive
Committee (MEC) of the various departments in the provinces and discussed
the content of their relevant chapters.
The review document captures information that goes beyond simply providing
a comprehensive set of data on provincial budgets and expenditure, to
providing analyses of trends in service delivery. It lays a basis for
benchmarking provinces on service delivery performance in key sectors such
as school education, health, social development and housing, among others,
and also give a snapshot of the expenditure trend for the future budget
allocation and expenditure.

The report will consist of a Part A (Social Development), B (Education and
Agriculture), C (Roads and Transport) and D (Social Development and
Housing). Each department will be dealt with on a specific day of the week.
The hearings are preceded by a briefing by the National Departments, after
which the MECs are allowed to make their respective submissions and
thereafter an intense discussion will take place.

                     PART A: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT HEARING

Tuesday, 18 October 2005

1. Presentation by National Treasury on Social Development
The National Treasury outlined the social development spending, social
assistance spending and beneficiary trends, the social grants expenditure
by type of grant and province, the performance in previous years within the
social development sector, the provincial social welfare and development
services expenditure, and the provincial social development expenditure
budgets for 2001-2008. They also highlighted key issues around the role of
the nine provinces in managing public funds within the new environment of
the increase in the beneficiary numbers and public spending.

2. Presentation by National Department of Social Development
The Chief Financial Officer gave an overview of provincial expenditure,
social development services and the social assistance programme, which
encompassed the old age, disability, foster care, and child support grants.
He covered the measures utilised to sustain social grants expenditure, the
pressures on future provincial expenditure and highlighted future policy
initiatives in addition to conditional grants expenditure for the Medium
Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) allocations for 2001/2-2007/8 that
included HIV & AIDS and the Integrated Social Development Grant (ISDG),
which was previously known as the Food Emergency Relief Grant.

3. Presentation by Eastern Cape Department of Social Development
Discussions centred around the strategic responsibilities of Social
Development and gave an overview of 2001/2-07/08 and the budget allocations
for the same period. Also discussed were the 2005/6 first quarter
expenditure trends only and the challenges the Eastern Cape face.

Committee Discussion
The questions dealt with the following issues: confirmation of the figures
which were agreed too, under expenditure on the conditional grants, the
omission of the Provincial Care Dependency Grant Expenditure 2001/2, the
R94 million and the 5 957 beneficiaries and the Social Services in 2002/3,
only R480 million in expenditure was listed, while in 2003/4 it was R399
million. What are the reasons for the decline?

The MEC responded that the information was for 2005/6 ended on June 30
only, and therefore did not cover September. She continued that in terms of
the projected under-spending for the current financial year, the monitoring
report for each month went to Treasury, and that at the end of the
financial year, the situation was going to change. She chose as an example
the Integrated Social Development Grant and said that the process towards
the rolling out of the programme came late from the National Department,
which caused them to start the process late. She stated that in terms of
the foster care grant, the respective departments were now working
together, and that they were looking at changing the situation, because it
was difficult for children to get into the programme, and that reflected an
under-spending because of the bad financial flow. She answered that in
terms of the transfers to NGOs, the department was dealing with the
challenge.

The committee requested the Eastern Cape delegation to inspect their
records and submit answers in writing within two days. The Chairperson
stated that it would be useful for the Eastern Cape Department of Social
Development to interact with their Treasury, so that the Committee could
have a long-range view of where they started from to the way forward and to
look at the trends from 2001-2005 to see the broader trends as they
appeared in the report beyond this financial year.

The committee is of the opinion that it would be useful to start from 2001,
to see the sustainability within those NGOs and to view some of the NGOs
that had been doing good work within some communities and also providing
the committee with a list of current NGOs are still in existence.

The MEC agreed with the committee that the distribution of social workers
was skewed and added that they still had a shortage of social workers. She
added that they had indicated a shift from social welfare to social
development, and thus experienced a growth of responsibilities contrasted
against the availability of required skills, as people were needed to
manage offices at those lower levels in different areas. She stated that
the focus was on development and the strengthening of welfare services, and
that they employed 100 more social workers at a very low level.

4. Western Cape Presentation
Western Cape Social Services Department and Poverty Alleviation delivered
an overview of their expenditure and said that the budget for the current
financial year was driven and influenced by priorities ranging from
transformation, community regeneration, protecting the most vulnerable,
early childhood development and the fight against drug and substance abuse
to strengthening and intensifying social capital and building families.

The department presented on the growth between 2001/02 and 2004/05, the
unspent funds for 2004/05, the factors that influenced growth in the
aforementioned periods and the distribution of the budget. They indicated
that the average growth in beneficiary numbers of grants per financial year
is currently growing. A progress report on the implementation of the SA
Social Security Agency (SASSA) in the Western Cape and its challenges were
mentioned. The cost pressures, the number of social workers, development
and support services, which included HIV/AIDS, Poverty Reduction, Food
Relief and an update on personnel spending, and numbers were also alluded
to.

Committee Discussion
The Director of Social Security indicated that the Legal Resources Centre
had brought a court action against the National Department as well as all
nine provinces and indicated that they could not proceed with the
cancellation of grants because the first letter of award that went out to
the beneficiary to inform them about the grant did not contain all the
correct information. It did not state that the beneficiary had the right to
appeal within 90 days, so those grants that they cancelled for a specific
period had to be put back onto the system and new letters had to be issued
to those beneficiaries which stated that they had the right to appeal. He
added that they had to keep those cases on the system for that three-month
period or until the appeal process had been completed for those
beneficiaries who appealed. He continued that they could not cancel any
cases until they had completed the process and that led to the increases in
beneficiaries. It would only be when they had completed the Mashishi court
cases that they would be able to state that the processes were clean.

In terms of the assessment tools, the National Department had contracted
the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC) to develop an assessment tool
and that they had identified with the National Department four provinces
where the assessment tool would be piloted. They would meet in November in
the Western Cape to pilot it in the George region, but it had not been
implemented throughout the province, so different provinces were operating
with different assessment tools. He admitted they were still vulnerable to
litigation in terms of the different assessment tools that were in use in
the provinces, and that they were working with the National Department to
fasttrack the pilot so that they could reach uniformity in the provinces as
soon as possible.

Regarding an increased funding to NGOs for salary increases of social
workers, traditionally it was the norm to fund social workers in the
private sector a maximum of 75% of the status quo average and due to the
Social Security Budget they were unable to do so as State salary scales had
increased. The effect was that as of the previous year they were funding
between 55-63% of the State salary scale and as part of the National
Strategy for social workers they decided to transfer that benefit to the
social workers working in the NGO sector. That had led to the increase in
transfer payments in the NGO sector.

The personnel numbers for Social Security that decreased was due to a
moratorium and they could not appoint any new personnel in the provinces.
They then went through a period where they did an assessment in the
province, and saw that the shortage of personnel had a negative effect on
the quality of the work they rendered. Then they decided to appoint more
people to ensure that their quality control was in place.

The major jump in personnel numbers between 2003/04 and 2004/05 was due to
the appointment of contract workers to assist with the process of grants,
specifically in terms of quality and to ensure shorter waiting periods.
Further they had to accommodate the support side to deal with files, the
register, etc. as they had experienced an increase of grant applications.

5. Presentation by Free State Department of Social Development
The Free State MEC for Social Development delivered a presentation  and
said that there was a need for more social workers in the province. They
also looked at making services accessible to poor people, and that they had
come up with the idea for mobile offices that would provide services to
rural communities. The MEC said that some NGOs that provided additional
services duplicated what the Provincial Department was already providing,
and that they were looking at a structure that would complement each other.
In this, they would focus specifically on rolling services out to rural
areas, as well as making the NGOs accountable for their work to the
Province. They would also do better monitoring that would enable them to
better account for the funds that went to the NGO and a better system to
monitor HIV centres as well as better communication processes to deal with
this. The reason for underexpenditure in the social disability grants was
because of an anti-corruption drive last year and early in the current
year.

The Free State HOD for Social Development said that the drop in personnel
was as a result of resignations due to low salaries and working conditions.
The growth in beneficiaries was because of the social model that changed
the criteria which now included social background and unemployment, and
that more people could now get the disability grant due to improved
assessments.

The Chairperson said that he would allow them to go back home to
investigate this matter, as they were obviously not in control.

The committee stated that one of the issues they had not looked at yet was
migration from people outside the system. The Free State had the highest
numbers, with the second highest being Limpopo.
The Free State MEC for Social Development stated that the assessment panels
that they used to assess the beneficiaries were the main reasons. Treasury
agreed.

Free State bordered Lesotho, and issues of migration came out strongly in
the discussion. He said that people from Lesotho, who migrated to the Free
State and who were in dire need of social assistance but could not receive
any due to a lack of documentation was an issue to be looked at.

6. Presentation by the Northern Cape Department of Social Development
The MEC delivered a presentation that looked over the previous three years,
expenditure and outcomes, and the challenges over the next three years. He
said that there was a rise in beneficiaries, which resulted in the growth
in expenditure, looking at the challenges of social assistance grants and
that of the Social Welfare Services. A high turnover of social workers due
to poor salary scales was experienced. However a social worker retention
plan is in place. He gave a summary of the provincial payments from 2002/03-
2004/05 and the achievement within the same time frame. He also presented
actual and projected expenditure, and policy matters for 2005/06.

The committee queried the large consistent annual growth in old age persons
as a trend across all provinces in 2001/02-2005/06 in light of the HIV/AIDS
pandemic, and asked the MEC about this trend in the Northern Cape.

The MEC indicated that they had not really done an analysis on that issue,
but that growing old was a natural process and that one had to look at the
statistics as to how many people were likely to get old on a yearly basis
as a trend. He added that he did not note an unusual trend in view of
earlier years and that it seemed to be consistent with natural attrition.
On the issue of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, MEC added that the pandemic had its
major impact on the16-45 year old age group; those above fifty had not been
as badly affected.

The committee recommended that an analysis had to be done as the rise in
the numbers of old persons was dramatic and that they had to check whether
they had the correct numbers.
The migration was sighted as a reason why people from the Northern Cape
would live and work in the Western Cape and Gauteng during their productive
years, but would return during their elder years to the Northern Cape and
would draw their pensions there.

A KwaZulu-Natal delegate said that one of the things that they picked up in
her province was the cross-border situation when people were coming into
the country from places like Mozambique, but when they were analysing the
Health Budget they realized that it cost Kwazulu-Natal R180 million per
year just to service the people who came over to access clinics. She said
that it taxed the clinics, the schools, a whole range of services and that
they were paying a lot of money to support people from other countries.

The Northern Cape confirmed the figures shown as a true reflection of the
report as published by National Treasury. Statistics showed that the
average age in the Northern Cape had risen from 54 to 58, which implied
that there had been an improvement in the quality of life of people in the
province and that that could be the indicator for the rise in the numbers
of older people.

7. Presentation by the Limpopo Department of Social Development
Limpopo indicated growth above the average and that they had commissioned a
study to look into the reason for these trends which indicated that there
was a serious inflow of people from Botswana, Mozambique and Zimbabwe and
people just like herself from Swaziland.

The committee questioned the reliability of numbers, as they surely must be
able to verify beneficiaries?
The Limpopo Social Development budget, as an equitable share of the
Provincial Budget, since 2001/02 had risen from 18% to 25% in 2004/05 and
that they were now more able to take care of poor people because of that.


8. Presentation by the Mpumalanga Department of Social Development
The HOD of Social Development in Mpumalanga confirmed the figures shown in
the report as a true reflection of their report. The Chairperson said that
they had no report on their personnel numbers, and yet they had spent R49
million in 2001/02, then R59 million and then R64 million. He added that in
2004/05 they had about 510 personnel and asked them to explain that
phenomenon. Furthermore in 2001, 2003/04 there was no personnel indicated
and then this jumped to 166 and 180 and asked for an explanation. He also
queried their growth of 29,4%.

The Mpumalanga response was that it was clear that there was an omission in
terms of the submission of the statistics by his predecessors, and that
from 2004/05 they submitted the figures. As far as growth was concerned,
they have problems with cross border flow from Mozambique and Swaziland as
well as the setting up of the disability panels.

9. Presentation by the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Social Development
The Kwazulu-Natal Social Development presented some problems on the social
assistance front, and they were pinning their hopes on the establishment of
the SA Social Security Agency (SASSA), which would give them an opportunity
to have a specialised institution to deal with matters of administration
and management of the social grant system. They added that the
establishment of the Agency would bring about uniform measures to eliminate
some of the inconsistencies with regard to provinces in this particular
function. They indicated that the ghosts in the system were real human
beings - public servants - and that from the studies that were done, it was
quite a sizable number of public servants who were involved in these
fraudulent activities. They are looking into a strategy to ensure the
progressive realisation of social-economic rights to ensure that they
balanced those with available resources.

The department indicated that there was a great possibility for savings
rather than underspending, because those efficiency gains that were seen
were as a result of efforts and measures that they were putting in place to
rid the social security system of fraud and corruption.

The committee noted that National Departments should be firmer and that the
provinces should not be given so much discretion in the context of national
norms and standards. Norms and standards should be equal across all
provinces so that one province would not be better than another to the
extent that they would then experience migration across borders. Provinces
were always arguing that conditions for conditional grants were very
strict. The equitable share was unconditional. Some people wanted to review
conditional grants but the committee would urge National Departments not to
relent on this. Finally, the Chairperson added that the National Social
Development Department was the only department that complied with the
Division of Revenue Act in terms of supplying quarterly reports on the
conditional grant.

                        PART B: HEARINGS ON EDUCATION

Wednesday, 19 October 2005
1. National Education Department Briefing
The department outlined trends in the proportion of national income that
flowed towards public education; comparisons of spending with similar
countries; the decline in the provincial share of expenditure and the
expected further decline; the need to look at linking social grants to
education; low spending on adult education; special-needs learners;
expenditure on capital and non-personnel items; enrolment ratios; slow
turnaround time and logistical issues in getting data verified and audited;
the Senior Certificate matriculation results; teacher incentives and
stabilising teacher numbers.

Also focusing on provincial budgetary pressures; service delivery outputs
and outcomes; slow real growth and under-expenditure in provinces. All
provinces had decreased spending for 2001-2007

2. Eastern Cape Department of Education
The MEC highlighted the following issues: the monitoring of learner
innumeracy and literacy, access in terms of no-fee schools; policy shifts
to bring Grades 8 and 9 together; grant improvements; problems with finding
and funding personnel; the pressure to service debt; the number of schools;
lack of money for desks, books and teachers; and the need to train
principals to run schools effectively.

Committee Discussion
The Eastern Cape had overspent R900 million on personnel expenses and the
whole province had to be put under Section 100 of the Constitution
(national supervision of a provincial administration). In 2004, the same
thing had happened when the province ran R600 million into deficit. They
had to take money from all departments to service that debt, and there was
still pressure from their social partners to hire more educators. The
vacancy rate in the administration was around 60%. When they had started to
use their finances properly, half to service the budget deficit had cut the
non-personnel budget.

R27 million of funding was received from the European Union, Japan and
others. The 2006 figures indicated that they needed 2 000 classrooms and
that they have built 50% of those already. The maintenance allocations
approximated to R54 million.

School nutrition: in the current financial year indicated, the department
could not feed learners five days a week because of inefficiencies in the
system and budgetary constraints. Migration was another challenge for the
province.

The Eastern Cape indicated that some of their educators had served ten
years but officially remained temporary staff. They had issued a bulletin
in the previous week, and by January the posts would be filled. School
administration performance would be monitored. In some schools they had
disciplined principals, and they had to centralise this kind of programme.
In poor areas like Lusikisiki, there was a very poor teaching and learning
culture. An increasing problem was the number of staff and pupils dying
from AIDS.

The MEC said that communities were not involved in the nutrition programme
and that service providers came from the Western Cape and Gauteng.
3. Free State Department of Education Briefing
The Free State Education Department presented on the learner numbers; the
closure of farm schools because of low learner numbers; the learner support
programme, the orphan food parcels programme; the schools nutrition
programme; the hostel programme; school transport allocation; renovation of
schools; the programme to install computer centres in all secondary schools
by 2010, Further Education Training (FET) Colleges, the literacy rate, and
the provincial budget and expenditure trends.

Committee Discussion
The provincial department stated that higher growth was due to an
improvement in the accuracy of information. Educator training was now
taking place after school hours. The rollover was due to funds given by the
European Union countries recently and which they had been unable to spend.
With regard to spending on the HIV/AIDS programme for staff, most of those
programmes would be completed during the December holidays and had
therefore been shown as unspent. Capital expenditure funding had actually
been increased, so the department had to start quickly on renovations. The
Public Works Department in the Free State only dealt with building new
schools and not the maintenance thereof.

4. Northwest Department of Education briefing
The MEC presented on provincial access to education, the matriculation pass
rates, building of schools, the adult literacy rate, enrolment in
independent schools, provincial expenditure trends and inputs, percentage
growth, personnel costs, and expenditure by economic classification.

Committee Discussion
 The Head of Department indicated that credible data remained a challenge,
including that for independent schools. They had recently appointed people
at a regional level to deal with this challenge.

5. KwaZulu-Natal Department of Education Briefing
The presentation outlined the trends in the learner: educator ratio, the
reduction in the number of schools, migration, full-time equivalence,
numbers of full-time learners in FET colleges, the Nutrition Programme,
expenditure trends, and the number of black learners doing science and
maths.

Committee Discussion
The Head of Department indicated that figures reflect that 1 000 extra
schools had Section 21 (non-profit organisation) status. Insufficient
groundwork had been done in those schools located in the Zululand region.
The Chairperson asked them to go back and verify those numbers.

6. Northern Cape Department of Education Submission
The MEC and the Director General for the Northern Cape were not present and
the Committee accepted their written submission only.

7. Director-General’s Response
National Director-General explained that with the Nutrition Programme, the
Eastern Cape had 50% of their learners on the programme. That province had
particular pressures, as other provinces had 20% of learners on the
programme. Information on teacher numbers were improving. As for principals
inflating numbers, the National Department accepted that in many ways it
was a design flaw in the system, and that they were developing a new
information system where learners would be identified by Individual Learner
Numbers, or by their ID numbers, so that the National Department could
track learners when they migrate, as well as to check their progress
throughout their schooling life.

The Chairperson said that hygiene with the Nutrition Programme was
important, as he knew of one school in Mpumalanga where the food was kept
in a room with no refrigerator, and in another where the food was prepared
in a shack.

8. Mpumalanga Department of Agriculture Briefing
The Mpumalanga MEC outlined the trends in administration costs, resource
management, infrastructure, irrigation programmes, the Comprehensive Farmer
Support Programme, food gardens, pack houses for exporting produce from
food gardens, irrigation systems for small-scale farming, capacity,
prevention of foot and mouth disease, revamping of laboratories, the
increase baseline of agricultural structure, the Department focus on
technology, structural agricultural training, and micro-finance for small-
scale farmers.

Committee Discussion
The Chairperson referred to the National Treasury Report on Land
Distribution and Reform outputs that showed 311 projects with 22 347
recipients, 2 197 of them female, and requested an answer as to why that
number was so low because women were in the majority in rural provinces. In
the Eastern Cape there with 58 000 recipients, with female recipients at 7
000. The Free State had 8 000 beneficiaries, with 1 000 females. He further
asked about female-headed households. In response the department said that
they did not currently have the statistics for beneficiaries of land
reform.

Mpumalanga indicated that it had become clear that in spending more on
other areas like farmer support, which was close to 43%, this ‘pushed up
the totals’. The initial high expenditure in veterinary service had
outstripped capacity and had then been adjusted. They were satisfied with
the current levels.

The province had spent R16 million out of R18 million in December 2004.
They had a serious problem because CASP then accounted for R700 000 out of
R18 million. They had to put in a programme between January and February.
The committee said that consistent underspending of conditional grants
would be under constant review.

9. North West Department of Agriculture Briefing
The North West Province outlined trends in budget and expenditure, service
delivery, personnel expenditure, animal disease prevention, critical small
and subsistence farming, tourism, research institutes, environmental
impact, waste management, lack of reliable statistics, number and types of
livestock around, uniform strategy, farming equipment, CASP, training and
the incapacity to spend budgets.

With regards to the recent veldt fires, they had provided emergency
livestock fodder. They have also looked at damage to houses, fences, and
farm workers, buildings, and at long-term management of these disasters.
One of their challenges was the capacity of local municipalities in
emergency services.
The extension officers seem to be an ongoing challenge.
10. Eastern Cape Agriculture Briefing
The Eastern Cape officials outlined trends in budgets and expenditure, soil
conservation strategies, migration, underspending, capacity, infrastructure
development, CASP, irrigation, veterinary services, and animal diseases.

Committee Discussion
The department in the province emphasised that the numbers around the Nguni
cattle could not be verified and therefore did not know whether the project
was sustainable. There also appeared to be massive problems with fruit
production and the challenge of for example, 500 hectares of land to one
tractor. In other communities, chicken litter was sold as fertiliser and
then billed to the Department. Management of the extension officers in that
area left much to be desired. They added that conventional ploughing was
very expensive. Some officials had gone to Brazil to observe ‘zero
tillage’, but realised that it needed special machinery, and would not work
with the type of rainfall of the Eastern Cape.

Sustainable resource management being hamstrung by the fiscal arrangements
in the Eastern Cape caused fluctuations in totals. They had not been able
to run all the programmes as budgets had to be reduced. There were problems
in the CASP programme, but tractors had been ordered and were due to be
delivered to villagers. In response to the Nguni question, the department
indicated that the University of Fort Hare had jointly run the Nguni
programme.

Roads had been influenced by the cluster system, and there was no
integration of efforts. The department would launch an initiative to
compile a complete list of the small farmers. He admitted that
supernumeraries were still on the system. Last year they had 3 000, and
currently they have slightly less than 900.
The MEC then said that he had no ready information on the percentage
growth.
The small number of extension officers and lack of funds is a concern to
the department. On zero tilling, they were investigating soil erosion and a
pilot project is underway. Tea production had become a viable business.

The Department had applied for a rollover of the R38 million. About R17
million had been spent and R19 million was planned for projects. The
agricultural research was necessary for the province and was reaping
benefits already.

11. Gauteng Department of Agriculture Briefing
Gauteng outlined trends in budgets and expenditure, high-potential
agricultural land, budget and expenditure, agriculture strategy, lack of
laboratories, tunnel farming, hydroponics, deploying staff in other
provinces in disease control initiatives, veterinary services, strategic
objectives, community food gardens, conditional grants, access to land, and
environmental projects.

12. Free State Department of Agriculture Briefing
The department officials outlined trends in budgets and expenditure, land
and agrarian reform, development of communal land and beneficiaries, food
security, the community donor-funded support programme, sustainable
resource management, soil conservation, farmer support and development,
disaster management, veterinary services, the technology research and
development services programme, the structured agricultural training
programme, and low spending on the CASP project.

Free State produced 70% of South Africa’s grain. As there was currently
overproduction of grain in the world, they had looked into producing bio
diesel with SASOL. This was the first such project for the Department.

                   PART C: HEARINGS ON ROADS AND TRANSPORT

Thursday, 20 October 2005
1. National Department: Roads
National department for roads indicated some challenges, which included:
Accounting for roads at municipal level and all unclassified roads (not
assigned in terms of ownership) especially when these unclassified roads
are at the poor community level.
Assets and information management systems should be prioritised.
Traffic Management and Safety initiatives are the “Arrive Alive” campaign.
E-Natus is a system that would ensure up-to-date information and improve
access to information and up-to-date data, which is critical to eradicate
fraud and corruption. It is expected to start in 2006 (April).
Road Traffic Management Cooperation is encouraged to promote efficient and
inform strategy for road traffic management across the spheres.
National crime prevention strategy will rely on technology for registering
and licensing motor vehicles and the bureau to combat crime. In safety and
security 88% of spending are accounted for in this department for all nine
provinces.

Another challenge is the overloading control of heavy-duty vehicles. Damage
in this area amounts to R600 million. Initiatives in this regard are
traffic control centres - approximately 90 exist and most are upgraded. The
focus is also on upgrading driver testing, weighbridges and all other
centres.
An initiative to step up testing of vehicle roadworthiness.
Administering public transport subsidy system, the Treasury indicated that
the policy challenge is to bring some equity, efficiency and better
targeting in the system since Gauteng, KZN and Western Cape are the biggest
spenders in this regard, mainly in the metros.

The Integrated Planning Transport Plans aim to improve the process of
planning, a major effort which municipalities embarked upon. The idea of
the department is also to increase non-motorised transport management and
to ensure the effective coordination of different modes of transport. Hence
there is a great focus on roads and transport in view of 2010, which poses
a major opportunity for investment going forward in this sector.
The number of unclassified roads in order to ensure integration and to
classify the roads according to function and to assign ownership is a
ongoing process. This is to ensure standardisation and to better plan for
needs and coordinate across the spheres.
Formalising Taxi Industry
Structures are in place and R7,7 billion has been earmarked for taxi
recapitalisation over the next seven years. The current year’s budget
amounts to R250 million for scrapping old vehicles and the process is in
place for establishing scrapping agencies. The idea is to introduce safety
standards in the taxi industry and to move from taxi permits to operating
permits to improve safety.

Although the sector has grown in spending, the challenges in terms of the
needs are as follows:
Performance indicators, information management systems, constraints in
terms of skills throughout the whole sector, backlogs in maintenance and
access roads. But there is the potential for more jobs as more funds are
channelled to this sector as well as the 2010 World Cup.
The corruption in vehicle licenses and registration in drivers licenses are
a challenge, which the NATIS system also seeks to address.

Responses to Committee’s Concerns
Motor vehicle licence fees differ substantially - Western Cape is the
highest. Equalisation of license fees in provinces.
Road Accidents.
Value for money in spending.
Bus Subsidies.
Weighbridges – Norms and Standards and distribution
Orphan roads in rural areas – ownership problems

As soon as any road is incorporated into the national road network, routine
road maintenance procedures are put in place. This means the road is being
patched after taking strain to make the road as save as possible, which is
an ongoing exercise.
Classification of roads in the past was done in a functional manner and
never took into consideration the social requirements of roads – this is
the main reason why the department is looking at the classification of
roads to address the issue of orphan roads. Municipal boundaries exist and
roads should be claimed and cannot be regarded as unclaimed roads.

Responsibility of weighbridges resides with the province. The department
feels that spending money on weighbridges is a much better investment than
not spending money at all. However, they are working closely with provinces
to assist in non-functional weighbridges being re-instated to its
functional order.
The department may construct these weighbridges but the manpower to
administer is heavily reliant on the province to provide officers to man
these centres. This is a great challenge. Hence putting in place the
necessary facilities to ensure a quality road and the maintenance thereof
is not the challenge, but to ensure law enforcement is the bigger
challenge.
Arrive Alive is not only the responsibility of the department but also of
the citizens of our country, this is a culture that has to be inculcated.
The bus subsidy challenges is of concern due to unequal allocations between
provinces and it shows up to have an urban bias in allocation.

Final Remarks by Chairperson in Summary
Usefulness of data
National and provincial confirmation of the data in the book
The next step is value for money to support and complement the data.

2. Education Department:
They have 2003 enrolment figures and not 2005, this is of concern to the
committee.
Eastern Cape will be feeding children in their school nutrition programme
for three days only. What then becomes the function of the business plan
and on what basis do you plan - on what stats do you use to access your own
funding. What, then, is the basis of the plan if the numbers are much
higher and the budgeting is therefore underbudgeted.
At the same time, the issue of migration arises. Tthe numbers should
decline, leading to saving. This is not evident in their information,
amidst the belt-tightening exercise.
Hygiene for school nutrition is a big issue, storage facilities as well as
eating facilities and other things.

3. Social Development:
They managed to remove some ghosts workers from the system and secured a
saving.
Indications are that there is a HIV/Aids pandemic which targets the younge,
but annually old-age applicants are growing. How do you align this fact
with one mortality rate?
Provincial Discretion
Trade-offs between provinces in their endeavour to deliver services this is
a serious matter of concern.

                     PART D: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT HEARING

Friday, 21October 2005
1. KwaZulu-Natal: MEC for Roads and Transport in the Province
Monitoring,  provincial  plans  in  line   with   IDPs,   Provincial   Roads
Expenditure for 2002/03 declined as opposed to the previous  financial  year
(why?), revenue collection from motor vehicle  licences  (projected  decline
in 2004/05 –Why?), value for money in terms of expenditure, contribution  of
tollgates to the maintenance of roads.

Response to Committee’s Questions
Out of a total of 25 000 people employed in this sector, 24 000 are women.
The idea now is to allow these women to establish cooperatives so as to
move into other areas of economic development.
Monitoring mechanisms are in place and this was based on the request of the
majority of women who engage in this activity so as to improve their skills
and ability to be much more productive.
The department is working closely with the municipalities on transport
issues especially pertaining to the IDPs that need to be aligned with the
departments’ plans. However, the provision of taxi ranks is a persistent
challenge.
The drop in the Provincial Roads Expenditure for 2002/03 is as a result of
the department’s reprioritising and targeting the far-flung areas, more
specific the rural areas that are not easily accessible, hence the
reprioritisation of funds.
Value for money is guaranteed in the construction of the KZN roads delivery
as members witnessed with the oversight visit.

Committee Comments
Capacity of provinces to spend, as indicated in the Division of Revenue the
withholding section becomes very applicable while provinces that does not
have the capacity to spend, while provinces are build those capacity the
money could be allocated to those provinces that are in a position to
spend.
Data also becomes a crucial element, because the reliability of data
impacts on planning.
Response of Treasury is that they seriously need to look at the issue of
underspending and if under-spending will be incurred, that money can
perhaps be shifted to the roads department.
MECs should also start talking to each other in and across provinces,
perhaps in the context of a department underspending, so that those
departments with capacity to spend can continue to spend.
Also to transfer skills across municipalities in the province or country,
especially when projects were successfully completed.

2. Free State: for Public Works, Roads and Transport in the Province/s
The province indicated that the department needed more funds in this regard
and that national department should look at this suggestion seriously.

Response to Committee’s Questions
Questions were based on the following issues: Decrease in expenditure,
collections of vehicle licences and why the decline, value for money in
expenditure, decrease on motor vehicle licences, road signs, litigation and
how the department is dealing with this, staff shortage, quality of the
bridges not well constructed in accordance with engineering specificity,
staff shortage and who are these people, provincial strategic plans and
provincial priorities and other trade-offs.

The Free State confirmed that the vehicle-licence figures are correct even
though the figure stated in their presentation differs.
The dip in the vehicle licences was as a result of an effort to stem fraud
and corruption. The vehicles that were found to be suspect did not find
their way to the registration process, hence the lost of revenue and the
decline. Most vehicles are register in neighbouring provinces due to the
higher registration fees in the Free State. Free State is number three on
the most expensive list in the country.
Shortage of staff includes engineers, - these people command a high salary
and hence relocate if the salaries cannot be matched.
Even with the limited budget, the Free State indicated that they could
deliver more road per kilometre in comparison to the allocation it got in
its budget as opposed to the other provinces.

3. Eastern Cape: for Public Works, Roads and Transport in the Province
Department indicated its intention to take a major investment initiative  in
the Umtata  region,  which  was  previously  neglected  in  the  growth  and
development strategy of the province. They are struggling to deal  with  the
huge backlogs in the province.

Committee Discussions
The fencing of roads to make them much safer is a big challenge because
people will take the fencing and use it for something else. This issue
should be discussed with the Minister of Education, as people should be
made aware of road safety rather than putting up fencing. The province is
also experiencing low revenue collection in vehicle licencing.
The committee raised the issue of the Western Cape being the highest in
charging licence fees yet still thinking of implementing a provincial tax
on fuel. The Eastern Cape said that it is much better to maintain roads
than to build new roads.

The Eastern Cape indicated that their budget in 2000 amounted to R900
million but currently the budget has decreased to R355 million. As a result
of the bad road conditions, the province is currently going through a
litigation process. If this case is not in favour of the province, further
pressure will be applied on the provincial roads budget.
Since 1991 the conditions of the roads in the province has worsened and has
serious implications and challenges for the department in the province. The
province at this stage is only maintaining the roads and not upgrading the
roads. Collection of vehicle licencing is also growing rapidly.
The low revenue collection is also as a result of municipalities that
collect the revenue on behalf of the department. However, what is
experienced is that they withhold money where the province owe them. A
service level agreement is currently being looked at.

4. Limpopo Presentation
The province seeks to contribute towards the Growth and Development
Strategy via road construction to create more jobs and tackle poverty.
A key challenge is the gravel roads in the province; with any amount of
rain on the road it becomes extremely dangerous. The Road Agency also
managed to spend all its funds in the province this year.
Revenue collection is currently a process that would allow the devolvement
of this function to the municipalities. With the drop in licence-fee income
it was stated that the department did not send out notices to renew
licences in the province, hence the drop in licence fees.

Committee Response
The committee indicated that provinces have a tendency to owe and withhold
money to municipalities; the MFMA section 37 speaks to cooperative
governance promotion. This creates a challenge to this sphere of
government, which is at the forefront of delivery.
The committee will have to monitor this phenomenon.
The committee indicated that Eastern Cape has so many cars and so little
income on license fees; this is a matter for further discussion. Further
more, Eastern Cape has three weighbridges and the equitable distribution
thereof is a continuous challenge.

Law enforcement is not only done during the day - what about at night, when
many of the accidents take place?
Trade-offs: infrastructure cannot be compromised because it creates jobs
and fixed investment in the province.
While the committee was on an oversight visit in the Eastern Cape, they saw
500 houses which had been built and not used. These houses were in the
middle of nowhere, near Alice.
Eastern Cape decided to feed school children for three days only, not five
days. The question is, how does budgeting and planning take place?

Limpopo indicated that they are now paying teachers manually so as to root
out corruption. This proved to be a success - they managed to score a
saving of R3 million.

5. Free State: Housing Presentation
The Free State Housing Department indicated that as a result of the
capacity constraints of municipalities, the accreditation process would
have to be put on hold, as this will not be to the benefit of the province
at this stage. It will remain a provincial competency for now.
Accreditation for now will not be considered as an option due to capacity
constraints in the Free State Province, as agreed with SALGA and the
National Department.

MEC Responses
The Free State has a special project that is currently dealing with
incomplete houses.
The rollovers will be used through the EPWP (Extended Public Works
Programme) to correct this challenge. Accreditation is agreed to with
SALGA. It is too early to extend accreditation to municipalities currently
and it would be disastrous if the department agreed to this accreditation.
However, piloted projects have been started which are currently in danger
of collapse. The challenge is to assist municipalities to get them up to
the level to accredit them.

The amount of houses completed and information around that will be provided
to the committee, as requested.
Major challenges in response to the houses built since 1994 include
incomplete houses of which the contractors that were involved are now non-
existent.
A distinction should also be drawn where poor workmanship is evident as
opposed to consumer or house-owner neglect over the last few years.
Overcommitment has also contributed to  underexpenditure.  The  response  to
the Human Settlement Grant will be forwarded to the  committee  as  soon  as
possible (next four days).


Committee Response in Summary
Discussion between Housing, Roads and Treasury – to relocate money that is
not spent to other departments in the province.
Reluctance to pass this section of accreditation by the committee when the
DORA was passed, but Treasury persuaded the committee on this issue
Similar to provincial regulations tax – similar issue, the Bill was passed
but not up until today optimally utilised, capacity problems etc. This will
inform the committee much better when dealing with the DOR bill this next
financial year.
Recommendation: The committee will convene the DFIs at a meeting in
Parliament to come and indicate their role in the process of development
and where they participate and fit in e.g.: DBSA, Land Bank, IDC etc.

7. Western Cape Housing Presentation
The Western Cape indicated that their projected expenditure is well
balanced and that the second-quarter expenditure figures will reflect this
fact, coupled with value for money. The Western Cape is on track to deliver
16 000 houses as per their principled commitment. The Western Cape
indicated that they are not planning or tolerating any underexpenditure for
the financial year as it stands.

For 1999 up until 2004, they have built 89 090 houses, both completed and
still under construction. For 2004/05, the department has serviced 16 965
sites and built 15 921 houses, hence a total of R511 million was spent. In
total the performance of the department adds up to a tally of 200 000
houses. The shift now is the quality rather then the quantity of the
houses, hence value for money.
Also due to improved specifications of houses and the conditional grant not
holding track with the inflation, a lower quantity of houses could be
delivered. It was a key issue for the Western Cape to speed up delivery and
improve on expenditure.

The Integrated Housing and Human Settlement Programme has put forward a
range of items on the menu of housing which the budget does not keep track
of all, things considered equal. The Western Cape indicated that they are
able to spend more and to deliver more but the budget is keeping them at
ransom and holding back their performance, and also that some of the
municipalities are stronger in some of these areas. Also taking into
consideration that the delivery is 15 000 per year whilst the growth is 27
000 per year. Migration is also a sensitive issue as the spill-over effect
is clearly felt in the Western Cape, hence the need for the neighbouring
provinces to make sense of the added pressures and to deal with this issue
on a much higher level.

Committee and Departmental Response
The challenge of migration seems to be an ongoing battle that the provinces
seem not to win and hence a much closer interaction between provinces is
required. The types of trade-offs that provinces are willing to forgo are
vital in the attempt to deal with external pressures that are exerted from
other provinces. This presents a data challenge to the province which
impacts on planning and delivery.

The solution to migration lies not at the departmental level but is an
inter-provincial solution and at MINMEC level. As the migration increases
and the housing pressure on the department increases, the equity share
decreases. The issue of skills and working with Cuban assistance, the MEC
confirmed that skills delivery and transfer is a reality and is taking
place.
The city as one metro is part of the accreditation; a working group has
been set up between the city and the department in implementing the
elements of the accreditation framework, which is a phased accreditation
framework. Hence for any municipality to qualify for accreditation there is
some fundamentals to be adhered to and a minimum accreditation period of
two years. Although there is level, one, two and three, which is full
assignment, what is full assignment in terms of the role and future role of
provincial department of housing and local government? There might be a
range of unintended consequences of accreditation, which need to engaged
with.

8. Gauteng Presentation
The department indicated that they not only respond to the housing waiting
list but in terms of the needs that exists so as to indeed be a caring
government. Those who qualify in terms of the need are those who look after
children affected by HIV and Aids and caregivers, who are predominantly
older persons and grandparents. The department is also questioning a
waiting list as opposed to a database, because a database allows
flexibility as opposed to waiting list, which orders things and makes for
inflexibility.
A new initiative is the community-builder programme, to provide
opportunities for local community to engage in building their own
settlements. The backlogs are extremely distorted, as the data has not yet
been cleaned. Gauteng has established programme management officers that
would assist with the development and delivery of houses, also to ensure
some form of accountability.

The department also are looking at inner-city regeneration as another
alternative to deal with housing backlog.

Committee Response
Gauteng agreed that accreditation is not yet an option to pursue at this
stage; a similar sentiment was echoed by SALGA in the Free State - that
capacity in the provinces does not exist at this stage. The DORA document
addressed Gauteng’s concern about the shortage of funds by the withholding
of allocations from provinces that cannot spend to reallocate perhaps to
those provinces/department/municipalities that can spend.

The department also highlighted the challenges of the procurement policies,
which is very inconsistent. The province is initiating the support of those
smaller companies to be assisted by the bigger companies in the procurement
process so as to transfer skills until they are sustainable. This will also
assist with security. The department has also put in place an anti-
corruption unit to deal with corruption and outstanding moneys paid for
work not fully completed.

9. Presentation By North –West Province
North-West indicated that the average delivery per year was 12 000 houses
per year. The province had delegated many of its projects to the
municipalities and agrees that this decision has come back to haunt them in
more ways than one. It is showing up in the decline in expenditure and
therefore roll-overs will be taking place. A SALGA audit report indicated
that the capacity for municipalities to deliver in building houses is zero.
The department admitted that it has been more like a paymaster with its
hands–off approach - just receiving money from national and handing it over
to those that need to be paid (e.g. municipalities).

Committee Interaction
The committee has identified the important fact that accreditation is a
serious issue, as is the withholding clause and the transfer of funds to
other departments that can spend. The committee identified these as matters
of urgency and suggested strengthening the Division of Revenue Act on these
and related issues.
The committee made it clear that departments cannot always blame capacity
for underexpenditure. Clearly the committee needed to call all the relevant
interested parties involved in capacity building together, e.g. DBSA, DPLG,
National Treasury, so that we can interrogate the training figures at this
stage.

Committee Recommendations:

    • The information in the Provincial Budgets Expenditure Review 2001/02 –
      2007/08 should be kept the way it is with the Local Government
      Information separately;

    • Non-financial information needs to appear in the document;


    • The committee is concerned about MECs who do not respond in terms of
      the invite to these types of hearings and feel that the powers vested
      in the committee and those in the  Public Finance Management Act
      should be explored further;

    • Data should be verified, due the fact that data is disputed when the
      MECs are present before the committee;

    • On the issue of data, the committee will have to set aside a time to
      interact with STATS SA and other institutions making use of data-
      intensive methods;

    • The committee further recommend that the report be circulated to all
      the relevant provincial departments and participants in the province
      via the correct protocol procedures,

    • Information on the equitable share and the conditional grants should
      continue to be presented before the committee as it gives a clearer
      picture of provincial departmental expenditure;

5.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Special Pensions
      Amendment Bill [B 28B - 2005] (National Assembly – Section 75), dated
      15 November 2005:

The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of the
Special Pensions Amendment Bill  [B 28B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
Section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

6.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Auditing Profession
      Bill [B 31B - 2005] (National Assembly – Section 75), dated 15
      November 2005:

The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of the
Auditing Profession Bill  [B 31B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75),
referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a Section
75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

-----------------------
[1] Withdrawn and Hon Prince NE Zulu nominated by Chief Whip of the Inkatha
Freedom Party, Hon JH Van Der Merwe on 27 October 2005.


