---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 February 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-02-15
---

TUESDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2005
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

The Speaker announced that the vacancy that had arisen as a result of the
resignation of Mr B W Kannemeyer had been filled by the nomination of Mr B
M Mkongi with effect from 11 November 2004.

The member had made and subscribed the solemn affirmation in the Deputy
Speaker’s office on 2 December 2004.

The Speaker announced that the vacancy that had arisen as a result of the
resignation of Ms R Taljaard had been filled by the nomination of Ms A M
Dreyer with effect from 1 January 2005.

The member had made and subscribed the oath in the Speaker’s office on 9
February 2005.

              DEBATE ON PRESIDENT’S STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr D H M GIBSON: On a point of order, Madam Speaker: I would like to raise
a point of order concerning the speakers’ list. The previous Speaker gave a
ruling on a similar occasion, to the effect that the Chair felt that in a
parliamentary democracy, the Leader of the Opposition would follow after
the President. That matter seems still not to have been cleared up, and we
have an hon member of the ANC having been nominated to be the first
speaker, to be followed by the Leader of the Opposition. Madam, I would
like you to correct the speakers’ list and call upon the Leader of the
Opposition. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Gibson, you did raise the same point of order during the
state of the nation address debate of May 2004, and, as agreed in terms of
my ruling on that occasion, the matter went to the Rules Committee, where
parties engaged on whether in fact they did support the view that you hold,
based on a particular approach to the place and role of the largest
opposition party.

As you know, that issue is still with the Rules Committee, and so for now
we will proceed with the speakers’ list as it stands in front of me. I
would like to urge parties to complete this debate in the Rules Committee
on the issue of the place and role and how we believe we should recognise
the largest opposition party. Of course, we do not have such a thing as an
official opposition; we have the largest opposition party, and we have
other opposition parties.



Mrs M L NGWENYA: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, hon
comrades and friends, since 26 June 1955, the Freedom Charter has remained
the embodiment of our people’s aspiration for peace, freedom and justice.
It lives in the hearts and minds of many people in and outside South
Africa. This is because the Freedom Charter represents hope, and an ideal
for which, as former President Mandela put it, many were prepared to live
and, if need be, to die.

The ANC is dedicated to ensuring that the vision of the Freedom Charter is
progressively transformed into a lived reality for South Africans, for our
African sisters and brothers on the continent and for all the peoples,
especially the poor of the world.

The era of apartheid was an era of rule by a minority, an era of
compartmentalising our people into different groups and colours. It was a
time when blacks were deliberately set up to hate and despise other blacks.
It was a time when whites were taught the criminal and false ideology of
white supremacy. The Freedom Charter represented a humane and just break
from the colonial and racist crime of apartheid.

When, in 1994, the people of South Africa exercised, for the very first
time in the history of this country, their democratic right to elect a
government of their choice, they ensured that the time had come for the
people to govern in pursuance of the goal of a better life for all.

Today, as the Freedom Charter foretold 50 years ago, the people’s
representatives in our structure of governance reflect the broad spectrum
of our country’s social reality. We not only have the representation of the
better-offs and whites, as was the case in the past. Children from dusty
streets and poverty-stricken backgrounds like myself, female or male, now
have the right to vote for and stand as candidates for all bodies that make
legislation in a South Africa that truly belongs to all who live in it.
[Applause.]

However, with regard to the poor, black section of our communities,
particularly Africans, we still need to do more to ensure equality in all
aspects of life, including equality before the law and respect for human
dignity. To better deal with some of the racial problems that still
constitute a part of our social reality, the judiciary will also have to
transform.

How do we justify that in our society today we still experience incidents
such as the ones I will highlight.

Motlhomphegi Spikara, go sa na le batho ba bangwe bao ba gopolago gore bona
ba ka godimo ga molao; bao ba sa phelago bophelo bja mehleng yela ya
kgatelelo ya kgale. Kgweding ya go feta, rapolasa yo mošweu kua profensing
ya Limpopo o thuntšhitše mošomi wa mothomoso gomme ge a botšišwa gore o mo
thuntšheditše eng, yena a re ke be ke re kotse ke tšhwene. Comrade
Presidente, batho ba mohuta woo ga ba nyakege mo setšhabeng sa rena le
lefaseng ka bophara. Bjale tšhwene yona gabotse e be e bolaelwa eng?
[Disego.] Batho ba mohuta woo ba swanetše go kwešwa bohloko, ba kwebje
bophelo bja bona ka moka kgolegong, ke moo ba tlago tseba gabotse gore rena
ga re ``Banana Republic’’, eupša re mmušo wa batho ka batho, wo o
ithekgilego ka motheo wa Freedom Charter ge e re: “Batho ba tla buša.”

Ba bangwe gona kua profensing ya Limpopo – Presidente, re na le bothata ka
profensi ya Limpopo – ba lahletše motho, a phela, ka lešakeng la ditau. Ke
mohlolo mang wona woo? Kgoro ya Toka e swanetše go tiiša letsogo. Re ka se
phele le batho ba mohuta woo mo nageng ya mmušo wa African National
Congress. Molaotheo wa naga ya rena o re: Ka moka re a lekana pele ga
molao. Freedom Charter e boletše ya re: (Translation of Pedi paragraphs
follows.)

[Hon Speaker, there are still some people who think that they are above the
law; those who still have an apartheid mentality. Last month a white farmer
in the Limpopo province shot a black worker and when he was confronted
about this issue, his answer was that he thought he was a baboon. Comrade
President, people like this are not accepted in our communities and in the
entire world. Even if it was a baboon, why should it be killed? [Laughter.]
People such as these should be punished, they should be given life
sentences in jail, and then they will realise that we are not a banana
republic, but instead a government that is led by the people, which is
enshrined in the Freedom Charter when it states: “The people shall govern”.

Someone in the same province – President, we have a problem with the
Limpopo province – threw somebody into a lions den while the person was
still alive. What kind of miracle is this? The Department of Justice must
use tough measures. We cannot live with these kinds of people in our
country, which is governed by the African National Congress. Our
constitution states clearly that we are all equal before the law. The
Freedom Charter stated that…]

All shall enjoy equal human rights, and all nation groups shall have equal
rights and human dignity.

Ga se mmala wa motho wo o fago motho maemo, eupša ke maitshwaro a motho a
mabotse ao a tlago mmea mo a swanetšego gona.

Comrade Presidente, rena bomme ba magaeng re re yo a nyatšago molao le
tshepedišo ya molao ya mmušo wo wa rena, a gate koseni, šile. (Translation
of Pedi paragraphs follows.)

[A person is not dignified because of his or her colour, but he or she is
recognised and honoured for his or her good lifestyle.

Comrade President, we rural women declare that he who does not abide by the
laws of our government must leave.]

Amasango avuliwe! Bona bangcono ngoba bayazi ukuthi bazoya kuphi. [Gates
are opened! They are better because they know where they will be going.]

The ANC government has introduced strong local government – wall-to-wall
municipalities – to further deepen the process of the realisation of the
clause in the Freedom Charter: “The people shall govern!”

The ANC government has created a system of local government that allows the
general populace to make a contribution in governance. As Parliament and
government, we continue to speak directly to all South Africans through
imbizos.

Simbonile uMongameli, simbonile noPhini Mongameli, sibabonile noNgqongqoshe
bethu behamba beya kobonana nabantu ngaphandle. [We saw the President, we
saw the Deputy President, we also saw our Ministers going out to meet the
people from the outside.]

Ba ile go bolela le batho; batho le bona ba bolela le bona. [They went to
the people in order to communicate with them and the people also
responded.]

We have passed laws, such as the Municipal Systems Act, which provides for
participation by all in the running of municipalities. This law enjoins
municipalities to establish ward committees that will, at ward level, meet
with councillors and make plans with regard to their needs in a particular
area, and feed their plans into a broad municipal plan called the
Integrated Development Plan, the IDP.

Our government encourages South Africans to participate in governance,
especially as we celebrate the unending life of the Freedom Charter, the
charter of the people.

Colonialism plundered the land from the majority of South Africans. White
racist regimes of the past pushed millions of black South Africans into
overcrowded and impoverished reserves - homelands and townships. The
Freedom Charter sought to correct this situation, and thus remained,
throughout the liberation struggle, our guiding light to the resolution of
the land question.

In the pursuit of this objective, the people’s government, led by the ANC,
continues to implement, with even greater vigour, both redistributive and
restitutive land programmes. To negate the impact of colonial laws on
women, these programmes also benefit female-headed households, thus giving
true meaning to our objective to realise, in a practical manner, the
objective of a nonracist, nonsexist society.

The President spoke, among other things, about illegal violent
demonstrations, and made the point that these demonstrations will not
produce the required resources where government does not have such
resources. In this regard, the President was referring to isolated
demonstrations that have begun to incorporate acts of violent behaviour.
Rather than resort to violence and criminality, it is important for our
people to take whatever grievances they may have to higher structures,
should they feel that lower ones are not responding adequately.

The President also spoke about the need of all public representatives and
the Public Service in general to work hard in the service of our country
and people.

Guided by the Freedom Charter, we have created a state where democratic
dissent is an entrenched right. We are free to voice our differences as
well as to constitute ourselves into political parties representing these
differing views. There is therefore no reason to resort to violence on the
basis of our difference of opinions.

Equally, and again guided by the Freedom Charter, we, as public
representatives in particular, are sworn to the injunctions of our
Constitution, which injunctions oblige us, among other things, to improve
the quality of life of our citizens. These injunctions, comrades and
friends, we must carry through, reserving neither effort nor strength.

The Freedom Charter lives!

Nina nizokhuluma … [You will speak …]

... until you are grey in your head. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, Mr President and colleagues,
if the last speaker from the ANC is correct about the wondrous state of
local government, perhaps she would explain why it is that ANC city
managers and ANC councillors in the Free State have to go to work in
armoured cars and Casspirs. [Interjections.] I think you should look
beneath the surface, Madam.

President Mbeki, in his state of the nation address last Friday, painted a
very hopeful portrait of South Africa. Economic growth is rising. Social
grants are expanding. Africa is taking her rightful place on the world
stage. Indeed, that is correct.

And, as he warned us, we cannot ignore the fact that millions of South
Africans are still waiting to enjoy the fruits of freedom. Indeed, 70% of
South Africans today live below the international poverty line; more than
40% of working-age adults in our country are out of work; 35% of young
people in their late twenties are infected with the HI virus. And each
year, 20% of South Africans – some 9 million or 10 million people – report
that they have been victims of crime.

So it is quite true, as President Mbeki told us on Friday, that South
Africa is at the confluence of encouraging possibilities. But if we want to
turn today’s possibilities into tomorrow’s realities, we will have to make
some difficult choices. We can choose to stay on our current path – the
path of more state control and less delivery, more racialism and less
tolerance, more authority and less democracy. Or we can return to the path
that South Africa chose in 1994 – the path of greater freedom, greater
opportunity, and greater unity in the face of common challenges. But we
cannot have it both ways.

We cannot, for example, hope to improve and expand government service
delivery if we carry out a wholesale policy of racial transformation that
gets rid of some of the most skilled and experienced members of the Public
Service.

Ons kan mense nie help om in die nuwe Suid-Afrika tuis te voel as die
regering Afrikaans bly aanval en ander inheemse tale eenkant toe skuif nie.
In 1976 het ’n revolusie in Soweto uitgebreek omdat die regering in daardie
stadium kinders in die townships wou dwing om in Afrikaans te leer. Nou,
byna 30 jaar later, probeer die regering skole in Afrikaanssprekende
gemeenskappe dwing om in Engels klas te gee. Ons kan versoening en begrip
nie bevorder as die President se eie woordvoerder, mnr Bheki Khumalo,
Afrikaanse enkelmediumskole as ’n soort instromingsbeheer uit die
apartheidsdae beskryf nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[We cannot help people feel at home in the new South Africa if the
government keeps attacking Afrikaans and pushing other indigenous languages
to one side. In 1976 a revolution broke out in Soweto because the
government at the time was trying to force children in the townships to
study in Afrikaans. Now, nearly 30 years later, the government is trying to
force Afrikaans-speaking communities to teach classes in English. We cannot
promote reconciliation and understanding if the President’s own spokesman,
Mr Bheki Khumalo, describes Afrikaans single-medium schools as a type of
influx control from the apartheid days.] [Interjections.]]

We cannot promote nonracialism if the government tries to classify land and
property by race. It is quite extraordinary that last year, when the
President and his Office correctly drew attention to the debate about the
use of racial profiling for donated blood, there was virtually no debate at
all about the ANC’s use of racial profiling for nearly every other purpose
under the sun – until the Minister of Defence raised it, and he was quickly
shut up.

We cannot build public trust in government by promising houses to people
who live in shacks along the N2 highway, while ignoring the thousands of
families who have spent years on the waiting list. Most of all, we cannot
uphold the Constitution if we allow the ruling party to take control of
every branch of government, every independent state institution and every
space in public life.

We have to choose the one path or the other. If we continue to follow the
ideological obsessions of race and power, we are going to continue to fall
short of the practical goals we have all agreed to for our country’s
progress. That means fewer South Africans will succeed, and more South
Africans will suffer, unless we change our direction.

I believe that the President’s address on Friday was remarkably candid in
one respect. The President admitted that only half – 51% - of his promises
last year were being implemented on time. A quarter of his promises – 28% -
he told Parliament, were not being fulfilled at all.

Now this failure rate cannot simply be blamed on a few lazy government
officials over here or somewhere else. It is what you get when you try to
implement policies that contradict each other. It is what you get if you
put race first and delivery last. It is what you get when you suppress
criticism and reject open debate. [Interjections.]

Indeed, despite some of the very good news that the President shared with
us on Friday, there were a number of key promises from last year that were
broken and which he failed to account for at all in his address, and
perhaps he will do so in his reply. The first one is antiretrovirals. For
two years South Africans have been promised that 53 000 Aids patients would
receive antiretroviral drugs. Yet, as of December 2004, only 20 000 people
were receiving them in public hospitals. Clearly, the government is going
to miss its March deadline once again.

Last year the President promised to increase the capacity of the first
economy to create jobs. But in the first economy we have tens of thousands
of textile workers and tens of thousands of agricultural workers – and
those are the two sectors in the economy that are doing the most job
shedding or are on the eve of the most profound job shedding, and the
government has taken precious few if any steps to deal with that.

With regard to crime, the President also promised to improve safety and
security in our nation’s communities. He said on Friday that 168 of South
Africa’s 200 most wanted criminals had been arrested. Indeed, that is
something to celebrate, and we sincerely hope that the prosecution service
will prosecute and the judiciary will jail each and every one of them. But
168 criminals cannot by themselves account for nearly 20 000 murders, more
than 50 000 rapes and more than one million cases of theft last year. And
the people of South Africa live in fear.

Take one very small community, not far from here, at the University of Cape
Town, an academic community of perhaps 800 people. In the past two weeks,
three members of that community – three – have been murdered. Now, if a
community of 800 people has suffered three murders in the space of two
weeks, how extraordinary is it that other communities in South Africa all
across our country live in similar situations?

Indeed, some of the policies that have been introduced by the government to
fight crime have actually hurt that fight. The haphazard implementation of
the Firearms Control Act and the elimination of the rural commando system
have made it even more difficult for ordinary people to protect themselves
from criminals.

And despite the fact that we learn that on the opening day of school the
government of Mpumalanga has not managed to deliver textbooks to its
learners, and despite the fact that we cannot protect patients in Chris
Hani Baragwanath from hospital-acquired infections, the state has decided
to increase its role across all elements of life and living in South
Africa.

The media, for example, is under constant pressure in this country. The
“SAB By You”, the SABC, has reverted to what it was under apartheid – a
propaganda machine for the ruling party. [Interjections.] [Applause.] Not
content with that, the judiciary is now under attack. Last month the ANC
warned that “the collectivist mindset” of judges had to be transformed, a
statement that the International Bar Association, no less, described as
“misguided and dangerous”. Actually, it is the judiciary’s function to
transform laws of Parliament if they think it appropriate, and not the
other way round – and when it is the other way round you don’t have a
constitution governed by the rule of law. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

South African sport continues to suffer the effects of constant political
pressure and interference - pressures to legislate racial quotas for all
teams. Even leisure time and recreation, it seems, is not free from state
control.
Indeed, on Friday the President spoke about the Freedom Charter. But in
South Africa today there is too much emphasis on the noun and not enough on
the adjective – too many charters, not enough freedom.

It is true that the ruling party, as we will no doubt be reminded dozens of
times during this debate, won a resounding mandate from the voters in last
year’s general election, and good luck to them. But 69% of the vote does
not equal 100% of the people. Nor does it mean that the ruling party is
right 100% of the time – not even Clever Trevor. [Interjections.] Nor does
it mean that the ruling party has 100% of the answers. In fact, many of the
challenges facing our country are problems that the DA warned this
government about a long time ago.

Let me perhaps just give you one small and modest example. At this very
podium 10 years ago when this Parliament, or its predecessor, was debating
the Labour Relations Bill, I stood up here and I asked that we amend that
Bill to allow exemptions for small business from industry-wide collective
bargaining agreements. That’s what I said. [Interjections.] We were shouted
down then as now by the government, and we were told, if you look at the
Hansard, that such exemptions were impossible, that they were conservative
and reactionary.

Now, however, no less an authority than the President of the South African
Republic agrees with us. In an interview on television on Sunday, he said
that the need for exemptions for small business was “obvious”. So what was
obvious 10 years ago is now the received wisdom today, and we say “good”.
But perhaps if we listened 10 years ago, we might have saved a lot of jobs
and we might have grown our economy a little more. [Applause.]

In the year 2000 I travelled to Zimbabwe with some colleagues to meet with
members of civil society and the government there. [Interjections.] When I
returned I sought and was granted a meeting with our own Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Dr Zuma. I said to her then that President Robert Mugabe
was not merely seizing farms, but that he was actually destroying democracy
in his country. Now, on the eve of next month’s parliamentary elections in
Zimbabwe, President Mugabe is resiling from his obligations under SADC; he
refuses to see Cosatu delegations; and international observers are being
turned away. [Interjections.] It is clear that democracy and human rights,
not land, are at the core of the crisis in Zimbabwe and they have been
right from the beginning. [Applause.]

Five years ago I wrote to the President. We had an exchange of
correspondence about the prevalence, the effect and the treatment of HIV
infections, and Aids deaths in South Africa. I said in the year 2000 that
this would continue to rise if we, or he, did not change his denialist
stance, and begin an immediate roll-out of antiretroviral drugs. That was
refused, and tragically the death toll has continued to mount. At least 1,5
million South Africans have already died of Aids, according to the
government’s own estimates. And, according to health experts at Chris Hani
Baragwanath today, there is deliberate underreporting of Aids deaths in
this country. I’m sure the hon Minister of Health will elaborate on that
later today.

When the government announced its plans for racial transformation in the
Public Service, the DA, while accepting change and welcoming it, warned
that many of the best public servants would leave and the poor would suffer
from lack of delivery.

Now, what is in the Budget for this year? There is an amount of
R600 million to hire back many of the same teachers in maths and science
that were retrenched as a consequence of this government’s policy in 1994,
at a cost of more than R1 billion. Once again, the Minister of Defence
complained in Rapport only two weeks ago that only 144 out of 4 200 new
recruits to the SANDF were white.

Many of these unnecessary costs and bad outcomes were entirely predictable
and avoidable. But this government only seems to listen to outside voices
once it has exhausted all other possibilities. It treats criticism from the
likes of Archbishop Tutu as a threat to democracy, when in fact such
criticism is the very lifeblood of democratic discourse. [Interjections.]
It behaves towards its political rivals as if democratic opposition were
illegitimate, unpatriotic and – to use the words of a very senior ANC
member in this House – “treasonous”. [Interjections.] Well, there you are.
You had it confirmed.

Last month in Sudan our President could not bring himself openly to condemn
the Sudanese government’s atrocities in Darfur. Yet he found the courage
and the occasion in the Sudanese parliament to accuse the South African
opposition, thousands of miles away, of conducting a cold war against our
country and government. Perhaps he could elaborate on what he means. How
ironic that our President travels thousands of miles and uses up a great
deal of energy and time in the very worthwhile pursuit of encouraging
foreign governments to interact with their respective oppositions, while
making no effort to do so at home. [Interjections.]

The President told us on Friday that he would soon convene a summit on
corruption to discuss ways of strengthening the government’s anticorruption
structures – to which we can only say “amen”. But the government itself,
under the direct orders of the Presidency, has been the biggest obstacle to
these structures fulfilling their legislated missions.

On Sunday the President revealed that he would appoint a commissioner to
review and oversee the Scorpions. But when the Scorpions were formed in
1999, what did the Minister of Justice say? He said, and I quote:


  There is no intention to tamper with the constitutionally and
  legislatively enshrined functional independence of the National Director
  of Public Prosecutions and the National Prosecuting Authority.

Indeed, the President himself went on to say that the Scorpions would “be a
signal of our commitment” to dealing with crime and corruption. But now
that the Scorpions are doing their job and their sting is a bit closer to
home, we want to take away their sting. [Interjections.]

Parliament as an institution has been disfigured, Madam Speaker, as you
well know, by the ruling party doing everything it can to stall and
intimidate the Scorpions in an attempt to shield its own MPs from a full
and open investigation of the Travelgate scandal. [Interjections.]

And now the disgraced former ANC Chief Whip Tony Yengeni is complaining
that he didn’t get the special private deal – this is what he says – that
he was promised by the Minister for Justice and by the ANC secretary-
general in a meeting at the home of the Minister for Justice of the time.
But, you know, ordinary people, like the travel agents outside or opposite
this parliamentary building, don’t get private meetings with the Minister
for Justice. They don’t get deals brokered by the secretary-general of the
ANC. They simply, or hopefully, get arrested, charged, tried and punished.
And that is what you have to have if we are going to have the rule of law;
if we are going to do what the President says must be done, and that is get
South Africa to work under a proper system. Don’t protect some from justice
which you deny others. [Interjections.]

If we go back over the whole sorry deal of the arms deal, we will see that
the Presidency has continued to suppress any serious probe into that deal.
It has paralysed and subdued the Heath Special Investigating Unit, Scopa,
the Scorpions and the Public Protector, among other institutions.

When opposition parties – and there were several of them – asked if the
report of the Joint Investigating Team, JIT, had been substantially changed
after the Auditor-General showed it to the President, the President accused
us of racism. Yet the evidence has now emerged that the draft JIT report
indeed went through major changes, contrary to what the President and the
Auditor-General said. Clearly, the government believes that there is one
law for itself and another law for everyone else.

The President seemed to confirm that when he pardoned Dr Allan Boesak, who
has never expressed remorse for stealing from the poor or even admitted his
guilt. Let me be very clear on this issue. Obviously and legally and
constitutionally the President of South Africa has the power to pardon
whomsoever he wishes. That is not in dispute. But the President also has a
political responsibility to take the people of South Africa into his
confidence when he does so. Those aren’t my views. They are the views of a
judge of the High Court of the Cape, Justice Davis, who said:

  I’m not saying the President can’t pardon people, and if he wanted to
  pardon Allan Boesak I understand that, but these are debatable questions,
  and they can’t be debated if there’s no openness.
We are left to wonder whether the President is clearing the way for pardons
for other disgraced ANC leaders such as Winnie Madikizela-Mandela.
[Interjections.]

And so, once again, we turn to the fundamental question: What is the state
of our nation? The answer remains: The nation is strong; the state has some
problems. The more the government tries to expand state control and close
down debate, the less it delivers to people and the weaker our democracy
becomes.

South Africa must choose a different path. We should choose smaller
government and bigger individuals and communities. We should choose
empowerment for the many, not for the few. We must choose freedom and
opportunity, not state power and total control. Those are the choices that
the DA stands for. For freedom must always be a higher value than power.

I am not afraid, nor is my party, of being called names, of being labelled,
or of being in the political minority for a while longer. [Interjections.]
Some of us in the DA were in the political minority when the white
community of South Africa in a 1983 referendum chose to exclude black
people from the constitutional future of this country. And some of us – we
were only 34% then – said “no”. That 34% that said no then, has turned out
to be 100% right over time. [Applause.] So, we will continue to stand for
what we believe in. We will continue to promote that vision of an open
opportunity society that is uniquely South African and founded on freedom.
We will continue to defend the Constitution. We will continue to reject the
politics of co-option and capitulation that has turned so many other
parties in this House into mere relics. I thank you, Madam Speaker.
[Applause.] [Time expired.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, Mr
President, Mr Deputy President and hon members of this House, what a rage
and a rave, just to declare that it is comfortable to be a minority.
[Laughter.]

In 1955, at Kliptown, the Congress of the People declared: “The people
shall govern.” The Freedom Charter asserted that:

  Every man and woman will have the right to vote for and to stand as a
  candidate for all bodies that make laws;
  All people will be entitled to take part in the administration of the
  country;
  The rights of the people shall be the same, regardless of race, colour or
  sex;


  All bodies of minority rule, advisory boards, councils and authorities
  will be replaced by democratic organs of self-government.


Five decades later it is appropriate to reflect on our progress in terms of
realising the society we set out to achieve at Kliptown. Today, I will
limit myself to the point that all people will be entitled to take part in
the administration of the country. This single sentence conveys a wealth of
meaning and touches on a great many issues that are critical for our
programme of administrative reforms. Firstly, taking part in the
administration begins with the citizens’ privilege and duty to take part in
the process of electing a representative government.

This duly elected government then has the responsibility to govern, to make
decisions and to allocate resources on behalf of the people. In situations
where direct representation is not practical, it is only such a government
that enjoys the legitimacy to act on behalf of the population as a whole.
However, elected representatives, be they councillors, members of
provincial legislatures or members of Parliament, have a duty to keep in
touch with those they represent.

Although the mandate of representation is formally renewed every five
years, the system of representation is built on the assumption of a healthy
relationship of communication between the citizen and public
representatives.

Tweedens, dit moet vir elke burger, wat aan die vereistes van ’n vakante
pos voldoen, moontlik wees om oorweeg te word vir ’n pos in die
Staatsdiens. Die Staatsdiens in sy geheel moet soos die bevolking van Suid-
Afrika lyk, en nie soos party mense wens dit moet lyk nie. Ons het dit op
uiters goeie gesag, beide in die teorie en praktyk, maar selfs ook
polities, dat dit essensieel is dat ons hierdie ideaal moet bereik, en
gegewe ons geskiedenis is dit noodsaaklik om op regstellende aksie staat te
maak om hierdie posisie te bereik. Ons gaan nie teruggedwing word daarop
nie.

Die vroue van Suid-Afrika moet oppas, hulle wil ons terugstoot. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Secondly, it should be possible for every citizen who meets the
requirements of a vacant position, to be considered for a position
in
the Public Service. The Public Service in its entirety should
resemble
South Africa’s population, and not look the way some people would
wish
it to. We have it on very good authority, both in theory and in
practice, but also politically, that it is essential for us to reach
this
objective, and given our history it is necessary to rely on
affirmative
action to achieve this position. We will not be forced back on this.

The women of South Africa must watch out, they want to push us back.
[Applause.]]

The ANC elaborated on how it saw affirmative action unfolding in order to
achieve this, and I quote:

  We do not support giving positions to unqualified people simply on the
  grounds of race or gender. What we will insist on, however, is that
  hundreds of thousands of highly merit-worthy persons who have been
  unjustifiably kept out of jobs, denied advancement in their careers and
  excluded from training, be given their due. Those who have been kept back
  by apartheid education, and by sexist assumptions, should be given
  special backing to catch up. The rich life experiences, knowledge of
  languages and cultural diversity of those previously discriminated
  against should be seen as enriching the contribution of individual South
  Africans.

Thirdly, it is the needs of the people that give direction to what the
administration does. In other words, the administration should respond to
the needs of the population and take on board the input and feedback from
the grass roots. This is captured in the values and principles in Chapter
10 of our Constitution as well, and in our Vision 2014 the ANC calls for
the delivery of “compassionate government services to the people”. This
embodies our Batho Pele approach - mense eerste, people first - that
includes not only responsiveness, but also transparency, accessibility, and
accountability.

In the fourth instance, administration should be participatory and
consultative in decision-making. But more than that, implementation should
happen in partnership, where appropriate, and information should be shared
on a wide scale. Monitoring and evaluation should not be a narrow,
technical, or a secretive undertaking, it should be done in collaboration
with communities. This will result in a dense pattern of interaction
between government and the people, which, in turn, will contribute to a
more responsive government. It will allow us to work in an empowering way,
recognising the value of knowledge of ordinary people as opposed to narrow
expert knowledge.

In die finale instansie, ten spyte van al die permanensie en tegniese
kundigheid wat in die administrasie opgesluit is, kan die amptenary nie ’n
mag op hulle eie wees nie. Amptenare bly verantwoordbaar aan die mense van
hierdie land en aan hulle verkose verteenwoordigers. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)


[In the final instance, in spite of all the permanence and technical

know how inherent in the administration, the officialdom cannot be a

force on its own. Officials remain answerable to the people of this
country and their elected representatives.]

Here there exists a strong oversight role for Parliament and its
institutions. This does not negate the traditional role of the executive
and the interface between people’s representatives and the administration.

Democratic systems are based on a system of carefully balanced and
institutionalised rights and obligations. When many institutionalised
channels exist for citizens to make themselves heard in the system, one
would not expect to see behaviour that registers itself at the upper ends
of repertoires of violent and disruptive behaviour. When honest feedback
and accurate evidence are valued in a system, one would not expect
disinformation and smear campaigns.

All this and more was implied by one little subclause in the Freedom
Charter: All shall have the right to participate in the administration.

Let me demonstrate how we give meaning to these values by reflecting on
some aspects of the government’s programme of action in the governance and
administration cluster. The community development worker is an excellent
example of ensuring a responsive administrative system that will result in
an empowered citizenry. These workers will strengthen the bond between
people and government. They will perform at the interface between
administration, across political representatives and the people – and they
are important carriers of information and messages in different directions:
from the people to the respective administrations to unblock implementation
delays; between the different spheres of government and different sectors
to improve co-ordination and bring about integrated administration; from
government to the people to inform them of different opportunities and
government services available, and how to access these; and from people and
administrations to the political representatives to flag the need for
decisions and actions at a political level.

More than 500 of these cadres have been trained and they have been deployed
since the beginning of the year. We have established a relationship with
India, and at the end of February an initial group of 30 community
development workers will go for training in India. Members will know that
India is renowned for its successful approaches to community development
work and we hope that rural communities in particular will greatly benefit
from this international skills transfer.

In the short period that they have been operational, the community
development workers in Gauteng could already report to me on a substantial
body of successful interventions. This include examples with regard to
social development, such as the development of food gardens in Kathlehong,
Diepsloot, Thokoza, Lanseria and so forth; health issues, such as
facilitating access to health facilities, with cases ranging from a person
suffering from leprosy to rape and assault victims and so on; and housing,
such as solving problems with regard to access to housing finance,
obtaining title deeds, explaining local authority actions to residents
where removals take place from dilapidated buildings that constitute health
threats and fire dangers, and so on.

The same goes for education-related matters, economic development issues
and transport issues with respect to learners, the aged, access to extended
public work employment programmes, and so on.

It is necessary for us to say why the President saw the need for this
special cadre and then announced it. This was done in order to avoid the
kind of heartbreaking story we saw in City Press, where 77-year-old
wheelchair bound Susan Magome’s pension was suspended after officials
insisted that she had to physically report to Home Affairs to verify that
she was actually still alive. A community development worker goes into the
home and acts as the link between the Home Affairs officials and the
person.

The effort that we have made to create a representative administration,
through setting employment equity targets, is another example of how we
translate the values of the Freedom Charter into reality.

Our goal, to create a representative democracy, we heard today once again,
is not shared by all, and recently has been criticised from unexpected
quarters. I want to refer to President Mandela’s closing address on the
state of the nation in February 1999, when he said, and I quote:

  The progress that we have started to make in all sectors of government
  will not be sustainable, if we do not consistently and systematically
  change the composition of the Public Service.

It is therefore completely predictable that skilled cadres who dedicate
themselves to this government, its vision and programme of action, will be
approached to fill positions in the public sector. As long as due process
is followed, our position on this matter is completely defensible.
[Interjections.]

Our Batho Pele policy remains the backbone to give effect to the notion of
citizen-centred administration. The most recent Batho Pele action
programme, approved by Cabinet, makes provision for a mix of quick wins,
medium-term and long-term strategies. These range from e-government to
educating citizens about their rights in relation to public services, to
performing against the set of Batho Pele relevant indicators compulsory for
senior managers and other public servants.

So, notwithstanding our efforts to create administrative machinery in which
all our people take part, the output of the machinery is often still
lacking, both qualitatively and materially.

Capacity limitations are persistent obstacles to better and more extensive
service delivery. The extremely negative impact of weak capacity is more
severe, because the developmental state needs particularly strong capacity
to execute its mandate; strong capacity to co-ordinate at the centre of
government; strong capacity to regulate service delivery where we opt for
indirect service delivery channels; and strong capacity to render services
directly to the public, such as education and health.

With regard to the latter, the President already announced that in key
sectors we are boosting the number of officials, while at the same time,
hopefully, also addressing issues of motivation and commitment by improving
on the remuneration packages of professionals such as educators health and
police officials. We further intend strengthening the human resource
planning function in the public sector to prevent further problems
downstream in terms of supplying, in the future, the capacity needs of the
Public Service.

The SA Management Development Institute has been gearing up to play a much
more meaningful role in terms of public sector training. A number of
international relations that will result in high-level expertise
development have been established and/or rekindled. Among these are our
relations with India and Brazil, to mention but a few.

Later this year we also intend introducing a system of sustainable
recruitment pools of fast-tracked individuals at middle management level in
the Public Service.

An aspect not entirely separate from capacity, but which to a degree is
much more invidious to deal with is the issue of ethos; this includes the
so-called softer issues of attitude, value orientation and culture.

Obviously, those of us who care, including political office holders, public
servants, community members and the media and so forth, should work
together to identify officials who do not do us proud, so that the system
can deal with them, either by emphasising retraining and orientation, or by
instituting disciplinary procedures. The power of example should not be
further underestimated.

The izimbizo has turned out to be a powerful mechanism in identifying
problematic officials and the follow-up to revelations by community members
can be further improved. Through constituency work and general
accessibility, people’s representatives are bombarded with anecdotes and
substantial evidence. The challenge is how to deal with all the feedback
that we receive in a systematic and prompt way, and we are looking at
dealing with it.

Now I want to emphatically quell an idea that I heard the hon Leon voice
last week - and we have heard him regurgitate it today - at a meeting at
the Friedrich Naumann Foundation, and that was rehashed in The Citizen
yesterday. This is the idea that we need to bring private sector solutions
to public sector problems. If the hon Tony Leon had bothered to familiarise
himself with the most recent international scholarship on public sector
reform before he tried to pass himself off as some sort of expert, he would
have known that a strong consensus is emerging that one of the biggest
mistakes that was committed in public sector reform is to do exactly what
he is proposing. [Interjections.] That is to ignore the unique attributes
of working in the public sphere and trying, in an uncritical manner, to
transfer private sector solutions to the public domain. [Interjections.]

Mr Leon, it is not that simplistic. It is not about one path or another,
because this is a reflection of your myopia. [Interjections.] And if the
public has heard your howling over this past period they will realise that
you are just a disgrace. [Interjections.] For this purpose today, I will
quote some statements from literature, and if you are interested, I can
supply you with the entire reading list.

In 1998 the UNDP concluded that market-based approaches, otherwise known
under the label of “new public management” in the literature, constitutes a
limited vision of public service reform, in that it tends to focus on short-
term cost containment measures, aimed primarily at payment and employment
systems.

The 2001 World Public Sector Report, published by the UN, states that:

  On the administrative side, new public management and reinventing
  government have been effective tools in improving the efficiency of the
  public sector and in reducing costs. However, notwithstanding some of the
  positive results derived from these reforms, the retreat of the state in
  social areas like health care, education and housing, has been
  detrimental for many developing countries.


Henry Mintzberg, one of the leading critics of new public management,
declares that business can learn from government no less than government
can learn from business. [Interjections.] And while privatisation is to
some extent “probably useful”, a “good deal of it is just plain silly”.

However, the final moisture on hon Leon’s gunpowder must come from David
Osborne and Ted Gaebler, two of the originators and strongest advocates of
new public management. They declare that those who advocate privatisation
on ideological grounds, as he does, because they fundamentally believe that
business is always superior to government –

  ... are selling the American people snake oil. Business does some things
  better than government, but government does some things better than
  business.


[Applause.] [Interjections.]

Allow me to use this latter statement to point to the double standard meted
out to government. Mr Leon earlier, in his input - and you can check the
Hansard - spoke about the steps that government should have taken in the
textile sector. Just earlier than that he said that government should do
very little or nothing. [Interjections.] But yesterday Die Burger reported,
based on an SABC-Markinor survey, that the vast majority of 3 500
respondents in its service gave government a very bad report for not
creating jobs.

However, the prevailing liberal economic wisdom says that job creation
should be left to the market or private sector, and that public sector job
creation should not be allowed. So, what do they really want? What does he
really want? [Interjections.]

Earlier he had the audacity to misinform the public from this podium when
he claimed that we fired educators in maths and science. Did he not
understand the VSP and the packages that were taken? [Interjections.] This
is the Leader of the Opposition! Shame on you! [Applause.] This is what we
see. So, as government we accept that our flanks are exposed either way …
[Interjections.] … while we operate in a globalised environment where the
most powerful uncritically embrace a fundamentally liberal agenda. We shall
not be driven by that, because for us, going back to the Freedom Charter,
we say that the people shall govern. [Interjections.]

For us the developmental state is important, and we will implement the
developmental state! [Interjections.] And, Mr Leon, with all your snipes,
you will not succeed. That is why you are still the minority. [Applause.]

Dr M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Chairperson, Your Excellencies the President and
Deputy President and hon members, as we enter the second decade of our
freedom, I think we must pause to consider what has been left undone over
the 10 years. We must do so from the perspective of the poor and not the
rich.

Over the past decade we have achieved greatly and vastly. We rightly take
pride in what we have delivered to our country, to our democracy and our
people. Nonetheless there have been major policy failures as well. We must
now have the courage, the wisdom and the political maturity to recognise
and address them.

The rate of our delivery and achievement is rapidly decreasing. There are
fears that our democracy and government may fall prey to the law of
diminishing returns, with the same rate of efforts producing and delivering
increasingly less.
I was very proud of the President’s admission of the situation when he said
in his address, and I quote:

  ... that the democratic state will not walk away from its obligation to
  come to the aid of the poor, bearing in mind available resources.


Commitments were made which were not kept and we need to address both
deficiencies at the heart of government, which are likely to impair further
progress, as well as policy indecision and lack of political will. For 10
years promises have been made about employment generation. Yet we must be
honest and acknowledge that not enough has been achieved to free our people
from the enslavement of unemployment. For in the past 10 years unemployment
has increased dramatically. Even when we look at what we have achieved in
the past 10 months through our Expanded Public Works Programme - the
President announced that to date we have spent over R1,5 billion and
created over 76 000 job opportunities - we have made modest progress. But
looked at against the background of more that 40% unemployment, this is
hardly a drop in the ocean. It is clear therefore that investments are the
only answer to this intractable problem of joblessness.

Years ago, the pledge was made to look at the negative effect of some of
our existing labour legislation. I was still in the President’s Cabinet
then, and we decided to do this and to introduce much-needed greater
flexibility in the labour market. This pledge was not kept.

We need to put at least one million of our people to work in the
agricultural field through the green revolution, which I have often called
for in this House from this podium. We need this today, not tomorrow.

There are some things that we need to do ourselves. Throughout the country
much of our land is underutilised for low-added-value, nonlabour-intensive
but land-intensive produce and products. Yet, throughout the world there is
an increasing demand for high-added-value agricultural products, generated
on the basis of labour-intensive but not land-intensive agricultural
practices.

Our government should brand, promote and market South African produce
around the world in the same way as Spain, Italy and California have done
with theirs. This should not only include our wines but also our grapes and
our spices, our tropical fruits and nuts, our olive oil and our canned
vegetables to be produced through our green revolution. We should not
import wheat or avocados, as we currently do, but should rather become the
quality vegetable, spice and fruit emporium of the world. I believe this
can and must be done.

Our government must invest to promote an industrial base for South Africa
so that our people can be employed in the long term. This should be
premised on a plan which identifies today, and not tomorrow, the products
and services that South Africa will produce in the next 30 years for the
global markets. I have called for this plan on many prior occasions, but it
has not materialised. I fear that there is not enough awareness of the
catastrophic effect of this lack of a long-term plan capable of developing
a competitive industrial, high technological and scientific base for our
country. We know that such long-term planning has been central to the
success of other thriving developing states.

We must be able to compete internationally. Our government has pushed the
agenda of international aid and assistance, which is commendable, I must
say, but has neglected the domestic agenda of long-term productivity,
competitiveness and economic growth, which is deplorable both in itself and
a symptom of a mindset that we must overcome.

Many years ago it was promised that we would bring about extensive
privatisation. After Cosatu and the SACP halted this programme, our
government is still holding numerous public enterprises which have little
or nothing to do with its business of government. They managed to
intimidate us with slogans such as, “Asiyifuni Gear, Asiyifuni Gear”! [We
don’t want Gear.] [Laughter.] As always we, the taxpayers, will end up
footing the bill for the mismanagement of many companies and enterprises
which are not core business of government.

In the few instances in which some privatisation has taken place, often it
had not been coupled with returning the relevant assets to the dynamics of
a free market, thereby changing public monopolies into private ones. This
is the case with Telkom, for instance, which compels us all to suffer some
of the highest costs for telecommunications in the world.

I am concerned about the increasing centralisation of government which
seems to reflect a pernicious pattern we have witnessed throughout out
continent. This is the overweening tendency to concentrate everything at
the centre, even though there are provincial and local institutions. The
centre is then allowed to collapse with nothing remaining to promote
progress and development.

At present, our provinces are not working as they should because they are
not provided with the autonomy that they require. The national government
has not empowered provinces but has tried to centralise all the decision-
making. The consequences of this are likely to be disastrous if projected
into the next 10 to 20 years.

I am concerned about the growing corruption within the levels of
government. We openly state that the situation is out of control and with
this awareness we ought to be dealing with the problem accordingly. Looting
is taking place in local government, provincial government, across all
political parties and within the national government. Denying that
corruption is out of control compounds rather than solves the problem. I
know that the President announced in his address that within three months a
summit on corruption will be convened to review expenses across all sectors
of society.

Tender procedures are not respected or are being complied with in a
perfunctory manner, often after the contractor has already been selected on
the grounds of politics or patronage. Our meritorious policy of black
economic empowerment has become a tool for the enrichment of a few and not
the upliftment of the many. The empowerment of us as black people has been
transformed into a hidden requirement of doing business only with those
with the right political connections. Black empowerment is not about
enriching those with political connections but rather broadening the
economic base of our country, particularly to benefit those who have no
political connections.

Politics and business must be separated. Instead, we witness an
irresistible tendency to merge everything in a concentration of power which
no longer differentiates between the state, the ruling party and the
economic sector. We are replacing the features of a pluralistic and open
society, which we committed ourselves to bring forth in South Africa, with
those of an oligarchy resonating with some of the worst characteristics of
certain East European countries.

Our country has fallen far behind in its efforts to uplift our people from
the bonds of ignorance, for lack of education exposure and knowledge. The
massive training efforts we promoted in the past few years have not yielded
appreciable results. We are spending 1% of our national payroll and every
one of us is contributing to such effort through our salaries. In spite of
the vast moneys spent, there is still very little to show for it. We must
therefore promote a massive campaign to train our people by means of a
generalised culture of training, education, information and awareness. Each
organ of state should carry such a responsibility. Individuals should take
it upon themselves to spend time educating and uplifting others.

Human growth is contingent on the spread of knowledge and awareness. We
cannot allocate too many resources to this effort. Our country has
allocated one of the highest percentages of the budget, compared to
anywhere else in the world, to education. Yet, it seems to be woefully
inadequate in bridging the gap between the low levels of knowledge,
information and awareness endemically present within our society, with
those which are required of a competitive people operating in the global
markets of the 21st century. We will not succeed unless we become a
knowledge-based society.

We have promised to lift exchange controls to enable a greater flow of
investments into our country but we have not done so. This is in spite of
it being clear that exchange controls are no longer required to protect the
international competitiveness of the rand. Exchange controls are now only
protecting those who have money in South Africa and who want to prevent
foreigners from investing here by displacing their economic position
through competition. This is despite the fact that competition and
additional capital inflow will create massive additional employment.

Again, it seems that our government is more concerned with enriching those
who are already enriched rather than broadening the economic base and
bringing into the fold of wealth a larger number of people while providing
much-needed job opportunities. So we must have the courage to look at what
is going wrong in South Africa so that we can all make it right.

For too long we have been entrapped in a syndrome of denial, a debilitating
syndrome that runs across many sectors of government and political circles.
This is so especially in respect of unemployment, corruption, poverty and
ignorance, and crime. We must accept that crime is out of control and we
are losing the war against it because of a lack of political will. I
applaud what His Excellency the President announced as far as the salaries
of police officials are concerned and as far as getting more police on the
streets.

We are even experiencing the resurgence of political violence, Your
Excellency, especially in KwaZulu-Natal. I again wish to compliment the
President for his honesty in admitting in his address that although there
was some improvement in combating crime, the level of crime, especially
violent incidents, remained unacceptable. He said that while he stood here.

As I have stated in this House, in each response I have made to the
President’s state of the nation address, I find the breakdown in our
criminal justice system a cause for despair. In the province of KwaZulu-
Natal, we are still living with political violence. On 13 July 2004 a group
of people attacked the house of the mayor of the Zululand municipal
district, Miss Zanele Magwaza in Ulundi. One of the assailants was killed
and one of Miss Magwaza’s security operatives was injured and hospitalised.
Yet, nothing has happened since.

This week we mourn the death of the mayor of Imbabazane municipality near
Estcourt, Mr Sipho Bhengu, who was assassinated. He will be buried on
Saturday. Last Saturday we buried one of our IFP youth leaders in the
Osuthu area, Mr Sithende Mbatha. We see the same pattern, Your Excellency,
that emerged during the assassination of the mayor of Nongoma, Joseph
Sikhonde, where names of prominent people including MECs and members of the
legislature were mentioned. If nothing is done soon, I fear that we will
soon have the same unfortunate pattern of political violence which led to
the revenge violence and pre-emptive attacks. We will soon find ourselves
in the same low-intensity civil war that cost so many thousands of lives.

On 12 December 2004, at the end of the Ukweshwama ceremony, the ceremony of
first fruits, at the king’s Enyonkeni palace, I was given an opportunity by
His Majesty to say a few words. Among other things I deplored the fact that
there were well-known assassins that were seen within the bounds of the
royal court. They included Mr Sputla Mpungose who had two others with him,
and also Mr Nkalankala Zungu.

We have a serious situation in Ulundi, Your Excellency, where these men,
who are a hit squad, are residing in the KwaZulu-Natal legislative assembly
flats. No one knows how they came to be there. There are about 15 of them
and they are armed with all sorts of arms, according to the information I
have. I therefore objected to their presence at the king’s palace, in view
of the fact that one Mr Nkuna defamed our king during the trial of suspects
in the murder of the mayor of Nongoma. We do not want a repeat performance
of that kind. Mr Sputla Mpungose, Your Excellency, comes from my area, the
Buthelezi area. He boasts that he was taken out of jail, where he faced 22
charges, without being tried. The question I ask is: Who got him out of
jail? As I speak he is facing a charge of rape. Yet he is all over the
place, carrying guns and is accompanied by armed men.

I wrote to the Deputy President calling for a presidential commission of
inquiry to determine why political crimes are not usually met with
prosecution, trials and convictions. I urge the government unequivocally to
take a public stance against all forms of political violence, especially in
KwaZulu-Natal, by mounting a real campaign against this type of crime, in
the same way we have done in respect of other crimes such as violence
against women and children. If government fails to do so, the existing
perception of impunity will continue to flourish among perpetrators, if not
the belief that crimes of this nature are not that displeasing to those who
are in power. I am not suggesting that those who are in power are involved
in such crimes, but they must not allow the perception to develop among the
perpetrators that they condone them, that they may meet them with impunity
or even silently approve of them. We can no longer deny the existence of
these problems. Too many people have suffered and died because of denial.

The big failure which stands out like a sore thumb in the mindset of all
that we have achieved in the first decade of democracy is our failure to
address the issue of the complete obliteration of the powers and functions
of traditional authorities by the Municipal Structures Act and other
legislation in our rural areas. This is beginning to compound the problem
of lawlessness in rural areas. Traditional leaders are being stripped of
whatever authority they exercised before either as peace officers or their
authority to preside over indigenous courts.

In KwaZulu-Natal the premier is willing to discuss these issues, Your
Excellency, with the representatives of the traditional leaders and members
of the Zulu Royal House. However, the MEC concerned has stated that he has
to meet deadlines and is impatient, and cannot be seen to be behind other
MECs in other provinces. In this way, traditional leaders are denied the
opportunity of making any input to the provincial legislation on the
Traditional Framework and Governance Bill. The MEC does not consult with
traditional leaders and this worsens existing tensions. The legislation
that is now before the legislature compels traditional leaders to be
members of municipal councils, something national legislation passed by
this House does not do. Traditional authorities are stripped of any
administrative powers.

The year 2005 must be the year in which denial stops, especially in
relation to HIV and Aids. Self-delusion must not replace denial. Failure
with regard to HIV/Aids remains the black hole at the centre of our public
policy. It is time for an honest and unqualified critique of government
policies over the past 10 years. Unless this House begins to exercise its
oversight role with regard to public policy we are not going to gain the
necessary momentum to do what is required of us to stop the genocide of our
people. This is true in every policy sphere as well as HIV and Aids.

Because the state is stripping traditional authorities of any finance for
administrative purposes, we as traditional leaders cannot even participate
in the war against HIV and Aids. Three years ago, we as traditional leaders
of the province invited the national Minister of Health, the hon Dr
Tshabalala-Msimang, and the then MEC for Health in KwaZulu-Natal, the hon
Dr Mkhize. We launched teams for each regional authority to manage and
prevent HIV/Aids infections. We have not done a thing, Your Excellency. And
now that the state, under the new legislation, is not going to provide
traditional authorities with budget, we are being denied an opportunity to
make our own contribution in combating the pandemic, which is highest in
the province of KwaZulu-Natal. Uganda reduced the pandemic by using,
amongst other things, their indigenous mores. As traditional leaders we are
the custodians of these mores.

More people have died and suffered in our country because of HIV and Aids
than those who have lost their lives to the recent tsunami. Many such
people who have died unnecessarily were not only victims of the disease
itself but also of inadequate government policies, lack of awareness and
lack of assistance at community level and within their families. It is not
enough for us to do as much as other countries do, for our problems are
greater than theirs. So we are compelled therefore to walk that extra mile.

It is now time to turn the page of history on HIV and Aids and it is time
to do this together, without discord and division. When the history of the
past 10 years and the next 10 years of our freedom and democracy is finally
written, many of our other achievements will be obliterated by the failures
in the field of HIV and Aids. We will be judged at the bar of history by
what we have done or what we have failed to do to win the war against HIV
and Aids.

The past 10 years have seen the progressive disintegration of traditional
leadership brought about by a myriad of government actions, laws, policies
and initiatives. In spite of the many promises that His Excellency the
President made in this House and elsewhere - that traditional leadership
would be preserved and that their powers and functions would not be
obliterated - traditional leadership has been inflicted by a thousand cuts.

I often remember something that our icon, His Excellency former President
Mandela used to say. President Mandela used to refer to himself as the de
jure President, and pointed to then Deputy President Mbeki as the de facto
President, who in fact chaired almost all meetings of Cabinet – I was in
the Cabinet and I don’t need anyone to tell me. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.] To a great extent he managed the state itself. As the de
facto or de jure President of South Africa for the past 10 years, our
President stands the risk of being remembered by history as having presided
over the destruction of the institution of traditional leadership,
traditions and customs which have been with the majority of South Africans
since time immemorial and were to some extent respected even by
colonialism. [Interjections.] I said, “he stands the risk”. You must
understand English. [Laughter.]

I hope that in the remainder of his term of office, our President may
reverse the status of affairs and change the impending judgment of history
in this and other respects. Dlamini! Mzizi! [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: Hon members, a comfort break has been asked for.
Accordingly, we will adjourn for 10 minutes and the bells will be rung
after 10 minutes.

BUSINESS SUSPENDED AT 15:24 AND RESUMED AT 15:34.

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, Your
Excellency President Thabo Mbeki, hon Deputy President Jacob Zuma and hon
members, in his exposition of the state of the nation the President put
forward the hypothesis that we, the people of South Africa, now live in an
age of better prospects. You reminded us of the generation of democrats
who, 50 years ago, identified the denial of democracy as posing a strategic
challenge, a challenge that needed to be met frontally. In the form of the
Freedom Charter they postulated a future, which in many respects has since
become the lived experience of our generation. When they said the people
shall govern they gave us a perspective which keeps nudging us to the
finish line.

In designing the new system of local government, care was taken to ensure
that we put in place a framework for progressively doing away with the
consequences of a system which exposed white and black South Africans to
vastly different socio-economic environments.

We knew that the conditions of high segregation had translated directly
into economic disadvantage and structural deprivation for the majority of
our people. The legacy of that system is the key conditioning variable for
some of the problems which persist to this day. For instance, we still have
a relatively higher concentration of poverty in the geographic spaces which
were historically designated as native reserves. It is in those areas where
we find a pernicious interaction between high poverty rates and the paucity
of skills that are critical to good governance and effective
administration.

Mr President, as you said on Friday last week, in the first eight years we
have allocated to the local government sphere a quantum of resources which
is proportionately higher than allocations which were made before. Needless
to say, on current macroeconomic trends there is a distinct possibility for
those allocations to increase even further. The continuing challenge we
face, therefore, is one of ensuring that all municipalities develop the
requisite capacity to translate those resources into instruments with which
to confront problems of poverty and underdevelopment.

The challenge was brought into bold relief by the feedback we received as
we interacted with our people through izimbizo, as well as in the period
leading to the 2004 provincial and national elections. These interactions
offered us the opportunity to approach the problems of unattained targets
through introspection.

Those municipalities which have substantially high levels of service
delivery and infrastructure backlogs are now receiving systematic support
which is rendered in terms of project consolidate. It is the combination of
this support and the expansionary budget allocated to municipalities which
offers the material for acceleration.

The two-year engagement programme is aimed at getting national and
provincial governments, together with key partners and stakeholders outside
government, to find new creative, practical and impact-oriented modes of
supporting local government. The intervention must make a positive impact
on the way we meet such challenges as public participation, programme
management as well as creating conditions for sustainable service delivery
and economic development.

One of the aims of project consolidate is to increase local government
capacity for strategic planning. The capacity of our municipalities to
prepare good integrated development plans remains uneven. Key observations
in this regard are that 37% of municipalities in the country have the
capacity to prepare effective IDPs, these municipalities have mainstreamed
IDPs as part of their core business; thirty-five percent of municipalities
have the basic institutional capacity in place but require support to
prepare effective IDPs and implement them, these municipalities still have
to take full ownership of the IDP process; and twenty-eight percent of
municipalities still do not have basic institutional capacity in place and
are struggling to prepare effective IDPs.

It needs to be said, though, that the overall picture is one in which there
is growing local ownership of the IDP process and the local government
sphere is asserting itself more and more as a locus of strategic planning
for sustainable development.

We seek to deepen this process by conducting nationwide IDP public
hearings, starting in April and ending in June this year. This exercise
will help us become more intimately familiar with the needs and priorities
of local communities. It will also help to bring provincial and local
priorities into synergy with national objectives.

The IDP public hearings, together with the ongoing work which we do in the
context of the ward committees, will enhance the quality of public
participation in matters of governance. Not only does this broad
mobilisation give effect to the vision of the Freedom Charter, but it also
creates the space for innovations which are of local inspiration.

As you indicated, Mr President, in the recent period we have witnessed
substantial growth in the establishment of ward committees. At least five
of our provinces, namely Gauteng, Limpopo the North West, the Northern Cape
and the Free State have achieved a 100% establishment rate. [Applause.] The
overall rate was, however, brought down by the fact that for a while in
KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape provinces there existed a strategic
balance which did not favour transformational advances. [Interjections.]
Happily the situation has changed for the better and the communities in
those provinces now also have the possibility of enjoying institutional
interaction with their government.

The challenge we seek to meet over the next two years under the banner of
project consolidate is to sustain the positive trends and work towards a
100% national establishment rate and, more importantly, to improve the
functional capabilities of all our ward committees. To this end we intend
to hold a national conference on ward committees in March this year.
The aim of the conference is to look at the ward committees and to generate
ideas which will help enhance their functional capabilities. The ward
committees must not be seen as entities whose usefulness is only to the
local government sphere. Other spheres of government should increasingly
utilise ward committees as channels for providing information to
communities about public services, programmes and development
possibilities.

The emerging cadre of community development workers will also work in close
collaboration with the ward committees. These ward committees should
therefore be seen for what they truly are, a cord which keeps the whole
system of government articulated to local communities.

Hon members, as we were reminded on Friday, this is the 50th anniversary of
the Freedom Charter. The Freedom Charter encapsulates a vision of freedoms
which we sought to bring to fruition when we conceived legislation on local
government. That legislation was not adopted without acrimonious debates.
It was even challenged in the Constitutional Court. Clearly, debates
between us and those who stand in strategic opposition to the intent of
local government
legislation are not just in-house exchanges between democrats.

There is no doubt that we proceed from different sets of philosophical
assumptions, as well as theoretical and practical commitments. You see this
in the leader of the most embittered minority party who takes perverse
delight in accentuating the as yet unaccomplished targets. [Interjections.]
He seeks to project these unaccomplished targets as proof of the
nonviability of our policies and the system which is founded on those
policies. No thinking can be more jaundiced than that. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

He and his ilk specialise in standing the truth on its head. When we
restore the dignity of the institution of traditional leadership, they
allege that we are destroying the institution. We stand committed to
integrating the Freedom Charter’s implications into our thinking about
current challenges, and we have a plan which accounts for the progressive
improvements that are already in evidence. Like our forebears, who pledged
to fight side by side for the attainment of the goals which are contained
in the Freedom Charter, we chose a future rather than no future.

We shall spare no effort in order to advance our country towards our chosen
destination. We shall not be diverted by those who have chosen to sit
whinging on the sidelines. They are frustrated by any sign of progress.
When progress happens, it invokes in them the phantom pain caused by the
loss of the seductive illusion of superiority. [Applause.] We need to make
this message clear to them, that the past is gone forever and that they
must forget about returning to it.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Chairperson, President, Deputy President and hon members,
allow me this opportunity to propose some answers to the questions raised
by the President in his state of the nation address.
The foremost question facing the nation remains this: How can we create
enough jobs? Indeed the figures mentioned by the President are impressive
at first glance, such as the fact that 76 000 job opportunities have been
created to date under the Expanded Public Works Programme. However, these
job opportunities constitute a mere drop that will not quench the nation’s
massive thirst for employment.

The UDM has, from this podium, called for a state-led growth strategy for
many years now. We therefore fully support the Expanded Public Works
Programme. We repeat: All governments throughout the world are investing in
their economies on a daily basis. We humbly suggest that current efforts
should merely be the first step in a comprehensive state-led growth
strategy.

One of the first considerations when building new infrastructure should be
to ensure that it is maintained. This protects the taxpayers’ investment in
the economy and turns a short-term job opportunity into a longer-term job.

The question of the success of infrastructure development can only be
answered with better co-ordination and integration of resources. Billions
here and billions there are spread across various spheres and levels of
government. However, it seems that there is very little co-ordination.

Given the lack of skills and capacity within government, as well as the
shortage of professionals such as quantity surveyors and architects to
monitor the infrastructure development programmes, it would make sense  to
bring all infrastructure programmes under the auspices of the Department of
Public Works.

Why, for instance, should the building of schools fall under the Department
of Education? The result of these dispersed funding and construction
initiatives is that the quality and quantity of projects differ from
location to location. It is simply unnecessary and unfair that two
different communities with the same need for a school will receive two
widely differing buildings, even though they are both constructed by
government using the same source of funding.

Standardising the design and construction of schools, clinics and the like
would remove this inequality, speed up delivery and improve government’s
ability to monitor the quality of the product being provided to the
community.

Given the lack of expertise and the exodus of such expertise to the private
sector, there is a serious gap in the government’s ability to monitor
infrastructure development programmes. Government should seriously consider
entering into pacts, regionally or provincially, with professional
companies of architects and quantity surveyors with a view to seconding
their services to monitor the construction of infrastructure.
Another step towards answering the question of jobs is further to expand
the state-led growth strategy by investing in new strategic industries. In
the past in this country and many others, and currently in some of the most
successful economies, governments have been at the forefront of developing
new industries.

In South Africa, Sasol, Eskom and Iscor, which was sold to foreigners some
time last year or two years ago, were pioneered by government to introduce
new economic drivers and to create jobs. Some would say that such state-led
growth strategies run contrary to the so-called internationally accepted
economic practices.

There are astounding contradictions in the lectures that the developed
world give us about how we should run our economy. We should not be so
quick to accept as gospel their advice. For instance, two years ago, when I
visited Beijing, hon Kader, I was surprised to find that large corporate
representatives from the developed world, such as General Motors and many
others, were operating businesses in partnership with the Chinese
government, which holds the majority shares in these ventures in trust for
its citizens.

This is ample demonstration of the fallacy of allowing others to dictate to
us. State-led growth has been the answer in the past and should be the
answer to our present job-creation needs. That is the advice that I would
like to leave you with, Mr President.

On the topic of other developing countries that outstrip us in terms of
economic stability, growing GDP and low interest rates – we need to comment
on this - one has to wonder what sort of economic model we are following,
given the high interest rates that hamper our economic growth and make our
currency volatile.

Another contradiction regarding the economic model we are following is that
capital accumulation by rural South Africans still suffers from a lack of
recognition by government. Many rural people are making significant capital
investments in rural areas by building upscale residences. However, lacking
a proper legal mechanism recognising individual property rights in these
areas, their investments go unrecorded, unrecognised and unrewarded. Their
expenditure is not recognised as fixed capital formation, to the detriment
not only of the national accounts in the calculation of GDP, but, worse
still, of the value of the investment, which is lost to the investor.
Unlike fixed property investments in other areas in this country, rural
investors cannot utilise their investments as collateral or even list them
as an asset in their personal balance sheet. Thus they are deprived of the
fruits of their own savings.

Adding insult to injury, government still insists upon taxing such rural
properties. There can be no taxation without the recognition of these
people’s property rights. Legal recognition of individual or fixed
properties is now long overdue.

Kwedini Kader, uzimamele ezi zinto ndizithethayo? [Kwahlekwa.]
[Young man Kader, are you listening to what I’m saying?] [Laughter.]]

Chairperson, as the President said in his speech, there is a seeming
lack of performance by the Public Service. I would submit that this lack of
performance is the result of confusion or overlapping of roles between
politicians and their administrators. Some politicians
have the habit of using political directives where decisions should
actually be made by administrators. This is a danger to the morale of the
Public Service and may also encourage corruption.

There are a lot of examples of MECs, Ministers and even councillors who
behave as if they are accounting officers, whilst people employed to do
critical jobs such as directors-general are forced to take a back seat.
There is a tendency for crucial administrative decisions to be made by such
politicians. You often hear people say: “If you want that job or contract,
go and speak to the Minister or to councillor so-and-so.”

The blame for failures with regard to service delivery, therefore, often
lies with the interference by politicians and not the public servants
alone. At times these political directives have recommended people for
certain jobs when they are not competent for those positions. Patronage
inevitably comes at the cost of service delivery.

The public’s complaints regarding nepotism in the Public Service remain
widespread. I am certain that these observations are not news to the House.
They have been noted in the media and also by the Auditor-General.

In the same vein, we have taken note of the pending report of the directors-
general assessing the state of the Public Service. However, I suggest that
it would be important that the executive should also revisit the report of
the Presidential Review Commission report. It might prove that it is not
necessary to reinvent the wheel, and that many weaknesses and overlaps have
already been identified and remedies proposed.

Another major question facing the nation is … [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Mr Chair, Your Excellency the President of the Republic,
Your Excellency the Deputy President, Ministers, colleagues, ladies and
gentlemen, emerging from our celebrations to mark a decade of democracy, it
will be remiss on our part to ignore why we are where we are, especially in
order to make choices for the future that will and must impact on us. As a
result of this, I shall totally disregard what the Leader of the Opposition
has said.

Mr President, in your opening remarks last Friday, you made reference to
the preamble of our country’s Constitution. In seeking to unbundle this
declaration, one is seized with aspects of our current reality. Can we
really belong, when only our bodies are here and our hearts are somewhere
else? Can we belong when we deliberately detach ourselves from the
aspirations of the vast majority of our poverty-stricken people?

The new circumstances that you talk of, Sir, are not only for a strategic
opportunity, as far as I am concerned, but offer us the opportunity for a
revolutionary option.

Somehow my faith in human beings compels me to believe that most of us,
black and white, are repelled by the vulgarities of violence and poverty.
Most of us have within us the power, the force and even the principle of
life that animate us. Most of us are and can be characterised by some
activity, quality or disposition which altogether for me is the force of
our spiritual selves.

This, read together with the principle of ubuntu, “I am because you are”,
and the Gandhian trinity of reverence for life, the force of truth and the
welfare of all, for me is the basis of life. This is an ethic which demands
of us a vigorous call to action. We must refuse to nourish violence,
despair and poverty by becoming victims of a culture of silence,
acquiescence and indifference on the one hand, and choosing the state of
unfreedom on the other. Why else would we have rejected the culture of
violence and the culture of war to resolve our conflicts and differences? I
believe because it was morally correct and in keeping with the spirit of
ubuntu.

There are those deviants who sought and in some ways continue to derail our
democratic project. We as South Africans are on the path towards our goal
of making South Africa livable for all who live in it. We cannot and must
not merely mouth the principle that South Africa belongs to all who live in
it, black and white. The Freedom Charter offers us, without any dogma, the
scope for this ethic to be a lived reality. Let us live together. Because
the question remains - and this is a challenge to all of us, but especially
to you Mr Leon - who among us here, in this Assembly and outside, as an
article of faith, touch the lives of others to ensure that we make a better
life for all? How many of us have entered into covenants and united action
against strife, distrust, poverty, acrimony and racial hatred, or do all of
those who do not belong to the ANC wait for the ANC to do it alone?

Of course the ANC does not only assume the responsibility, but it is
entrusted with the responsibility and the duty to lead the processes and
projects to make a better life for all. This was our commitment in 1955
when we adopted the Freedom Charter, which remained our guide and which
today is manifest in our temporal Constitution.

With a moment’s reflection, successive colonial and apartheid constitutions
began with the words, “In the name of God and the Almighty”. I make bold to
say that nothing in them that pertained to black people was godly or
spiritual. The Group Areas Act, forced removals, and a litany of other
measures were in essence ungodly and far removed from anything spiritual.
Without being self-righteous or judgmental of any religious faith system,
it is my conviction – and I invite others to dialogue this – that our
country’s Constitution, which is rooted in the Freedom Charter, presents a
spirituality devoid of divisive rituals and dogma as a guiding institution.
It is my belief that the Freedom Charter demands a service to South Africa
and the rest of humanity as a primary faith, which must lead to the
emotional and psychological integration of us as a nation. And this will
undo the ominous perversions of a kind of self-consciousness that made
whites “as chosen by God to be the gods of black people”.

This service to South Africa will give an extraordinary content to the gift
of ubuntu to the world; to Jesus’s Sermon on the Mount; to the tenets of
sharing and caring of the Qur’an; to the universal Hindu ethos of
“vaisadeva kutumbakan”, that the world is only one family; and to the life
and works of St Francis of Assisi, who implored God to make him an
instrument of His justice, His peace and His love, but never forgetting
that his first call as a human being was to serve and care for other human
beings, who in his case were lepers in a lepers’ colony.

Adherence to and implementation of the Freedom Charter, Mr President, gives
us the opportunity to establish a new spirituality and hopefully in some
small way becoming the culture bed of all that is best in the human
experience.

I wish to emphasise what many of us have maintained for decades, that
charting a new, fresh course, a road map for all South Africans away from
apartheid to transform our country, offers South Africans the scope to
develop a new attitude, a new philosophy, a new faith, a new and lived
spirituality, which will lead to a new society and which will transcend
racial differences and be at peace with itself. And as fellow believers and
activists, will be able to excite a national consciousness, which is
fundamentally necessary for national cohesion, with a deep humanitarian
underpinning, without which there can be no nation-building.

We in the ANC invite not only the opposition parties, but the judges, the
NGOs, the business community, the trade union movements, students and
others to reflect on this. Enter into a covenant with each other as South
Africans, to help create and reinforce the impetus for an ethical
consciousness, the vision of the Freedom Charter, that is possible to be
lived, thus becoming walking symbols and creative instruments to make South
Africa livable for all who live in it.

In conclusion, Mr President, allow me to borrow from a discourse held at
the University of Natal in the 1980s on the culture of the Freedom Charter.
It was and remains my historical privilege to reiterate that sectarianism,
no matter by whom it is practised, always militates against the liberation
of the human race. In order to counter the fanaticism of the proponents of
apartheid, it is equally imperative that adherence to the principles of
national unity and a national consciousness do not fall foul of their own
shortsightedness. The Freedom Charter guards against this by its commitment
to transforming our existing reality, a transformation decided upon by
understanding the concrete realities of our country.

Finally, I daresay that charterists exudes faith and trust in people to
transform our society into one in which it would be easier to love, which
in turn will mean our liberation from hate and suspicion. The central theme
and concern is to rehumanise our society, conscious of the incompleteness,
Mr Leon, of the life’s oppressed. Charterists present the possibility to
struggle to restore their own affronted humanity and to make possible
conditions whereby the oppressor, too, will recover his own lost humanity.

The Freedom Charter offers every conscious South African, cutting across
political barriers, the opportunity to come together, to engage in the
processes and programmes, to liberate ourselves from poverty, disease,
hunger, homelessness, racial prejudice and hate. This in turn can and will
lead us to a kind of spiritualism, a unity in action towards a truly
liberated South Africa.

Mr President, I think I shall be remiss and failing in my duty if I did not
to say something else. I take advantage of the opportunity here to pay
tribute to Phoenix settlement, which was brutalised in 1985. The sentiments
expressed here would not have been possible without the dialogue and deeds
of people from various backgrounds and cultures, but who were committed to
share and take responsibility: the Bikos and the Pityanas, the Patons and
the Nanasitas, the communist Rick Turners and hardheaded businessmen, the
Jinabhais and the Mxenges and the Matabeses, the Boraines and the
Skweyiyas, the normal Middletons and the Buthelezis, and scores of others.
With regard to ideas and work, we incubated together at Phoenix settlement.
This is why I believe, Mr President, when you officially reinaugurated the
settlement, you did not hesitate to say that Phoenix belongs to you, it
belongs to me, it belongs to our children, and it belongs to all the
children yet to come, so “cherish it and take care of it”.

I want to extend this sentiment and say in equal fashion that South Africa
belongs to you, it belongs to me, it belongs to our children, and it
belongs to all the children yet to come. Let us all cherish it and look
after it. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, Hon President and Hon Deputy President, I want
to start by congratulating the President on the frankness and openness in
his state of the nation address. I shall try to be equally honest and frank
in my assessment of the nation.

We have inherited a deeply divided country with the advent of democracy ten
years ago, a country that had systematically excluded the majority of South
Africans. Given this history, nobody can deny the need for transformation
in South Africa, and our criticism of government must be seen in the light
that we are pushing an agenda of transformation.
For us in the ID transformation must achieve a balance of equity in
society, and in order to achieve this, we must focus on diversity and give
opportunities to everyone. For some, transformation has become a process in
terms of which politically connected individuals are able to get the lion’s
share of government contracts. The continuing controversy over the Big Bay
land sale and the Telkom share deal, to name but a few, do not help in
countering this perception. For the majority of South Africans, though, who
live in abject poverty without much hope for the future, the concept of
transformation is still a pipe dream.

The ID believes that transformation is a positive concept that must be
embraced by all South Africans. We need to address these negative
perceptions, and in some cases realities, so that all South Africans can
willingly become part of the process of transforming our society. We must
manage transformation and the transition to generate hope and meaning. If
our people do not have the necessary hope and meaning, they will become
hopeless and defensive.

For us transformation is not just a numbers game. Transformation is about
moving from a society where the majority of South Africans were excluded to
one in which all South Africans are included. In this process we will have
to debate certain important issues such as race in an open, sober and
direct manner.

This debate is so important, because we use the terms “black” and “African”
so interchangeably that it has given rise to so many conflicting
interpretations. First and foremost, we are all South Africans and
thereafter, by choice, those who so wish can define themselves further by
their appearance. This confusion excludes many fellow South Africans who
legitimately qualify to benefit from transformation. We cannot allow
transformation to be seen as an exclusive process, rather than one in terms
of which every South African is given the means, opportunity and resources
to achieve their full potential.

The transformation of our society begins with our children. Their hopes and
attitudes are shaping our country’s new consciousness. Unfortunately, we
are failing the children of South Africa. Ninety-five out of every 1000
children in South Africa do not live beyond their fifth birthday. HIV and
many other preventable conditions cause most of these deaths.

Section 28 of the Constitution guarantees children certain second-
generation human rights, but while the drafters of the Constitution
prioritised these rights, we are not seeing the same prioritisation when it
comes to government departments. The current Children’s Bill must provide
for a national policy framework that will ensure that the rights of
children are prioritised in each of our government departments.

Added to this must be the political will to provide sufficient financial
resources to achieve these goals. Currently there are more than a million
children of school-going age who do not attend school and last year we
actually saw the number of enrolments drop. We are moving backwards on
education. We simply cannot compromise on the education of our children.
The ID will work with the government in identifying those missing million
children. We have already established an Access to Education Fund that has
assisted more than 450 children to realise their constitutional right.
Ultimately, the education system must be geared towards delivering the
skills needed by the economy.

People living with disabilities also need to be given a greater stake in
our inclusive society. We strongly object to the manner in which
empowerment scorecards have eroded the weighting given to people living
with disabilities. Giving opportunities to people with disabilities starts
at a very early age. It is a cause of great concern that thousands of these
children are excluded from education because of their disabilities.

According to the Medical Research Council, 5,6 million people were HIV-
positive in 2003. Ten percent or 560 000 of these HIV-positive people need
antiretrovirals. The MRC further found that approximately 1000 people die
of HIV-related illnesses every day. The Aids tsunami in our country is
killing more people than the tsunami on Boxing Day.

Mr President, we can only escape the tsunami of HIV/Aids if we can scale
the cliffs of survival through a properly planned and implemented national
antiretroviral programme, but a complete lack of compassion, empathy and
leadership is, however, holding us back. Added to this is the ignorant and
arrogant attitude of the petty bureaucracy and their failure to apply
resources.

The red tape of bureaucracy is strangling those people who want to advance
the cause of treatment and care, including the international community.
There is no nutritional support at clinics, so it will help if those who
advocate nutritional support take some of their own advice. Mr President,
if you go to the clinic in Crossroads today, you will find no nutritional
support.

The tsunami of Aids is upon us and we cannot wait for six months’ supply of
antiretrovirals before we start implementation. The moment to act is now.

Building an inclusive nation also means bridging the economic divides in
our society. Research has shown that the informal economy in South Africa
only accounts for 15% of our economy, which is way below Latin America and
other African countries. Adding to our high unemployment rate are the
significant barriers preventing people in the informal economy from earning
a livelihood. We have to free up this sector of the economy and provide
greater government support in the form of credit and skills transfer.

Parliament must, as a matter of urgency, amend and remove all existing laws
that are preventing growth in the informal sector. Too much emphasis has
been placed on foreign direct investment. We certainly need foreign direct
investment to grow the economy and to increase domestic demand, but too
little emphasis is placed on local direct investment.

Local businesses got away with economic murder and so many are continuing
to do business as usual. Instead, many of the big corporates were allowed
to take their money to London and New York. This will ultimately militate
heavily against South Africa for a long time to come.

The greatest poverty is still found in the rural areas in South Africa.
Cities have developed sprawling informal settlements, because people
migrate to cities to find employment. Government must prioritise rural
development by dedicating more resources to land reform and agricultural
support, particularly subsistence farmers who seem to have been forgotten.

In many of these rural areas, development is severely hamstrung by in-
fights between spheres of government. We believe that more resources must
be given to the implementation of the Communal Land Rights Bill so that
tenure issues can finally be resolved and development can proceed. The ID
hopes that the Intergovernmental Management Framework Bill will address
some of these bottlenecks.

Mr President, I agree with you that the Public Service is not delivering.
Some public servants are doing excellent work and they must be encouraged
and congratulated. But I am sick and tired of hearing about a lack of
capacity. I think it has become just another excuse for inefficiency and
incompetence. These useless public servants do not just embarrass the
government; they embarrass all of us in this House. Ultimately, the
relevant Ministers must take the blame for sheltering those uncaring and
lazy public servants. It is a case of setting the right example, and your
work ethic, Mr President, has shown Ministers and all public servants how
they should be working.

Finally, the ID does not accept the excuse that we do not have enough
resources to address poverty. The reasons we dispute this excuse of lack of
resources are the following: We have collected extra billions of rands in
tax revenue for two consecutive financial years. We have received local and
foreign aid of R7,1 billion, and in-kind donations of R46 billion. We have
several roll-over budgets every year. The Umsobomvu Youth Fund received
R236 million. We have a Job Creation Trust. We have also seen irregular,
unauthorised, fruitless and wasteful expenditure of R142,1 billion.

We do have the resources but we do not have our priorities right. Poverty
eradication, Mr President, must become priority number one. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs Z A KOTA: Chairperson, I have noted that the DA leader, hon Tony Leon,
has suddenly remembered that there is a waiting list for housing. That is
something his party did not do anything about when they were in power in
this province. [Interjections.] I want to caution the DA that housing is a
bread-and-butter issue and should not be turned into a political football.
[Interjections.]

Chairperson, President, Deputy President, Ministers, comrades, colleagues
and honoured guests, I feel humbled by being afforded this opportunity to
speak in this important debate on behalf of my province. I’d like to
dedicate my speech in celebrating the life of Comrade Joe Slovo, the first
Minister of Housing, who has been away from us for ten years now. This
debate marks another milestone in the history of South Africa. As we enter
the second decade of freedom, we are cognisant of the fact that the
Constitution of our country requires each department to reflect on its
mandate and account accordingly. I have no doubt in my mind that the
national Department of Housing has a track record of leading the pack in
that regard. Let us remind ourselves that it has delivered 1,7 million
houses in the first decade of freedom. This work has been undertaken with
vigour, ability and lots of energy by the Minister of Housing, Comrade
Lindiwe Sisulu.

On behalf of my committee I would like to congratulate the Minister for
successfully hosting the African Ministerial Conference on Housing and
Urban Development in Durban and also on her election … [Applause.] … as the
first chairperson of AMCHUD for the next two years. I also congratulate the
Minister on the launch of the N2 Gateway yesterday and the awarding of the
contract to the Sombambisana Consortium.

This year we celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter, a
visionary document adopted in Kliptown in 1955 that defines dignified human
settlement as part of its declarations. The Charter talks of a society in
which all people have a right to live anywhere they choose and where they
will be housed decently. It is for that reason that we applaud the
turnaround strategy of the Department of Housing, whose vision is the
implementation of a comprehensive plan. The critical aspect of the plan is
the element of sustainable human settlement in which the building of houses
must be about building communities, and this can only be realised if the
integrated development plan is in place and all the departments are
committed to working together if this comprehensive plan is to become a
reality.

It is about time that a scorecard is introduced to measure the
participation of various departments in the IDP process, as we have seen
the failure of this process in Alexandra. I do know that an
intergovernmental Bill will be put in place soon, but in addition to that,
we need a balanced scorecard to gauge the participation of departments in
the IDP. I do know, Comrade Minister, that project consolidate will also
assist in this regard.

In each area where houses are being built there should be clinics, water
and sanitation, electricity, roads, schools, police stations and spaces
demarcated for leisure. The building of houses should be about the creation
of jobs and the economic empowerment of emerging and women contractors. The
importance of the Expanded Public Works Programme in the building of houses
is very critical. What we have seen is of great concern, despite the
billions of rands spent by our government on the building of houses.

No credible emerging contractors have emerged in this process. There are a
number of reasons for this scenario. Firstly, there is the absence of an
incubator process to assist them during the delivery process. Secondly,
there is a delay in the payment of contractors by municipalities, which
drives contractors into bankruptcy and away from the industry. The ANC is
concerned about this and we think that it needs attention.

The vision of the Department of Housing and its implementation of the
comprehensive plan consists of the following elements: Accelerated delivery
as a poverty alleviation strategy, job creation, asset creation, promotion
of social cohesion, a single residential property market, sustainable human
settlement, and leveraging economic growth. The comprehensive human
settlement plan takes the process of the provision of houses to greater
heights. Many projects have been launched in the provinces to fast-track
housing delivery.

The following projects have been identified as pilot projects for informal
settlement upgrading: In Mpumalanga, Emsamgweni in Emalahleni municipality
and also Thandukukhanya in Mkhondo municipality; in Limpopo, the Phomolong
project in the Mokgopong municipality; in Gauteng, Winnie Mandela in
Ekurhuleni municipality; in the Northern Cape, Leratong Park in Kimberley;
in the Western Cape, the N2 Gateway; in the Free State, Grassland in
Mangaung-Bloemfontein; in KwaZulu-Natal, Mount Moriah in Ethekwini; in the
North West, Klerksdorp in Kosh Municipality and Rustenburg; and in the
Eastern Cape, Duncan Village in Buffalo City.

It is critical at this point to mention the firm foundation laid by the
late MEC, Comrade Dumisani Makhaye, who passionately championed for the
slum clearing project at Ethekwini municipality, which began in 2001.
[Applause.] As a result of this, in 2003 the Institute of Housing SA voted
Ethekwini municipality as the KwaZulu-Natal local authority of the year.

In Gauteng we are anxiously awaiting the development of the Cosmos City,
which is aimed at integrating communities to begin to address the issue of
spatial development. In Gauteng housing delivery is forever moving at a
fast pace under the leadership of Nomvula Mokonyane. I have no doubt in my
mind that this will be a successful project.

Chairperson, allow me to look at the Western Cape scenario and see to what
extent the province and the municipalities are meeting this challenge. When
we discuss the Western Cape it is important to reflect on the history of
this province. These people did not allow Africans to own houses.
[Interjections.] They could only do so through the 99-year lease. When the
government came into power, the City of Cape Town was confronted with six
different waiting lists from six municipalities, each with different
allocation policies. The challenge for the City of Cape Town is to develop
a single database in order to address the housing backlog efficiently,
which includes the backyards. At present the City of Cape Town’s rental
housing backlog stands at 37 000. So far only a thousand people can be
accommodated each year.

It is also important to note that this is the province where people were
forcefully removed from District Six some 40 years ago. Ten years later the
forced removals from Sophiatown took place. We are very proud of the fact
that the N2 Gateway, which is a national pilot project, includes this
historic area. This project will be of benefit to the province and all
those who are residing along the N2, including a quota of the backyards.
The areas included are District Six, Joe Slovo, Barcelona, New Rest,
Gxagxa, Boys Town and Kanana. We are happy that this project involves the
three spheres of government. I hope that the N2 Gateway will be a catalyst
in fast-tracking the delivery of houses to District Six and Ndabeni
claimants. I know that the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs is
responsible for those projects, but I am appealing that the red tape be cut
so that those dreams can be realised sooner rather than later.

There has been a lot of success as far as housing delivery in the Western
Cape is concerned. In the City of Cape Town a lot of progress has been made
in the hostel redevelopment programme. The programme has been recognised at
national level to the extent that the then Minister of Housing made
specific mention of the approach followed by the Western Cape as a model
for hostel redevelopment. The programme is also featured in the case study
done by the Department of Housing. The study concludes by stating that this
precedent could be usefully applied to 600 000 hostel beds countrywide.

Zikwakho ke nezindlu ezakhiwe nge-PHP. Phaya eVictoria Mxenge abantu
bazakhela ngokwabo izindlu yaye zinkulu. Zikho nezakhiwe eHeyns Park,
eMontwood, eMfuleni nasePelican Park. Kukwakho neMalibongwe Project
enoomama baseGugulethu, abaseNyanga nabaseGrassy Park abazakhela izindlu
ezintle kakhulu. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[There are houses being built under the PHP. People in Victoria Mxenge are
building their own houses that are fairly huge. Houses are also being built
in Heyns Park, Montwood, Mfuleni and Pelican Park. There is also the
Malibongwe project that involves women from Gugulethu, Nyanga and Grassy
Park.]

We hope that the Malibongwe project can be replicated because of its
nonracial nature. Our government is committed to the integration of our
communities. Houses are built in the innercity, as shown by the housing
development project in Maitland.

In Nomzamo Lwandle a PHP project, managed through Asla, have built 1 400
houses. There are also houses being built in Wesbank, Delft, Dunoon and
other places in the province. More houses are to be built in Wallacedene,
where 2 800 sites have been cleared for the building of homes. In Kewtown
and Red Hill City land has been identified for the building of houses.

Despite these successes there are some challenges. One of them is the
outstanding issue of Hout Bay. This matter is being addressed by the
national Department of Housing and the province.

In Worcester 700 homes have been built recently. In Mbekweni 15 blocked
projects have been unblocked. During a committee visit to Stellenbosch in
January this year we were briefed on the progress made in housing delivery,
including the conversion of hostels to homes. What was also of great
significance is that there is a concerted effort by this municipality to
ensure local economic development in Khayamnandi. This is central to
sustainable human settlement.

We urge other municipalities to follow this route because it is important
to build local economies. We know that there are housing challenges facing
our people in places such as Ceres, Oudtshoorn, Clanwilliam, Lamberts Bay
and in many other areas. The province and the relevant municipalities are
attending to these matters, but the Portfolio Committee on Housing will
continue to follow up on these matters.

We want our communities out there to realise that the housing backlog
cannot be resolved overnight. The government has a plan but we need each
and every one to participate in this process. That is why members of
Parliament are urged to go from door to door and to talk to our
communities, and make them understand the challenges that we are facing and
the kind of measures that we are taking to resolve them. [Applause.] It
serves no purpose to talk and howl in this House. It is important that you
go to the communities and explain what the government is doing. It is about
time that you move out of your comfortable chairs and go into the
communities. In the spirit of amaVolontiya we will be going to those
communities and ensure that we speak to them and engage them, so that we
can solve those problems together.

Allow me, Chairperson, to thank the Chief Whip, Comrade Goniwe, for the
kind of leadership and support given to communities affected by the fires
in the province. [Applause.] A celebratory mood prevailed in Langa on
Sunday. Allow me also to extend a word of thanks to fellow South Africans,
from business to members of the community, for their support to Joe Slovo
during its hour of need. We want to thank the City of Cape Town, and Social
Development, Education and Home Affairs for their responses, including the
leadership of the ANC. [Applause.] Last but not least we want to thank the
ministers of religion and community leaders for their guidance and support,
and also for the successful prayer service held on 6 February, during which
the Methodist Church in Langa donated R26 000 to the Joe Slovo community.
[Applause.] We also wish to thank Reverend Qangiso and Reverend Stemela for
the co-ordination of that service.

Mandivale ngokucaphula intetho katata uWana awayinika phaya estediyamu.
Amalungu awayekho kwaLanga aya kuyikhumbula le ntetho. Equkumbela intetho
yakhe wathi ubulela uSodolophu namalungu ePalamente ngoba oko wafika eKapa
ngo-1937 akazange ambone urhulumente okhathalele abantu njengalo
Rhulumente. Watsho ebongoza abantu ukuba bamxhase uRhulumente, ngakumbi
uSodolophu, kwimizamo yokusombulula ingxaki yezindlu.

Ndiyangqina ukuba lo msebenzi awulula kodwa xa sibambene ngezandla akukho
nanye into enokusahlula. Siyamthembisa uMphathiswa ukuba amalungu
ePalamente aza kuhambela umzi nomzi phaya kweziya zindlu ziku-N2,
encedisana nalo Rhulumente, ecacisela abantu ngokuba olu phuhliso
lolwabantu. Lwenzelwe abantu bethu.

Ndibulela uMphathiswa uMarthinus van Schalkwyk ngokuthiya izikhephe
ezithile ngamagama kaLillian Ngoyi, Victoria Mxenge noSara Baartman.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Let me conclude by referring to Mr Wana’s speech, which he delivered at
the stadium. Members who were at Langa stadium will remember this speech.
He said he was grateful to the mayor and the members of Parliament because
ever since he had arrived in Cape Town in 1937 he had never seen a
government that cared for its people like this one. He pleaded with the
people to support the government, and more especially the mayor in her
efforts to solve the problems of housing.

I agree that this toil is hard, but there is nothing that will beat us if
we are together. We promise the Minister that members of Parliament will
visit every household in the N2 gateway, to help government by explaining
that this development belongs to the people.

I thank the hon Marthinus van Schalkwyk for naming some ships after the
late Lillian Ngoyi, Victoria Mxenge and Sara Baartman. [Applause.]]

Adv A H GAUM: Chair, we have serious problems - Aids, high crime levels,
unemployment and poverty. We can sulk about them or we can do something
about them. President Mbeki is clearly tackling our challenges one by one,
and has achieved a lot. We agree with the President that the very central
achievement has been our success in advancing our country away from its
divided past towards a realisation of perhaps the most important
declaration of the Freedom Charter, namely that “South Africa belongs to
all who live in it, black and white”.

Hierdie rigtingwyser van ons land word deur ons Grondwet beaam:


  Ons, die mense van Suid-Afrika … glo dat Suid-Afrika behoort aan almal
  wat daarin woon, verenig in ons verskeidenheid.

Die President se verbintenis daartoe om hierdie grondslag van ons land
verder te versterk verdien ons almal se ondersteuning.

Laat ons eerlik wees: 10 jaar gelede het Suid-Afrikaanse minderheidsgroepe
min vertroue in die toekoms van Suid-Afrika gehad. Hulle het om
braaivleisvure voorspel dat Suid-Afrika kort voor lank die pad van ander
onsuksesvolle Afrikalande sou loop en dat ons ekonomie gouer eerder as
later sou knak.

Dit is jammer dat die doemprofete van toe nou so stil is. Suid-Afrikaners
uit minderheidsgemeenskappe, en by name Afrikaners, behoort groter
erkenning te gee aan wat die Regering bereik het, groter erkenning aan
president Mbeki se reuserol in die nuwe ontwaking van ons land. Pleks
daarvan om vir partye soos die DA se goedkoop anti-Mbeki-Zimbabwe te val,
behoort minderheidsgemeenskappe en veral Afrikaners wat Suid-Afrika se
infrastruktuur help opbou het, erkenning te gee aan ’n president wat die
argitek is van die ekonomiese wonder van Suid-Afrika. Dis die werklikheid.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This direction indicator of our country is confirmed by our Constitution:

      We, the people of South Africa… believe that South Africa belongs to
      all who live in it, united in our diversity.

The President’s commitment to further strengthen this underlying principle
of our country deserves the support of all of us.

Let us be honest: 10 years ago South African minority groups had little
confidence in the future of South Africa. They predicted around barbeque
fires that South Africa would shortly move in the same direction as other
unsuccessful African countries and that our economy would collapse sooner
rather than later.

It is a pity that the prophets of doom of that time are so quiet now. South
Africans from minority communities, namely Afrikaners, should give greater
recognition to what the Government has achieved, greater recognition to
President Mbeki’s huge role in the new awakening of our country. Instead of
falling for the cheap anti-Mbeki-Zimbabwe talk of parties like the DA,
minority communities, and especially Afrikaners who helped to build South
Africa’s infrastructure, should give recognition to a president who is the
architect of the economic wonder of South Africa. This is the reality.
[Applause.]]

We are experiencing unknown economic prosperity, reduced inflation and the
lowest interest rates in more than 20 years, and a decade of uninterrupted
economic growth. We compete effectively in global markets and we have
almost doubled our manufactured exports. Many South Africans, ironically
whites in particular, have to acknowledge that they are living a more
prosperous life under this government than ever before. [Applause.]

While the rest of the world regarded Africa as a headache and did not want
to touch it, one man had a vision of an African Renaissance. President
Mbeki understood that the wellbeing of our land depends on the wellbeing of
Africa and its peoples. [Interjections.] Maybe the vision of a vibrant
democratic Africa will not realise overnight, but as we have more and more
democratic elections throughout the continent, the curtain is slowly but
surely closing on old Africa and opening on a new Africa that will soon
have its presence felt around the globe; a new Africa that will be a
tribute to our visionary President, who is always on the forefront of
brokering peace across the continent and of creating an atmosphere for
democratic change. [Applause.]

A great problem of our time is the worldwide increasing levels of
intolerance, which is a growing threat to peace. As an international
example of tolerance and reconciliation, we have a lot to share with the
rest of the world. We should therefore also make sure that we keep our own
house in order by fostering our unity in diversity.

Daar moet egter reg aan albei hierdie begrippe geskied. Daar kan geen
eenheid wees as verskeidenheid nie erken word nie, geen verskeidenheid as
eenheid in gedrang kom nie. In ’n Suid-Afrika wat ’n voorbeeld van
verdraagsaamheid wil bly, moet hierdie begrippe in diens van mekaar staan.
Juis daarom was planne om godsdiens uit ons skole te weer onaanvaarbaar en
was dit goed dat ons ’n oplossing kon bereik wat verdraagsaamheid en
daardeur eenheid gedien het, maar nie verskeidenheid ondergrawe het nie.

’n Goeie voorbeeld van versoening en eenheid in verskeidenheid is ons
nasionale lied wat ons Vrydag weer gehoor het. Hierdie lied met sy twee
dele wat saamsmelt tot ’n eenheid het, soos ons landsvlag, wat alle aspekte
van ons verlede reflekteer, en ’n naam soos KwaZulu-Natal, wye aanvaarding
gevind. Ons behoort steeds ook in die toekoms deur wat ons doen, ook deur
die name wat ons gee, op tasbare en sigbare wyse eenheid in verskeidenheid
te skep, versoenend te werk te gaan, nie verdelend nie. In die geval van
byvoorbeeld Pretoria verwelkom ons dit dat ’n versoenende opsie gevolg is
deurdat die stadsnaam Pretoria bly en die metropool die naam Tshwane kry.

Die kwessie van taalverskeidenheid word soms onsensitief en ideologies
gehanteer. ’n Mens het groot begrip vir die emosie waarmee taal in ons
geskiedenis gepaard gegaan het. Die geskiedenis moet egter vir ons as les
dien en behoort ons juis te waarsku om omsigtig met taalkwessies om te gaan
sodat eenheid in verskeidenheid, nie konflik omdat verskeidenheid
gekniehalter word nie, ons voorland is.

Wanneer dit byvoorbeeld kom by die taalbeleid van skole moet dit omsigtig
gehanteer word. Taalverskeidenheid behoort ook binne skoolverband
ooreenkomstig ons Grondwet bevorder te word. Waarom is dit dat ’n mens
nooit van ’n Engelse instelling hoor wat gevra word om sy taalbeleid aan te
pas of wat daarvan beskuldig word dat dit eksklusief en uitsluitend is nie?
As sake só gehanteer word dat mense ter wille van taal die hof moet besoek,
flikker die rooi ligte. As taal aan die ander kant ’n instrument word om
mense uit te sluit ís dit onbillike diskriminasie. Die Burger sê tereg ras
mag nooit ’n faktor wees nie. As dit ’n faktor is, moet ons dit meedoënloos
beveg.

Dit is egter ook taaldiskriminasie om onregverdiglik teen ’n bepaalde taal
te diskrimineer, om mense van ’n onwilligheid om te transformeer te
beskuldig sodra hulle hul taal wil handhaaf. Dit is net so verkeerd as
mense die taalkwessie as rookskerm vir inherente rassisme gebruik, wat ook
gebeur. Ter wille van verdraagsaamheid, van eenheid in verskeidenheid,
behoort daar as ’n saak van nasionale belang na die hantering en
akkommodering van taal in ons land, veral in ons onderwysinstellings, by
name ons skole, gekyk te word.

Die navorsing oor taaldemografie en dinamika wat die President genoem het,
kan met vrug in so ’n ondersoek aangewend word. Dit het tyd geword dat ons
10 gemarginaliseerde amptelike Afrikatale hulle regmatige plek in ons land
inneem sodat daar inhoud gegee kan word aan ons grondwetlike taalregte en
aan die Freedom Charter wat verklaar dat, “All people shall have the right
to use their own languages”.

Talle onderwysprobleme soos swak geletterdheids- en syfervaardighede hou
regstreeks verband met die gebrek aan moedertaalonderwys in ons skole. By
baie skole dring ouers tot nadeel van hulle kinders aan op onderwys in
Engels terwyl hulle en hul kinders tuis ander tale soos Afrikaans, Xhosa,
Zoeloe of ander tale praat. Talle kinders ontvang onderwys in hulle tweede
of derde taal, te wete Engels, deur onderwysers wat daardie onderwys in
húlle tweede of derde taal verskaf. Dit terwyl die jongste in ’n reeks
bevindings sê dat leerlinge wat nie tuis aan dieselfde taal blootgestel
word as die een waarin hulle onderrig ontvang nie, die gevaar loop om nie
hulle akademiese potensiaal te bereik nie. Is dit dan vir ons enigsins
snaaks dat ons kinders nie goed kan lees, skryf of reken nie?

Dit is van kardinale belang, mnr die President, dat ons die skoolbouprogram
versnel soos u aangekondig het. Ons is ook baie bly dat ons onderwysers
beter betaal gaan word, maar ons sal ook die moedertaalkwessie binne-in die
klaskamer moet aanspreek as ons merkwaardige vordering wil maak. ’n
Provinsie soos die Wes-Kaap het ’n onderwystaalmodel op advies van
taalkenners soos Neville Alexander aanvaar wat moedertaalgebaseerde
tweetalige onderwys in die eerste ses jaar van ’n kind se skoolloopbaan
ondersteun, wat ouers wil aanmoedig om hulle kinders vir
moedertaalgebaseerde onderwys in te skryf en wat die aanleer van ’n derde
taal in laerskole bevorder. Dis ’n inklusiewe, allerweë aanvaarbare model
wat ons met groot vrug behoort te gebruik. As dié model, wat met ons
nasionale beleid versoenbaar is, toegepas word, kan ons baie probleme
uitskakel.

Die ouers wat op Engelse onderwys vir hulle Afrikaanse, Xhosa of Zoeloe
kinders aandring, sal na alle waarskynlikheid moedertaalgebaseerde onderwys
kies in die wete dat dit in hulle kinders se beste belang is en dat Engels
in elk geval as ’n sekondêre taal toegevoeg sal word. Moedertaalonderwys in
ons laerskole het nou ’n saak van groot belang geword wat u ernstige aandag
verdien, mnr die President. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[However, justice should be done to both of these notions. There can be no
unity if diversity is not recognised, no diversity if unity is jeopardised.
In a South Africa that wants to remain an example of tolerance, these
notions should serve each other. Therefore plans to ban religion from our
schools were unacceptable and it was good that we could reach a solution
that served tolerance and, by extension, unity, without undermining
diversity.

A good example of reconciliation and unity in diversity is our national
anthem that we heard again on Friday. This song, with its two parts merging
into one, has, like our national flag, which reflects all aspects of our
past, and a name like KwaZulu-Natal, enjoyed wide acceptance. We should
continue in future, through what we do, and also through the names we give,
to create unity in diversity in a tangible and visible manner, and work in
a reconciliatory, and not a divisive way. In the case of Pretoria, for
example, we welcome the fact that a reconciliatory option was followed in
that the city name will remain Pretoria and the metropole will be named
Tshwane.

The matter of language diversity is often handled in an insensitive and
ideological manner. One has great understanding for the emotions coupled
with language in our history. History should, however, serve as a lesson
and should warn us to go about language matters in a circumspect way so
that unity in diversity, and not conflict because diversity is being
disadvantaged, will be our future.

When, for example, we look at the language policy of schools, this should
be handled in a circumspect way. Language diversity should also be promoted
at school level in accordance with our Constitution. Why does one never
hear of an English institution being asked to amend its language policy or
of its being accused of being exclusive and exclusionist? If matters are
handled in such a way that one has to go to court for the sake of language,
red lights are flashing. If, on the other hand, language becomes an
instrument to exclude people, it is unfair discrimination. Die Burger says,
and rightly so, that race may never be a factor. If it is a factor, we
should fight it relentlessly.

However, it is also language discrimination to discriminate unfairly
against a certain language, to accuse people of unwillingness to transform
as soon as they try to uphold their language. It is just as wrong when
people use the language issue as a smokescreen for inherent racism, which
also happens. For the sake of tolerance, of unity in diversity, the
handling and accommodation of language in our country, especially in our
educational institutions, namely our schools, should be looked at as a
matter of national importance.

The research on language demographics and dynamics referred to by the
President could be used effectively in such an investigation. It is time
for our 10 marginalised official African languages to take their rightful
place in our country so that substance can be given to our constitutional
language rights and to the Freedom Charter, which declares that, “All
people shall have the right to use their own languages”.

Several educational problems such as poor literacy and numeracy skills are
directly linked to the lack of mother-tongue education in our schools. At
many schools parents insist, to the detriment of their children, on
education in English while they and their children speak other languages
such as Afrikaans, Xhosa, Zulu and others at home. Many children are being
tutored in their second or third language, which is English, by teachers
who provide the tutoring in their second or third language. This while the
latest findings claim that pupils who are not exposed to the same language
at home as the one they are being educated in, are in danger of not
reaching their full academic potential. Is it a surprise to us, then, if
our children cannot read, write or do arithmetic well?

It is of cardinal importance, Mr President, that we accelerate the school
building project as you announced. We are also very glad that our teachers
will receive better salaries, but we will also have to address the mother-
tongue question in the classroom if we want to make significant progress. A
province like the Western Cape has accepted an education language model, on
the advice of language experts like Neville Alexander, which supports
mother-tongue based bilingual education during the first six years of a
child’s school career, which seeks to encourage parents to enroll their
children for mother-tongue based education and which promotes the learning
of a third language in primary school. It is an inclusive, widely
acceptable model that we should be using to our great benefit. If this
model, which is reconcilable with our national policy, is implemented, we
can eliminate many problems.

Those parents who insist on English education for their Afrikaans, Xhosa or
Zulu-speaking children will probably choose mother-tongue based education
knowing that it will be best for their children and that English will in
any event be added as a secondary language. Mother-tongue education in our
primary schools has now become a matter of great importance that deserves
your serious attention, Mr President.]

Although we have many reasons to be grateful as we look back, our real test
may still lie ahead. While we have to be a beacon of tolerance,
reconciliation and peace, we also have to address major challenges such as
Aids, poverty and inequality. As much as we need to grow our economy, we
need to kick-start our second economy. We welcome the tangible plans of the
President to address the needs of both these economies, particularly the
reforms pertaining to small, medium and micro enterprises, and the
relaxation of the labour dispensation governing these enterprises. History
will show the phenomenal effect of these reforms on our economic growth.

Regarding our second economy, the President’s goal of including people in
economic activity, or at least affording them sustainable livelihoods,
should be achieved as soon as possible. By decreasing the levels of
dependency, people will regain their dignity and more state funds will be
freed up for priorities such as education and health. While we have to
provide social security nets for the indigent, our country has to live
within its means and cannot meet all needs at once. Those like the DA, and
Mr Leon, who try to apply pressure on our government to disregard our means
by, for instance, introducing basic income grants straight away, are
irresponsible. [Applause.]

In the next decade transformation will really have to address the needs of
the poorest South Africans. We need a national consensus on transformation
that will ensure the active, enthusiastic participation of all South
Africans, even Mr Leon and the DA! [Interjections.] We need all our people,
black and white, to understand and buy into the principles underlying
transformation if we want to be a winning nation. If this does not happen,
some people will feel increasingly alienated, something that we can ill
afford as a nation. If we can achieve this consensus, it will be only a
matter of time before we will be the first country in Africa to join the
ranks of the developed world. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, President Mbeki, Deputy President Zuma
and hon members, in the state of the nation address that you delivered last
Friday, Mr President, you asserted that we as a people have every reason to
be proud of our recent achievements. Central to this must be our success in
advancing our country away from its divided past and towards the
realisation of the vision contained in the Freedom Charter, written 50
years ago, namely that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black
and white. Accordingly, today I will focus on the clause in the Freedom
Charter that asserts: There shall be houses, security and comfort.

There are four subclauses under this clause that clearly underpin our
current approach to the provision of housing, health care and social
security. These are: All people shall have the right to live where they
choose, be decently housed, and to bring up their families in comfort and
security; a preventive health scheme shall be run by the state; free
medical care and hospitalisation shall be provided for all, with special
care for mothers and young children; and the aged, the orphans, the
disabled and the sick shall be cared for by the state.

Mr President, the Freedom Charter envisioned a society in which people
enjoy the right to live wherever they choose, where they would be decently
housed, and they would be able to bring up their families in comfort and
security. Our government has made great strides towards the realisation of
such a society. The Ministry of Housing has been working very hard to
develop a comprehensive plan to deal with human settlement and social
infrastructure, including rental-housing stock for the poor. Such a plan
was submitted to the Cabinet in August last year.

This plan introduces a fundamentally different housing mode to what we have
seen before. Amongst other things, it expands the scope of the housing
mandate to enable government to address the integration of the primary and
secondary housing market. It introduces a shift from the current
commoditised focus of housing delivery towards more responsive mechanisms,
which address the multidimensional needs of sustainable human settlement.

The plan also develops mechanisms for the enhancement of the partnership
between government and the private sector in the development of sustainable
human settlements. Finally, the plan outlines tools through which the
challenge of informal settlements will receive urgent attention.

The Minister of Housing yesterday announced the process of implementing the
N2 Gateway Project as a lead pilot project of this new comprehensive plan.
In essence, the project seeks to address the need for services, shelter,
and socio-economic development of an estimated 15 504 households in some
twelve existing neighbourhoods, and a further 6 141 household in backyard
shacks, totalling around 22 000 households within the City of Cape Town.

Impela Mongameli, amavolontiya aseKliptown, asekhona nangasekho, ahleka
kuvele elomhlathi uma ebona ukuthi izithukuthuku zawo aziwelanga phansi
kodwa zivundise umhlaba owenileyo, kwazise phela nansi intombi kaSisulu
owayekhona le eKliptown ifeza iphupho likayise. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
Zulu paragraph follows.)

[Indeed, Mr President, the Kliptown volunteers, both the former and the
present ones, are having a good laugh when they see that their labour was
not in vain but instead enriched the soil; hence there is a lady from
Sisulus who was there at Kliptown fulfilling her father’s dream.]

Mr President, our comprehensive social security system, which we have been
gradually developing over the last ten years, has seen many of our people,
especially the most vulnerable, receiving direct support from the state, as
a means of protecting them against extreme poverty. Currently our
expenditure on social grants of one kind or the other has reached more than
R50 billion a year.

This benefits more than 9 million people, especially children, people with
disabilities and the elderly. In addition, our government has made a
significant contribution to what is termed the “social wage”. This
represents a package of services that are provided to citizens by the state
in kind, which includes health care, primary and secondary education,
housing, electricity, water, sanitation and refuse removal, amongst others.
The value of the social wage was estimated at R88 billion in 2003.

The social sector continues to improve the efficiency of our social
security system, including efforts to eliminate corrupt practices. The
Minister for Social Development, Minister Skweyiya, has issued a call to
our people to come forward and join the fight against corruption and fraud
in our social grant system. We are confident that implementation of the
social security agency in April this year will be a key element in this
strategy.

Mr President, in relation to health, I am also pleased to report to the
nation that we are still driven by the vision of health care espoused in
the Freedom Charter. In 1994 we started providing free public health care
services for children under six, and pregnant and lactating women. In 1996
we went further and started providing free primary health care for anyone
who did not have the means to pay. During the same period we initiated a
clinic building and upgrading programme which, over the last 10 years, has
resulted in the building and upgrading of more than 1 300 clinics. Last
year we also initiated free health care for people with disabilities. In
addition, we have initiated and are sustaining a hospital revitalisation
programme in which 30 hospitals are currently being upgraded. The most
recently completed projects are in the Northern Cape, in Colesberg and in
Calvinia. I wish to invite hon members to visit these facilities and to see
the success of our revitalisation programme.

This year we will continue with this very important programme and the
Health Minmec will, in the next week, reflect on expenditure trends in this
regard, and take corrective steps to accelerate expenditure, where it has
been less than satisfactory. We trust, Mr President, that this will go some
way towards allaying your concerns about the slower pace of building
essential infrastructure, especially in so far as it relates to the
management and co-ordination processes in the three spheres of government.

Chairperson, one of the fundamental elements of access to health care for
all is the provision of safe and affordable medicine. Although our attempts
at achieving these two interlinked objectives have been, and are still, the
subject of court actions, I am pleased to say that we are making
significant progress. We are continuing to provide dispensing licences to
hundreds of doctors who have applied for them. These doctors have undergone
basic training in the handling and safekeeping of medicines. We can
therefore safely say that we are gradually eliminating a situation where
medicines are kept in unsafe environments, leading to adverse effects on
the patients.

We are also pleased to see that many pharmacies have demonstrated that the
claim that we are bankrupting pharmacies through our pricing measures is a
lie. The most affordable medicines in our country today are found in those
pharmacies that are actually following our pricing regulations to the
letter. We are awaiting the decisions of the court on this matter and we
will abide by their decision. But we will not be detracted from achieving
the vision of the Freedom Charter, as expressed in the clauses I have
referred to. In fact, to date we have more than 300 pharmacists who have
applied to open pharmacies in the country. Therefore, to say that we are
bankrupting them is not true.

Our department is also poised to launch a massive campaign to reduce
noncommunicable and communicable diseases, as well as non-natural causes of
death. This campaign will focus largely on the promotion of healthy
lifestyles. We will intensify our messages aimed at stopping people from
smoking and highlighting the dangers of alcohol abuse. Our actions in this
area will be accompanied by the necessary legislative steps, such as the
enactment of the regulations that will require labelling on all liquor
products. On the tobacco side, we are pleased to note that Parliament
intends, within the next two weeks, to approve South Africa’s ratification
of the World Health Organisation’s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.
This will allow us to take our place among the world’s leading tobacco
control nations.

Our healthy lifestyles campaign will also focus on the importance of
nutrition and exercise. As you have said, Mr President, the broad trends in
our mortality studies all, and I emphasize, all, point to a worrying
emergence of diseases of lifestyle such as diabetes, stroke and heart
disease. We cannot ignore this and we must take the necessary steps to
prevent it from growing. We have already started screening our people for
these conditions. We will also intensify our work around tuberculosis, as
research has shown that even in the context of HIV and Aids, TB can be
cured.

Mr President, some in this House have commented negatively on your
assertion that the government’s comprehensive plan against Aids is among
the best in the world, suggesting that you are making false claims. All I
would like to say to them is this: Very few plans are as comprehensive as
ours, bringing together elements of prevention, nutrition, and a variety of
different treatments – including traditional medicine. I have challenged my
department to ensure that we are never detracted from the implementation of
that plan in all its comprehensiveness.

I do not believe that we have done enough as a country to focus on the
issue of stigmatisation, and my colleagues should participate in this
exercise. I am also concerned about our ability to monitor how the people
who are using ARVs are doing, and why some of them have stopped
participating in the programme. Nor are we currently putting enough
emphasis on healthy living for people living with the virus. Finally, I am
also pleased to announce that the technical obstacles to the tender for the
procurement of the treatment regimes have been removed and the tender will
be finalised soon.

May I urge all of us to become champions of a comprehensive fight against
HIV and Aids. And may I further urge all of us, especially those of us who
have been elected as representatives of the people, to lead by example, and
to be shining examples of living healthy lifestyles.

Mr President, I am pleased to report to you and to the nation that our
community health worker programme is poised for expansion beyond the 15 000
community health workers in the field, and an injection of extra resources
into this programme will be most welcome. This year we plan to have another
conference, which will bring together all our community health workers and
to ensure that we are all reading from the same script when it comes to
service to our people.

In addition, we are also currently working to develop a new cadre of health
workers, at the middle level, which we might call medical assistants. This
is an attempt to provide quality health care and to ensure access,
particularly in rural settings.

Mr President, we have been concerned about the number of health
professionals we are losing to the developed world. To deal with this
matter we have embarked on a number of strategies, including entering into
bilateral agreements with countries like the UK – and I am told, already
there are quite a number of doctors who have come from Britain under this
agreement. We are trying to regulate their coming to this country. We have
also been meeting with some of these professionals themselves to find out
how we can assist them to be reabsorbed into our system. Many have
expressed their desire to come back and work in South Africa. We are
working to remove any obstacles that prevent them from returning, including
some conditions of employment in our Public Service.

And we have also targeted certain countries to augment our supply of health
professionals with scarce skills. Recently we signed an agreement with Iran
in this regard. I will provide details of all these programmes, as well as
our human resource plan later this year, when I present the Health Budget.

Mr President, let me end by focusing on the matter of what has become known
as “bugs and superbugs in our hospitals”. This was discussed at our first
Minmec of the year as a critical matter which needs to be addressed
urgently. We have requested the Medical Research Council to provide us with
an evidence-based understanding of the challenges so that we can plan
accordingly. Meanwhile, we have also embarked on a back to basics approach
around sanitation in our hospitals. Minmec will continue to make this a
focus area for our meetings, as we also include matters related to physical
safety in our hospitals.

For we must ensure, Mr President, that all our people enjoy security and
comfort, especially in hospitals, as the Freedom Charter enjoins us to do.
This year, Mr President, we commit ourselves to do more, and to do it with
urgency to ensure that we move even closer to the ideal, where all our
people, black and white, rich and poor, shall indeed feel that South Africa
belongs to all who live in it and that we all have a right to human
dignity. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Hon President, Deputy President and hon members, our
initial response to the President’s state of the nation address was a
positive one, in spite of the lack of detail in areas where some targets
have been missed. The hon President did well to acknowledge that there have
been logjams, albeit not identified, that still need to be cleared.

As an example, the President cited a commitment made by government in 2002,
to ensure that within three years no child would be learning under a tree.
As most of our people know, we still have hundreds, if not thousands, of
children who are learning under trees. It would have been helpful if the
President had told us what government is planning to do to ensure that this
time next year we will be told that, indeed, no child in South Africa is
learning under a tree.

On Tuesday last week The Star newspaper had, as their main frontpage story,
some findings of the Medical Research Council that reveal a dramatic
increase in drug abuse among black people, most of whom are between the
ages of 10 and 19 years. The problem of drugs has become so serious that
some schoolchildren are being recruited to be involved in drug trafficking.

Jenni Wiltshire, a psychologist at Drug Wise, was reported to have said
that the drug problem was reaching epidemic proportions. The psychologist
continued to say, and I quote:

  When we do school talks, more than half the children admit that they have
  experimented with alcohol and dagga. No schools are immune.

This problem, Mr President, requires urgent government intervention,
otherwise your noble intentions will be undermined by drug dealers, and our
young people’s future will be destroyed.

The only thing the President said about Aids in his speech, was to inform
us that government has a comprehensive plan which is among the best in the
world. Those who know the devastating effects of Aids on our people,
particularly the most economically productive citizens and young people,
expected more from the President. Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary-
general, said in his opening speech at the International Aids Conference
held in Bangkok last year, and I quote:

  The fight against HIV/Aids requires leadership from all parts of the
  government, and it needs to go right to the top. Aids is far more than a
  health issue. It is a threat to development itself. Leadership means
  daring to do things differently, because you understand that Aids is a
  different kind of disease.

Cardinal Wilfred Napier, Archbishop of Durban and president of the Southern
African Catholic Bishops Conference, wrote a paper in defence of his belief
that abstinence is the best strategy to win the war against HIV/Aids. He
wrote, and I quote:

  At the South African Leadership Assembly in Pretoria in July 2003, Miss
  Janet Museveni, Ugandan first lady, stated that Uganda’s success in
  turning around the rate of new infections from 29% to 6% in 10 years, was
  achieved by the simple but effective strategy of every leader, from the
  president down, whether in government, civil society or the church,
  preaching the same simple and clear message, “Change your behaviour.” The
  condom, rather than being in the frontline of defence, was reserved for
  discordant married couples.

Nearer to home, the president of Botswana is reported to have pleaded with
his people to abstain or die. “For us, he continued, the most compelling
argument for abstinence is the truism ‘desperate situations demand equally
drastic measures’.”

We in the ACDP endorse Archbishop Napier’s position on the importance of
abstinence in the war against Aids. We believe it is time for government to
start spreading the message of abstinence from sex for the unmarried with
the same zeal, passion and excitement they show when they promote condoms.

What has happened thus far is that when health officials promote
government’s ABC plan, they whisper when they talk about abstinence, but
they blow the vuvuzela when they talk about condoms. The ACDP believes what
helped the people of Uganda drastically to reduce HIV infections from 29%
to 6% in ten years, will also help our people, if, and only if, our
government leaders can have the courage and will to speak about abstinence
and faithfulness in marriage and be seen to be practising what they preach.

The President was quoted in the Sunday World of 6 February 2004, as having
said, and I quote:

  The call for Africa’s renewal, for an African renaissance, is a call to
  rebellion. We must rebel against the tyrants and the dictators, those who
  seek to corrupt our societies and steal the wealth that belongs to our
  people. We must rebel against ordinary criminals who murder, rape and
  rob.

We in the ACDP believe that a call to rebellion is a call to destruction.
It is one thing to oppose tyrants and dictators, and fight crime. However,
a call to rebellion is unacceptable even in the context used by the
President. It is those who rebel against decency, the rights of others and
law and order, who are raping, robbing, and murdering innocent people.

Our nation has enough rebels. A fresh call must be made to our people to
cease their rebellion and embark on nation-building, increased
productivity, and the restoration of family values.
The Oxford dictionary defines rebellion as violent resistance to the
established government, the action of resisting authority or control. Now
we call on the President to explain to us what his call really means, and
what he hopes to achieve with that.

The President said that they had started to recruit community development
workers, who would be deployed in each local municipality by March 2006.
What we want to know is what their mandate in local municipalities will be,
and whether they will be doing what local councillors should be doing. If
not, what will be their functions? Will they be part of the ward committees
that have been set up or not? These are some of the questions we request
the President to answer in his response.

We all know that the President launched the Scorpions because of the public
perception that crime was out of hand. This elite unit did not disappoint.
In the past 10 months, up to February 2004, the Scorpions had achieved 214
convictions, giving them a 90% success rate. Our criminal justice system
does not have such a consistent success record. The Asset Forfeiture Unit
had, by January last year, returned more than R100 million to victims of
crime.

While we understand the importance of aligning the different law
enforcement agencies, we nevertheless believe that the independence of the
Scorpions from the SAPS will help them maintain their success in combating
crime. More importantly, we are concerned that the Scorpions will be
subject to political interference in their investigations, particularly
when high-profile politicians are being investigated.

The National Prosecuting Authority must, according to the Constitution,
exercise its functions, without fear, favour or prejudice. Should the
Scorpions be moved to the SAPS, we in the ACDP are concerned that the unit
will lose its independence. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms B MBETE: Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President and hon
members, first of all, may I also add my voice in congratulating the
President for a state of the nation address that illustrated that the
contract with the people is working in practice; the head of state
accounted. The acknowledgement of areas where government has not met
deadlines showed honesty and commitment that gives hope for our system of
governance. Based on past promises, a report-back is given to our people on
how far we are.

This debate comes as we close the celebrations of ten years of our freedom
and budding democracy. The first decade has laid a firm foundation for a
better future for our people and the continent at large. This ten-months-
old third democratic Parliament is on a determined march into the second
decade of uninterrupted democratic rule in our country.

This year we are celebrating 50 years of the historic congress of the
people of South Africa, who demonstrated their yearn for freedom and
democracy by putting together the Freedom Charter, which guided the
struggle for freedom for decades. This Parliament will have to join in the
activities which will be held throughout the country this year. We must
take the opportunity to assess our own role in terms of building a nation,
united in its diversity based on the Freedom Charter. It declared that the
people shall govern.

In section 42(3), our Constitution defines the work of the National
Assembly as, and I quote:

  … elected to represent the people and to ensure government by the people
  under the Constitution. It does this by choosing the President, by
  providing a national forum for public consideration of issues, by passing
  legislation and by scrutinising and overseeing executive action.

This is what we have to judge ourselves against. The question is whether
the people are indeed governing. It is important to reflect on the
achievements we have made, and where we have fallen short. On that basis we
then have to map future programmes, knowing clearly where we have to
tighten up and how to prioritise among the many pressing matters we have to
attend to.

The Joint Rules Committee, informed by the Constitution, adopted the new
vision and mission of Parliament towards the end of 2004. As we all know,
it was a very lengthy process. However, I am happy that all parties have
finally unanimously adopted the new vision and mission, which commits
Parliament to being responsive to the needs of the people and realising a
better life for all South Africans. This is what is guiding hon members as
they do their work amongst communities out there. It guides our day-to-day
operations in both Houses of Parliament; it represents our commitment to
ensuring that our people govern, as they influence what we do. Both Houses
will adopt the vision and mission of Parliament.

The adoption of a new governance model, also at the end of 2004, has given
birth to the Parliamentary Oversight Authority that will help us to oversee
the management of the day-to-day issues of running Parliament. This will
free the Joint Rules Committee to concentrate more on strategic issues, and
not be bogged down by administrative matters. At the same time this will
assist us to build early-warning systems in Parliament, to detect timeously
when things go wrong. It will also give our management a platform to raise
issues with political leadership.

Reports from both the Joint Rules Committee and the Parliamentary Oversight
Authority will be submitted to the House from time to time. Policy-making
of course remains the domain of both Houses. One of the ways of enabling us
to strengthen financial accountability in Parliament will be the adoption
of the Financial Administration of Parliament and Provincial Legislatures
Bill. The Bill must be passed this year, and as soon as possible. We are
aware that there are various views on the necessity of the Bill. It is our
belief that the passing of the Bill will strengthen our financial
management. Although we abide by its principles, the current Public Finance
Management Act does not address issues of Parliament directly.

The issue of oversight work has been given serious attention, because it is
one of the critical functions of Parliament. In this regard, through a task
team of the Joint Rules Committee, there is ongoing work that is meant
eventually to lead to the comprehensive strengthening of our oversight
function as an institution. In this context there has also been continuous
interaction between Parliament and the executive, with the aim of improving
the system in relation to timeous submission of Bills for thorough scrutiny
by MPs.

A number of training programmes have been embarked upon to build the
capacity of hon members to execute their oversight function. There have
been some improvements in this regard, judging by the manner in which
departments and parastatals have been engaging with MPs in portfolio
committees. There are areas that need greater specialisation on the part of
hon members. A skills audit will be conducted for members to determine the
level of training needs.

In the debate on the May 2004 state of the nation address I raised the
issue of the participation of ordinary members of the public in
Parliament’s processes. I raise it again to remind us that the system
continues to benefit mainly those who can afford to come to Cape Town. It
remains difficult for ordinary citizens in rural or squatter areas. We need
to allocate more resources to enable poorer citizens to participate. As we
celebrate 50 years of the Freedom Charter, when the views of South Africans
were canvassed throughout our land, let us ensure that our people’s voices
are heard through our work here.

One of the very important tasks of members as elected representatives is
interaction with the people in their constituencies. We are discussing with
the leaders of parties how we are going to strengthen this area of work.
MPs must remain in touch with our people. We have agreed that we need a
significant improvement in the resources allocated to members for
constituency work. Diligent MPs often end up using their personal resources
to do their work.

If we are to strengthen the contract with the people, we must be seen to be
with them by using our constituency periods more effectively. Parliament
must increase the constituency allowances. [Applause.] In the past ten
years we have increased these allowances by only 58%. In the 2005-06
financial year we will make a negligible improvement on the current monthly
R7 230 per member. In this regard, parties’ submissions are hereby again
invited to enable us to approach the Minister of Finance to help address
this serious deficiency later in the year. [Applause.]

The Secretary to Parliament has brought proposals to the Parliamentary
Oversight Authority on ways to improve the systems of Parliament. We are
currently looking at these proposals with the aim of implementing them in
the new financial year, including those related to issues of travel. The
travel investigation has exposed the weaknesses of our systems, as we have
acknowledged before. The reports emanating from the probe will be tabled
before the appropriate parliamentary structures and the matter will be
taken forward from there. We hope for a speedy resolution of the matter in
order for the cloud that hangs over this august institution to be removed.

Our people who elected us to come and work for them don’t deserve the slap
in the face that this whole thing has constituted in the public domain. Our
people must have confidence in us. They must know that if there is any
wrongdoing it will be dealt with honestly and in accordance with our
principles, our rules and our laws.

As a true people’s parliament, we are working hard to ensure that our
buildings are accessible to everybody, including those who are physically
challenged. There are a lot of structural improvements under way in all our
buildings.

As members know, one of the prides of the African continent, the Pan-
African Parliament, now operates in our country. For an interim period of
five years the PAP will be at Gallagher Estate. At the end of the five
years the permanent premises must be in place for it to move into. The two
challenges this places on this country, and on the continent are, as
follows: Firstly, the permanent site in South Africa must be determined
nationally; secondly, through a continent-wide process, the design and
architecture of the premises must be finalised. The end of 2006 more or
less marks the halfway point of the five-year period.

During 10–17 December 2004 a South African parliamentary delegation
participated in the 17th plenary assembly session of the SADC Parliamentary
Forum held in Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania. Speakers at the opening session
included the president of the United Republic of Tanzania, His Excellency B
W Mkapa, and the president of the Pan-African Parliament, Ambassador
Gertrude Mongella.

The South African delegation participated in the executive committee
meetings the standing committees for regional co-operation and integration;
the interparliamentary co-operation committee; the committee on democracy,
gender and conflict resolution; and the committee on HIV and Aids, as well
as the regional women’s parliamentary caucus.

Key issues raised during the plenary assembly focused on the following: A
review of the norms and standards for elections in the SADC region, the
importance of constitutional and electoral reforms in strengthening
democratic elections in the SADC region, and enhancing gender
representation through the electoral processes.

Among the key aspects that the SA Parliament will have to follow up on, are
the following: Firstly, finalisation of the draft protocol on the
establishment of a SADC parliament; and secondly, scrutiny of the SADC
parliamentary forum’s norms and standards of elections, the SADC principles
on democratic elections and South Africa’s electoral laws.

It is our hope that members across the political spectrum will approach
their work with even more vigour this year. We will soon be a year old as a
Parliament. Hopefully we are all better able to understand our way around
here. We also need to increase the profile of our interaction with all
sectors of our society, in order to develop a better understanding of
Parliament’s role and place in our society. Many South Africans still need
to grasp the separations and distinct functions of various arms of our
government.

Our theme for last Friday’s event was “Parliament: Voice of the people;
realising a better life for all”. The theme is firmly rooted in our vision
and mission statement, a determination to build a people’s parliament. It
also resonates with this being the 50th anniversary of the historic
gathering of our people in dialogue in Kliptown.

Last year Parliament started a people’s assembly, where South Africans from
across the country talk to us and give us feedback on our democracy. This
year our people’s assembly programme will be aligned with the celebration
of 50 years since the great Congress of the People. It was on that occasion
that the declaration unequivocally came out, “The people shall govern.”
Ours is to make sure our people truly govern. This is our commitment as we
embark on the second decade of a democratic order in our country. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Mr Chairperson, the hon President, Deputy President and
hon members, I would like to commend the President for his statement on
Friday that this land indeed belongs to all who live in it, black and
white. This assertion is an emphatic rejection of discrimination based on
race, tribal affiliation and ethnicity. The challenge now is for the
President and the government to give life to this sentiment by constantly
remaining faithful to the values of the Constitution, which enshrines
protection of the rights of all individuals. In other words, better to walk
the talk than to indulge in empty rhetoric. An even greater challenge is
for South Africa to help to ensure the protection of these rights, not only
here, but throughout the region.

One of the most important rights of any individual is the freedom to
express their democratic will in an election that is considered free and
fair by the people, the opposition, civil society and even international
observers. That is why we commend the President for his outspoken
condemnation of the monarchist-like inheritance of the presidency of Togo
by President Eyadema’s son. However, it seems the President and his
government are only prepared to condemn antidemocratic behaviour when it
occurs far from home.

In our neighbourhood, where we have the most clout and indeed the greatest
responsibility to speak out against actions that undermine democracy, such
behaviour is often excused by our government.
Right next door in Swaziland we have an absolute monarchy in which the king
is accused of spending lavishly while the ordinary people of Swaziland
continue to languish in poverty. There is no democratic opposition in
Swaziland, even though the trade unions and other civil society groups are
trying their utmost to strive for democratic freedoms. [Interjections.] The
continuing existence of an autocratic political system of this nature
stands as an affront to our commitment to upholding fundamental democratic
freedom.

As the President said in his address on Friday, in less than two months
there will be an election in Zimbabwe. Yet, given everything we have read
and heard about conditions in that country, it is difficult to come to any
conclusion other than that a free and fair election is impossible in the
short term. [Interjections.] That is why I announced 10 days ago that the
DA would send a delegation to Zimbabwe … [Laughter.] … to evaluate
preconditions for an election. [Applause.] A free and fair election does
not come down to what happens on election day only. It is achieved in weeks
and months ahead of the poll. Therefore we need to ask the following
questions about the current state of democracy in Zimbabwe.
[Interjections.] Will all the citizens be allowed to exercise the right to
vote free from violence and intimidation? [Interjections.] Have they been
given adequate opportunity to register?

Hon MEMBERS: No!

Mr W J SEREMANE: Do their names appear on an accurate and freely accessible
voters’ roll?

Hon MEMBERS: No!

Mr W J SEREMANE: Can all political parties campaign freely in all
constituencies?

Hon MEMBERS: No!

Mr W J SEREMANE: Do all political parties have equal access to the state-
funded media?

Hon MEMBERS: No!

Mr W J SEREMANE: Is there an independent media that will report on election
campaigns in an unbiased manner?

Hon MEMBERS: No! [Interjections.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: These are salient questions we would like to pursue ahead
of the poll. [Interjections.] You worry about the Scorpions. Don’t worry.
[Laughter.]

The ANC and its representatives in government are fond of invoking
sovereignty as an excuse for inaction. However, they have rightly had
little problem in overcoming these concerns when speaking about the fiasco
in Togo and we would encourage the government to continue doing that. It is
high time the President and the government show the same resolve when
standing up for fundamental democratic rights to make all of us very proud,
especially in Swaziland and Zimbabwe. Lastly, I hope the hon Mr Gaum will
be given a position as high commissioner in Bolivia or Togo. Thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Thank you, very much Deputy
Chair. Mr President, Deputy President, and hon members, I’m sure that Mr
Seremane, as a learned person, will know that charity begins at home.

Hon MEMBERS: That’s right!

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: And it should also not end
there. But it would be interesting for Mr Seremane to share with us how
democratic the DA as a party is. [Interjections.] Or is what is going on
there a marriage of convenience? [Interjections.] We want to know how
democratic you are. After fifty years we as the ANC brought democracy to
this country, but we are still worried about your own ways of doing things
democratically. [Interjections.]

Fifty years ago, our Freedom Charter guaranteed that there would be houses,
security and comfort, amongst other things. For the past 10 years, the poor
people of our country have seen government’s efforts to realise these
ideals and, to a great extent, they have not been disappointed.
[Interjections.] But I must hasten to say that there is still a lot to be
done, mainly for the poorest who are still trapped in poverty and
conditions of underdevelopment.

Regarding the delivery of water, which is going to be my focal point, the
statistics speak for themselves. Ten million people have been provided with
water in 10 years. On the other hand, the provision of basic sanitation has
been slower.

This is what the state of the nation address explores – the reasons behind
the government’s slower pace in delivering some services, especially to the
poor. This will be the primary focus of government during the second decade
of our democracy.

The President, in his state of the nation address said, and I quote:


   … we must achieve new and decisive advances towards:
    • the further entrenchment of democracy in our country;
    • transforming our country into a genuinely nonracial society;
    • transforming our country into a genuinely nonsexist society;
• eradicating poverty and underdevelopment, within the context of a
  thriving and growing First Economy and the successful transformation of
  the Second Economy …


   These objectives constitute the central architecture of our policies and
   programmes, intended to ensure that South Africa truly belongs to all who
   live in it, black and white.

In a nutshell, these imperatives require us to increase the pace of
delivery while we ensure efficiency and sustainability in our service
delivery.

My focus this afternoon will be on the delivery of sanitation services,
since we lag behind in this respect. This is so for a number of reasons.
Firstly, the backlog has been greater, and the realisation of the need has
been slower to germinate. Secondly, in part this is because, even today, in
rural communities sanitation tends not to be a priority on individual and
family wish lists. We experienced this when we went on izimbizo. If you ask
people what it is that they want prioritised in their areas, they will say
amanzi [water], they won’t say sanitation services. Thirdly, the apartheid
legacy reflected in all facets of our society left us with an ailing
economy, and a small budget for our transforming country, which made it
difficult to deliver all the services at the same pace and simultaneously.

It has been almost impossible, or a nightmare, to prioritise the equally
compelling and competing urgent needs, something that has led to Mr Manuel
losing more of his hair. [Laughter.]

Development has been on the agenda of government for a long time. We are
currently beginning to see the fruits of those policies that were targeted
to develop human resource capacity. The President alluded to this.

There are also new challenges that have emerged as a consequence of our
transformation agenda. For example, the transfer of water services
provision to local government presented us with new challenges. One of
these challenges was that we realised that there was inadequate capacity at
local government level, or rather, varied capacity at local government
level. Another reality is that water services infrastructure is very
expensive, but that cannot be used as an excuse to deny our people much-
needed services.

The backlog in the delivery of sanitation services manifests itself in
different ways, and needs to be addressed in an integrated manner. For
example, we have the bucket system, pit latrines, and schools and clinic
sanitation services, all of which have their own complexities. The
strategic framework for water services was developed with an appreciation
of this.

Also, the government’s integrated approach to service delivery allows for
the participation of many departments. Although greater improvement at the
level of co-ordination remains an imperative, the department has assumed
the status of a sector leader since 2000, with the ushering in of our new
local government system. This means that the new role of our department is
to establish policy; it is to lead; it is to regulate; it is to monitor;
and it is to account for the delivery of water services as well as
forestry.

The bucket sanitary system has been particularly difficult to eradicate,
because of the costs involved. However, we are committed to the eradication
of this system in the long term. The department’s strategic framework for
water services suggests that in densely populated areas this system should
be replaced with a waterborne sanitation system. We also know that public
health and hygiene requires that we hasten the delivery of safe sanitation.
The sanitation programme needs a sizeable injection of funds, especially to
eradicate the bucket system. That would significantly reduce the backlog in
sanitation services. I am sure this is a message to the Minister who will
be launching his Budget next week.

As we know, the function of delivering these services is a constitutional
mandate of local government. We need to ensure that the capacity is in
place to deliver, operate and maintain the infrastructure and to ensure
sustainability. While it is true that local authorities, especially those
most recently established, are the hardest hit by the lack of human
capacity in every activity, this affects all levels of government,
including national government. We all compete with each other for the
limited pool of trained and experienced officials. This is especially true
of departments that need a higher proportion of people trained as engineers
and technicians of every kind.

I must say, though, that there are strategies in place to deal with this
particular problem. However, we will all appreciate that it takes years to
produce one engineer. So, the impact of our programmes will take longer to
be felt.

Our needs are greater than the number of people available. As government,
we are constantly seeking ways of stepping up the training and retention of
officials who are successful in doing their work.

We are also looking at ways of encouraging and increasing the supply of
suitably trained people, especially for the water sector. We must express
appreciation to our Cuban comrades for making themselves available to fill
some of these gaps. We also believe that our newly combined tertiary
institutions need to be looking at our needs for trained personnel, from
operatives and technicians to chief engineers, from bookkeepers to
chartered accountants, from junior clerks to chief directors in
administration, in finance and in management.

Last year we launched a book, as the Department of Water Affairs, on
careers in water with the aim of encouraging and promoting interest for
studying towards water-related careers. The Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry will continue to co-operate with the Department of Provincial and
Local Government to ensure that we deliver efficiently. We will ensure that
the much-needed technical expertise is transferred to local government, and
a process has already been started in this regard, guided by project
consolidate.

However, co-ordination is key among departments that share the same or
similar responsibilities, as well as between the spheres of government,
especially at local government level, which is closest to the people.
Therefore, we keenly await the passing of the Local Government:
Intergovernmental Relations Framework Bill. We believe that this Bill will
give us the instrument we need to enable us collectively to ensure that our
policies are effectively implemented at all levels of government.

With the restructuring of local government that came into effect in 2000,
we have continued to develop our capacity to provide leadership, advice and
guidance through our nine regional offices to local authorities that have
the task of providing these basic services. In particular, we shall
continue to provide guidance to local authorities on integrated planning
for potable water and sanitation services as part of their IDPs.

The Masebambani programme, financed by the EU, was initially introduced in
the most needy provinces - Limpopo, Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal and the
Eastern Cape - to address this particular matter, but now it has been
expanded to all nine provinces.

Although our early warning system indicated that we might not meet our
targets, we are proud that South Africa still leads in terms of meeting its
millennium development goals. Having said that, again, there is still an
urgent need for us to deliver, especially to the poor.

I wish to take this opportunity to say something about the drought that has
been plaguing our country for more than two years. This is a constant
reminder that South Africa is a water-scarce country.

Ilizwe lethu lelinye lamazwe aya kuthi kwiminyaka ezayo anqatyelwe kakhulu
ngamanzi. Ngoko kufuneka ukuba uluntu luwasebenzise ngobunono. Masiqaphele
singabantu ukuba asishiyi iimpompo zivuliwe. Naxa sipula iimpahla phaya
emakhaya kufuneka singashiyi iimpompo zivuliwe kwaneebhafu ziphuphuma
ngamanzi, siye kubuya mhlawumbi emva kwemizuzu eli-15 amanzi amaninzi sele
echithekile.

Asingethandi ke ukuba sibulawe lunxano. Ukubangaba asiwanonopheli amanzi
oko kuya kwenzeka. Kaloku naxa indlala ibomvu, sidla ngokusela amanzi
sixole. Kufuneka ke sihlale sinawo amanzi kuba abubomi wona ngokwawo.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Our country is one of those countries that will run out of water in the
coming years. Therefore, people must preserve water. Let us not leave water
taps open or unattended. When we rinse our laundry in the rural areas we
must not leave taps with running water, as baths will overflow with water.

We would not like to suffer from thirst because of a scarcity of water.
When there is severe poverty we will drink water and be satisfied. Water in
itself is life.]
The status of dams, in general, is that some are nearly full, but others
are at very low levels. South Africans are free to go to our website, and
have a look at the status of our dams on a weekly basis. The status of our
dams shows how variable our situation is. This highlights the need for us
to be careful in the way in which we use our resources. I want to take this
opportunity to express my appreciation to all South Africans who, almost on
a daily basis, are writing articles in newspapers giving advice to
government on what should be done in terms of resolving the drought
problems that we are experiencing. Indeed, we feel that the contract
between government and the people is alive.

We do need to conserve more of our run-off water and that means
constructing large infrastructure projects to give us a larger assured
supply of water. It is clear that the construction of such large
infrastructure projects will provide a massive boost to the Expanded Public
Works Programme, with enormous potential to create job opportunities and
training for many thousands of people. The result of the construction
should also be the creation of permanent jobs, the provision of food
security and an increase in the carrying capacity of currently unused land
with the potential of ensuring that more people will stay on the land,
producing wealth for themselves and the economy as a whole.

These hard figures of finance and economics can be calculated. What is more
difficult is to put a monetary value on a better life for our children and
grandchildren, and the dignity that comes with what our President has
called for, that people should be able to earn their living in normal ways.

The opposite of this is: How do we calculate the human cost of not doing
these things? We may be building infrastructure such as dams, but what is
important for us is to change the culture of wasting water. Municipalities
also need to embark on programmes that will monitor and deal with water
leakages. We lose a lot of water through leakages. The internationally
acceptable percentage for water leakages is 15%. In South Africa, the
percentage of unaccounted water is as high as 40%, as we speak. This is
unacceptably high. This is not only costly for municipalities and
consumers, but we cannot continue to lose this scarce resource. We will
therefore continue to give advice and support to local government in this
regard. Please remember that South Africa is amongst the 30 driest
countries in the world. We need to save water for humanity and the
generations that will come after us. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairperson, Mr President, Deputy President and hon
members, it is a mark of statesmanship on the part of the President to
candidly acknowledge in his state of the nation address that the many
promises he made to the nation have not been met. When he made some of
these promises last year, the PAC cautioned that these promises could not
be fulfilled unless there was a radical shift in government policies. This
PAC position was shared by a United Nations Human Development report.

The PAC appreciates many aspects of the President’s state of the nation
address, such as assisting our new farmers, whom the PAC has long said must
be subsidised. Indeed, our businesspeople in the rural areas and townships
must be helped. They are losing out to the minority and big business.

The state of this great nation imposes an imperative on us to embrace a
mission that rapidly moves the damned, the disinherited and the despised
from HIV/Aids, landlessness, persistent poverty, lack of access to
education and environmental destruction, acute underdevelopment in the
rural areas of our country and the privatisation of strategic state assets.

The HIV/Aids crisis is a wake-up call that forces us to take extraordinary
action to stop the reversal of human development and to prevent eight-year-
old children from becoming heads of households. The future standard of
living in this country will depend on access to quality education.
Education is the gateway to a strong economy, because when it is tailored
to the needs of a nation, it enables an individual not only to sell his or
her labour, but also to create a job for himself or herself.

Our country is educating fewer children and who are mainly African, the
majority population. The PAC affirms that the education system should leave
no child behind. No child should be denied entrance to school because of an
inability to pay the school fees. No child should drop out of school and no
child should be denied the opportunity to tertiary education because they
cannot pay. Free education is a sound national investment. No nation can
advance and avoid foreign domination if it neglects the education of its
people. At present over 50% of our students drop out before reaching matric
because of poverty. Only 14% are able to acquire tertiary education.

The PAC repeats that the privatisation of strategic assets and public
services do not serve the interests of the poor. Privatisation has
contributed to massive unemployment. It has also changed the role of
municipalities, from being providers of services to that of being
regulators of services.

Many households cannot afford the surcharge on water. It is high time
government stopped imposing water privatisation on our communities. Donor
governments and institutions such as the World Bank need to acknowledge the
failure of privatisation, and instead concentrate on boosting the
performance and coverage of public utilities. Public water delivery can be
improved through increased citizen involvement in decision-making and
budgeting participation.

The underlying assumption of the plan to privatise Eskom is that the
private sector and competitive market mechanisms are more effective and
efficient than regulated monopoly regimes. However, the experience of the
past few years proves that privatisation tends simply to replace regulated
public monopoly with unregulated private oligarchy.

Income inequality continues to disfigure our society. It has transformed
South Africa into the most unequal society in the world. This is
illustrated by the fact that the poorest African people in our country live
on R281 a month, while a white person lives on
R5 050 a month. This means that the income of the poorest African is 11
times smaller than that of the poorest white person. Added to this is the
fact that a Telkom chief executive officer was paid R11,1 million, while
Telkom provides the most expensive telephone service, pays its workers an
average of R3 000 a month, … [Applause.] … has retrenched thousands of its
workers and is threatening thousands of others.

Land was the primary contradiction of the liberation struggle. This nation
is not doing well on the resolution of this fundamental question and
present government policy will never resolve the land question. The
principle of willing seller, willing buyer is not working and will never
work. Land must be expropriated and compensation paid for improvements made
on the land. Research shows that it will take 96 years to distribute a mere
30% of agricultural land to Africa in this country. The reality is that
even if all land claims where to be settled, the land question in South
Africa would remain unresolved. Eighty-seven percent of our land was ceased
from the African people during the colonial wars of aggression. That was
long before 1913. Moreover, the Restitution of Land Rights Act closed even
these limited land claims on 31 December 1998.

The lesson we can learn from Zimbabwe is that equitable land distribution
and poverty cannot be postponed indefinitely without disastrous
consequences. Our land is being sold to foreigners at an alarming rate,
while we remain land dispossessed.

The PAC reminds members that there is no country anywhere in the world
which belongs to all who live in it. The Freedom Charter, which preaches
this erroneous gospel, is therefore a freedom cheater. [Interjections.] It
is cheating the land-dispossessed people of this country on a scale
unprecedented in the history of national liberation. Millions live in
squatter camps, which often burn, killing them. They are evicted from land
every day. Is this how South Africa belongs to all who live in it?

The PAC welcomes the anticorruption summit. It must be inclusive of all
sectors of society. Its agenda must include nepotism     and employment,
and the promotion of housing and grants based on political affiliation.

A common patriotism cannot be built on sectarianism and discrimination of
any kind among its citizens. The PAC does not support violence, but it is
not right to tell the people of Phomolong in the Free State, who were
protesting against corruption, that their demonstrations will be met with
the full force of the law.

Where does reconciliation put the former freedom-fighters? There is
continued incarceration of former freedom-fighters such as the PAC’s
Azanian People’s Liberation Army. When will truth and reconciliation
benefit them? It is a mutilation of justice to pardon the Rev Allan Boesak
for a criminal offence he has denied committing, while Apla fighters who
fought apartheid, declared a crime against humanity by the United Nations,
are ignored.

The PAC appreciates efforts by the President to bring peace in African
countries such as the Ivory Coast, Burundi and the DRC. The PAC welcomes
some aspects of the government’s foreign policy, which are gravitating
towards the longheld PAC position, that no African state can formulate a
prudent foreign policy in isolation from what is happening on the continent
of Africa.

The PAC adopted this historic position at a time when its ideology of Pan-
Africanism was called racism and Pan-Africanists denounced as racist. Yet
the Pan-African Parliament and the African Union are some of the fruits of
the tenacity of the Convention People’s Party of Nkrumah, the Pan-
Africanist Congress of Azania, Sekou Toure’s Guinea and Modibo Keita’s Mali
in particular.

Zimbabwe is our important trade partner. Under the apartheid colonialist
regime, mercenaries from this country roamed all over Africa, overthrowing
African governments which the colonialists did not like. It is bad news for
Pan-Africanists that mercenaries from this country have been arrested in
Zimbabwe on their way to overthrow the Equatorial Guinea government. Mark
Thatcher, who financed the attempted coup d’etat from Cape Town, has been
allowed to leave this country, instead of facing a stiff prison sentence
for treason. A spy from South Africa is reportedly under arrest in Harare.
Such activities can only ruin the Pan-African vision. They are not good
diplomacy for our country.

The PAC welcomes the reforming of the United Nations, especially with
reference to the Security Council. It is long overdue. Africa must have a
right of veto, if the present permanent members of the Security Council
continue to monopolise this right. However, the African Union must choose
its own representative. There should be no stampede or competition amongst
African states for this seat.

When it comes to the fundamental interests of our country and our continent
of Africa, the PAC shall not retreat. We shall not relent, we shall not
equivocate and we shall win. Economically we stand committed to a policy of
guaranteeing the most equitable distribution of land. [Time expired.]

BUSINESS SUSPENDED AT 18:06 AND RESUMED AT 18:23.

Nk B T NGCOBO: Sihlalo, Mongameli namalungu ahloniphekileyo, njengoba
kungunyaka ka-2005 sigubha i-Freedom Charter eyaqhamuka ngoba kwaba khona
ukuxoxisana okubizwa nge-dialogue. Abesifazane baseNingizimu Afrika
njengoba sikhuluma nje babambe iqhaza ezingxoxweni.

Ngizokhuluma kusuka kwi-Beijing Platform for Action ngoba izithathe zonke
lezi zinto ezikhona kwi-Freedom Charter, bese ngisho ukuthi abantu
besifazane bayalibusa, baliphethe futhi baneqhaza abalibambile. Mongameli,
abantu besifazane bathe bajabula kakhulu ngokuba ngabaseNingizimu Afrika
ngoba baseduze nenhliziyo yakho, ubabeka esimweni esibafaneleyo. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs B T NGCOBO: Chairperson, President and hon members in 2005 we
celebrate the Freedom Charter, which was the result of discussion, also
known as dialogue. The South African women are engaged in discussion as we
speak.

I will start from the Beijing Platform for Action, since it elaborates on
issues that are in the Freedom Charter, and will further add that women are
leading, are in control and are playing a significant role. President,
women are happy to be South African because they are dear to your heart, as
you have put them where they deserve to be. [Applause.]]

There are some political achievements by women, starting in 1956, when the
Charter was just one year old, and the women marched against the pass laws.
Then there was the formation of the Women’s National Coalition of South
Africa, which produced the Women’s Charter for Effective Equality. The
South African women used that at the time of the negotiations to ensure
that women and gender issues were placed on the agenda. Then there is the
Constitution, which makes provision for universal human rights as well as
women’s rights. This confirmed gender and women representivity in South
Africa. This means that women have a role in the political terrain in South
Africa. That is why, even to this day, we celebrate 9 August as Women’s Day
and August as Women’s Month.

Mongameli, ngonyaka ka-1994 [President, in 1994] …

... South African women took Parliament by storm; in 2004 South African
women took Parliament by tsunami waves.

Kwenzeka kanjani lokho? Kwenzeka ngokuthi iNingizimu Afrika ibeke abantu
besifazane eqophelweni eliphezulu. Okuhle lapho ukuthi bazibandakanya
ekwenzeni imithetho ebhekela ezobulili. Uhulumeni waze wabeka ezobulili
eqophelweni elifanele ngokuthi akhe izakhiwo ezindaweni eziphakeme: kukhona
ezisophikweni lukaMongameli, kukhona ezisePhalamende futhi kukhona
ezikusomqulu. Konke lokho kukhombisa ukuthi abantu besifazane
basenhliziyweni yeNingizimu Afrika. Yebo, balwa, bayibamba - namhlanje
balapho bekhona.

Kunenselelo laphaya yokubhekeleka kokuthi ngabe abantu besifazane ngempela
bayavuna futhi bayazuza yini-ke kule mpilo ephilwa namhlanje. Imithetho
ebekiwe ebhekela ezobulili iyabasiza yini, iyabalekelela yini? Okusemqoka
nje ukuthi, yebo, iyabasiza ngoba sebenalo izwi. Siyazi ukuthi kade
kunodlame kodwa sebenezwi futhi bayaphumela obala.

Masibonge laphaya kuNgqongqoshe wezabaSebenzi ngoba wenze ukuthi abantu
besifazane abakade besebenzela obasi nomesisi manje babhaliswe futhi
nemiholo yabo ibe sesimweni esingcono. [Ihlombe.] Kodwa-ke okunye futhi
okusemqoka ukuthi abantu besifazane balokhu beshilo bethi, “Eyi hhe, kodwa
kwezobulungiswa sifike singakutholi ukuthokoza ngoba abalaphaya ezinkantolo
ngabesilisa abangenandaba nezinto zabesifazane futhi abangazinakekeli.”
Ngiyabaceba, Mongameli.

Mongameli, e-Afrika iyonkana siyancoma ukuthi ngesikhathi uthula uhlelo
lwakho lonyaka ushilo ukuthi, eNingizimu Afrika, uphiko lwakho kanye
noNgqongoshe bakho nineqhaza elikhulu kakhulu enilibambile e-Afrika
iyonkana, nasezweni. Kodwa-ke maqondana ne-Afrika yonkana, siyakunxusa
ukuthi ubagqugquzele ohulumeni, ikakhulukazi laba abanesimo sokubeka
abesifazane endaweni efanele ezinhliziyweni zabo, progressive governments,
ukuthi bazame ukunyusa inani labesifazane ekubusweni kwezwe, okungenani
bafike kuma-30% ngoba thina lapha eNingizimu asisakhulumi ngama-30% kodwa
sesikhuluma ngokuthi sifuna ama-50% kohulumeni basekhaya. [Ihlombe.]

Ngonyaka ka-2000 ngenkathi uMongameli ekhuluma nabanye abaholi be-
Commonwealth wathi, “Poverty in South Africa wears the face of an African
woman.” Ngempela ngempela-ke kunjalo. Kodwa-ke noma kunjalo siyabona ukuthi
ikhona inqubekela-phambili encanyana. Njengoba sikhuluma nje, abezomhlaba
baye bathi njalo ngonyaka benza ingqungquthela lapho benikeza khona i-woman
farmer award. Lokho kwenza ukuthi abesifazane bagqugquzeleke, bathande
ukuthi kube nento abayenzayo. Lolu hlelo lusiza kakhulu labo abasezindaweni
zasezabelweni. Siyancoma-ke futhi ukuthi uMongameli ushilo wathi kuzoba
nezindlela zokuthi laba bantu bathole ukusizakala ukuze baqhubeke
nomsebenzi wabo wokuba ngabalimi noma bakwazi ukuthola ukuxhaswa ngendlela
efanele.

Njengamanje-ke uMongameli uthe iningi kakhulu imali abazoyifaka kohulumeni
basekhaya. Ohulumeni basekhaya babalulekile ngoba yilapho kukhona abantu
besifazane nemiphakathi. Kodwa-ke uma ifakiwe imali, kudingekile ukuthi
laba bantu besifazane baqeqesheke. Kudingeka ukuthi uma laba bantu
besifazane bezongena kohulumeni basekhaya bafundiswe. (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[How did it all start? It started when South Africa put women on the
highest level. The best part of it was their role in gender legislation.
The government put gender issues on the level they deserve by creating an
institution at the highest level in the hierarchy: others are in the
Presidency, in Parliament and in the gazette. These factors show that women
are the nucleus of South Africa. They fought, indeed- they are here today.

There is still a challenge to ensure that women are indeed benefiting in
modern life. Are gender laws of assistance to them? What is important is
that these should help them, for they have a voice. We’re aware that there
has been violence, but they have exposed it.

Let us thank the Minister of Labour because he has ensured that women who
had been working for bosses and wives are registered and their salaries are
better. [Applause.]

There are still complaints from women that they don’t get help from courts
since some males are not interested in women’s issues. I plead with them,
President.

President, in Africa as a whole we commend you that during your
announcement of the year’s programme, you stated that the departments and
Ministers in South Africa were playing a significant role in Africa. In
respect of Africa as a whole, we appeal to you to encourage the progressive
governments to increase the number of women leading their countries to at
least 30% because in South Africa we don’t speak about 30% but we’re
demanding 50% in local government. [Applause.]

In 2000, when the President was addressing the Commonwealth leaders, he
said that “poverty in South Africa wears the face of an African woman”.
That is true indeed. Be that as it may, there is progress. The Department
of Agriculture annually gives an award to the woman farmer of the year.
That encourages women to do something. Such programmes help those living in
rural areas. We appreciate that you have said, President, that there will
be ways to assist these people so that they can carry out farming work
accordingly.

The President has indicated that more money is to be given to local
government. Local government is important because women are there. It is
important to train these women after giving them money. The women must be
trained before their inclusion in local government.]

They must be recruited and, as new entrants, given information on
leadership, management and on how to deal with local government programmes,
policies and procedures …

… ukuze bakwazi ukulibusa kahle. [… so that they would be able to run it
well.]

Women are, in fact, committed agents of change.

Ngakho-ke ngiyethemba ukuthi uma sekufike isikhathi sokuthi kube khona
ukhetho lohulumeni basekhaya abantu besifazane bazophuma ngobuningi babo.
Thina singuhulumeni lapha sizobasiza abesifazane ukuthi bangene ngenkathi
senza umsebenzi wethu wasezindaweni esisebenza kuzo.

Ngizokhuluma kancane ngokukhubazeka. Mongameli, siyakuncoma ngoba
ukukhubazeka kungaphansi kophiko lwakho. Ungumuntu ozwelanayo
nezokukhubazeka. Noma ungakhulumanga kakhulu ngesikhathi ukhuluma
ngabakhubazekile, kodwa-ke ngiyethemba ukuthi uyazi ukuthi banesiqubulo
sabo esithi, “Nothing about us without us”. Ngisasho lokho, ngikhumbula
uMaria Rantho owayekhona lapha ngabo-1995 kodwa osewashona.

Abantu abakhubazekile baqhamuka nenqubomgomo yabo ebizwa ngokuthi i-
Integrated National Disability Strategy abayenza besehhovisi le-
Reconstruction and Development Programme ngaleso sikhathi. Base beveza
ukuthi bafuna ukuphila kanjani emphakathini. Kungaba yinto enhle uma
iminyango kahulumeni ingase iyisebenzise i-Integrated National Disability
Strategy ngoba izokwazi ukubanika indlela yokusebenza nabantu
abakhubazekile ezindaweni zabo. Futhi sizokhumbula ukuthi iPhalamende
njengamanje linenqwaba yabantu abakhubazekile abakhethwe umphakathi. Kusho
ukuthi laba bantu abakhubazekile umphakathi ubakhethe ngoba ungabhekanga
ukukhubazeka kwabo kodwa ubheke igalelo nekhono abanalo. [Ihlombe.]

Bangithumile-ke abantu abakhubazekile, Mongameli, bathi angisho ukuthi
bayojabula ukuthi ngelinye ilanga, uma ubheka emndenini wakho, ube naye
phela uNggongqoshe noma iPhini likaNgqongqoshe okhubazekile. [Ihlombe.]
Bangithumile. Lokho akushiwo yimina, ngithunywe yibona.

Kukhona nezinselelo engicabanga ukuthi zingabhekeleka uma sonke sizama
ukuthi sizibhekele. Lezo yizinselelo ezinjengokuthi niyabona lapha ukuthi
kukhona ilungu elikhubazekile elikhuluma ngolimi lwezimpawu. Ulimi
lwezimpawu lungolunye lwezimi ezikhona eNingizimu Afrika. INingizimu Afrika
iyo kuphela enalolu limi futhi eluvumile ngokukasomqulu.

Njengenye yezinselelo e-Afrika, siyacela futhi ukuthi maqondana nabantu
abakhubazekile kusetshenziswane ne-African Union futhi babe sesimweni
sokuthi bavele obala, bazeke, bangalokhu befihliwe ngoba phela bayingxenye
yomphakathi kanti nevoti labo futhi siyalifuna njengengxenye yomphakathi
siyi-Afrika iyonkana. Banegalelo abanokulibamba. Singajabula-ke uma ngabe i-
Afrika yonkana ingase izame ukubhekela abantu abakhubazekile.

Sengishilo-ke ukuthi ulimi lwezimpawu kufuneka kube nendlela yokuthi
lukhuthazwe. Ngiyacabanga ukuthi uMnyango wezeMfundo ungakwenza lokho.
[Kwaphela isikhathi.] Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[I hope that during local government elections women will come out in
numbers. We as government will ensure that women are included in these
programmes that we carry out.

I would like to talk about disability. President, we’re happy that the
disabled are within your department. You are sympathetic to the disabled.
Though you did not say much about the disabled, I do hope you’re aware of
their slogan, “Nothing about us without us”.  When saying this I remember
Maria Rantho, who was here in 1995 but who passed away.

The disabled came up with the programme called the “Integrated National
Disability Strategy” which they created in the office of the Reconstruction
and Development Programme during that period. They indicated how they
wanted to live in the community. It would be wise for government
departments to apply the Integrated National Disability Strategy because it
will give them ways to work with the disabled. We would remember that
Parliament at present employs a number of disabled persons who have been
elected by their constituency. The community elected them by focusing on
their ability and contribution, and not their disability. [Applause.]

I’ve been sent by the disabled, President, who are saying that they would
be happy for you to one day appoint a Minister or Deputy Minister from
among the disabled. [Applause.] They have sent me. I am not saying this for
myself. They have sent me.

There are challenges we can achieve together. There is a member amongst us
who is disabled and who uses sign language. Sign language is one of the
official languages in South Africa. South Africa is the only country with
this language officially recognised in the Bill of Rights.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, hon President and members, I’ve known Angel
Jones since she was a little girl. She’s a friend of my children,
particularly my son who was part of her initial homecoming revolution
campaign just over two years ago. It is an outstanding endeavour which
deserves our support, and the President has appropriately given it his
endorsement.

Angel is right. We need the twenty-something, thirty-something young people
with skills whoever they are, black or white, who left the country to get
experience and see the world, to come home and help build this great
country of ours. There are so many reasons to return. So what can possibly
hold them back? There’s a simple answer: crime. Crime, particularly the
fear of being a victim of mindless and often savagely violent crime, and
corruption in our country give our country a bad name.

The President acknowledges that the level of crime, especially violent
crime, remains unacceptable. It is all very well to point out that crime
has stabilised, but at extremely high levels. Certain crimes, such as
aggravated robbery, which means assault, and child abuse, have shot up.

The quarter of a million murders that took place in the first 10 years of
freedom are a blot on our young democracy. So are the 2,5 million
burglaries and the nearly half a million rapes. It is small comfort for the
families of the victims to hear that murder rates have gone down – from 25
000 in 1999 to 20 000 last year, or 42 per 100 000 of the population - when
this means that we are still one of the most murderous countries of the
world, with double the murder rate of Latin America.

The President says that 168 of the top 200 criminals in our country have
been apprehended since May. But this could be a fairy story for all we
know. The government has refused to identify the top 200. But surely we can
now be told who the top 168 are, seeing that they have been caught, to give
this some credibility?

Cape Town is now recognised as one of the top tourist destinations in the
world, but murderous attacks on tourists in this country are on the
increase and each such attack gets huge publicity in the tourist’s home
country. So they won’t believe that our notoriously high crime rate has
decreased.

Two of my own circle of friends in Johannesburg have been attacked and
robbed in their homes in the past week. They don’t believe that crime has
decreased. The families of the three murdered UCT academics don’t believe
it either.

We must offer the public in South Africa and our possible returnees a sense
of hope for the future. The question we must ask is: Are the steps
announced by the President enough to seriously cut the crime rate and make
South Africa an attractive destination in this second decade of freedom?

The DA’s position is that while much talking about plans, restructuring and
so on takes place, too little is actually done and too few resources are
actually allocated to the fight against crime, which is one of the major
factors inhibiting the Mbeki vision of a prosperous, successful country to
which we all earnestly aspire.

The fight against crime and corruption requires commitment and leadership
from the top. Just over two years ago at the ANC’s 51st national congress
in Stellenbosch, the President committed the government firmly against the
further entrenchment of corruption in our country. In this, the government
has failed dismally. White-collar crime, fraud and corruption are rife in
our country, and their tentacles are perceived to reach everywhere, right
up to the Deputy President whose alleged corrupt dealings with Schabir
Shaik are the subject of an ongoing court case. [Interjections.] These
tentacles have even reached into this Chamber, with over 20 of our
colleagues seated among us, but as yet unidentified, about to be charged.

Every day the media reports on corruption in the Police Service, corruption
in local government, and corruption in provincial government departments.
The President’s answer is to convene yet another summit on corruption
within the next three months, the fourth such summit since 1994. They may
serve to review progress and educate key players, but so far these summits
have yielded few results.

We would like to suggest that this time, unlike on some previous occasions,
members of the opposition, who, after all, are among the frontline whistle-
blowers, are also invited to participate in this. Thank you. [Applause.]
[Time expired.]

Mof T V TOBIAS: Ke a leboha, Modulasetulo. Mohl Mopresidente wa Rephaboliki
ya Afrika Borwa, Mohl Motlatsa Mopresidente, ntate Zuma, bosiyong ba hae le
maloko a Palamente a hlomphehileng ... (Translation of Sotho paragraph
follows.)

[Ms T V TOBIAS: Thank you, hon Chairperson, hon President of the Republic
of South Africa, hon Deputy President, Mr Zuma, in absentia and hon members
of Parliament …]

... I find it amazing that the DA is so used to singing its tune that they
are not even aware of the changes. I don’t think they were listening to the
President’s speech. [Interjections.] I suggest, hon Camerer, that you go
and read it. You will then see that South Africa is on course.

A serious allegation about the Presidency suppressing investigations has
been made. I think Mr Leon must clarify these statements to this House. I
know he is trying to start a debate, but he is failing. He also talks about
modesty. Does modesty mean making such wild allegations? [Interjections.]

The state of the nation debate takes place at a very important moment, as
we will be celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter, after
we have celebrated 10 years of democracy. This also happens on the eve of
the second decade of freedom. [Interjections.] Please allow me to reiterate
what the President said on Friday, when he addressed this House, based on
the basic principles of the Freedom Charter: South Africa belongs to all
who live in it, black and white.

Ka kopo, Modulasetulo, ntumelle ke phete seo … [Please, hon Chairperson,
allow me to repeat what …]

Mr T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, could we request your assistance in bringing
the DA to order because they are not allowing the speaker to address the
House. [Interjections.] Running comments are not allowed.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Thank you. Please proceed.

Ms T V TOBIAS: At least I am young; the people who are making a noise are
old. I wonder what this means for leadership purposes.

Since the inception of the democratic state …

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S BOTHA): Order, members!

Ms T V TOBIAS: … this people’s Parliament needs to take stock of the
following. Institutional mechanisms were introduced to bring about
democracy. The people’s Parliament was established to take into account the
needs of the South African people. In relation to youth development, the
following was also done to bring about change: The National Youth
Commission, the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and local youth units in
municipalities were established.

The strategic objective of the National Youth Commission is to monitor
government departments in terms of their bias to youth development
programmes. Our government has adopted the National Youth Service Programme
as a vehicle to achieve the latter.

The National Youth Commission, which exists in all provinces except the
Western Cape, is implementing the following programmes: The national youth
service implementation plan, the creation of the national youth service
units for effective liaison and the establishment of the youth development
offices. This, members of Parliament, is an achievement.

On the other hand, the Umsobomvu Youth Fund has been established through
the Department of Labour to ensure that the following is achieved: skills
transfer, youth entrepreneurship programmes and youth development in
general. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Order! Hon member, please take your
seat. Please give the member an opportunity to put her case.

Ms T V TOBIAS: Thank you, Chairperson. Given the huge challenges the youth
face with regard to unemployment and skills limitations, it is important to
merge the National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu Fund into one
structure, namely the youth development agency. This is done in an
endeavour to strengthen their capacity to realise youth development
programmes and also to fast-track changes with the intention of speeding up
the process of the establishment of the provincial youth commission,
particularly in the Western Cape, to realise the people’s aspirations.

Please allow me to congratulate the Umsobomvu Youth Fund for appointing
provincial youth co-ordinators. This move will be fruitful to you.

As the President mentioned in the state of the nation address, young people
will be trained in the provinces to be community development workers. This
is but one part of the job creation programme for the youth. More needs to
be done to deal with youth unemployment.

We also need to congratulate South Africa on the hosting of the 2010 World
Cup. This will also bring good prospects to the country. Research has
proven that the youth is in the majority in this country, and therefore it
is imperative to engage them in the economic activities that will come with
the 2010 World Cup, to reduce in order unemployment.

Last year, in the people’s manifesto, the President announced that, through
the Expanded Public Works Programme, the government had committed itself by
signing a people’s contract to create jobs and alleviate poverty.
[Interjections.]

The South African government generally subscribes to codes of good
practice, and in all the abovementioned gains we also want to welcome
announcements made by the President on issues of skills development,
information and communications technology, the Setas, small enterprise and
the financial sector.

We also note that government, through its information and communications
technology and communications programme, will encourage the youth to breach
the digital divide and provide, through Setas, relevant skills that are
demanded by the market. The demand-and-supply curve must be tilted in such
a way that it will address the demographics of gender, race and age in our
country, with a specific bias with regard to the future of tomorrow, the
youth.

At the same time student funding, through Nafsas, remains a challenge and
needs attention. The current learnership programmes have not yet reached
the expected targets to give skills to the youth.

In the recent past an impression has been created – and also today in the
Chamber by the hon Leon - that affirmative action is a programme to empower
the incompetent black majority. [Interjections.] Consistently, some
sections of the racist white minority, and the DA in particular, have been
questioning the capacity of black managers and leaders.

This racist attack is a tactic to undermine the democratic gains of our
revolution, that of bringing all South Africans as equals before the law
and empowering the disadvantaged majority that was excluded from
participating in the mainstream of the economy of the country. This
tendency, also finds expression … [Interjections.]

Prof B TUROK: On a point of order, Madam Chair: There’s so much noise
coming from that quarter. May I suggest that we ask the DA to take a
comfort break? [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Hon member, please proceed.

Ms T V TOBIAS: I didn’t know that I would raise their adrenalin levels.

This racist attack is a tactic to undermine the democratic gains of our
revolution, that of bringing all South Africans as equals before the law
and empowering the disadvantaged majority that was excluded from
participating in the mainstream of the economy of the country. This
tendency also finds expression through the so-called black professionals
who, by hook or by crook, think that an academic qualification is the
equivalent of intellectual capacity, which in itself cannot be justified in
terms of community development work, but is a totally elitist approach to
the difficult questions that the ANC has been unravelling since its
formation 93 years ago.

At the same time, black economic empowerment, which is broad in nature, is
viewed by this element as a tool to promote a few black elites and is
condemned by the so-called captains of big industries, who happen to be
white male conservatives who feel threatened and startled by this change.

Young black people who aspire to be businesspeople are labelled as fat cats
by those white people who knew that apartheid was wrong because South
Africa belonged to all who live in it, both black and white; they are
ostracised and given all kinds of labels, which I can’t mention in this
Chamber, in a quest to undermine the democratic cause. [Interjections.]

As we have asserted before, the economy of the country is still in the
hands of the few. Therefore it is important for the South African
government consistently to address this, as it has started to do through
the black economic empowerment programme, by allowing all South Africans,
especially those who were denied access and the youth, to participate in
the economic development of the country; and we are doing so.
[Interjections.]

The sports fraternity has also not been immune to these problems. For
example, the recent fight in the SA Football Association has also shown
that there is slow transformation in the sports fraternity, especially in
rugby and cricket. In South Africa, those who oppress the black majority
are very allergic to issues of quotas. That’s why we see such conduct.

These quotas are meant to address the backlog of equal participation, be it
in management positions or playing in the sporting codes. This poses a
challenge: At which stage shall we empower the disempowered, especially the
youth? And at which pace shall we do this and on whose terms? Shall we do
it on your terms? [Interjections.] The people will lead.

The popular view is that of serving individual interests. Are we really
serious about nation-building or is it just mechanical? Utopian exaltation
is a sickness that has beset the DA, to the extent that they have lost the
creativity to engage in intellectual debate. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

Indeed, they have turned into a very reactionary party that does not have
an alternative policy position but to react to our own progressiveness.
[Interjections.] At least the international platform has accepted that
there are no issues that the DA can raise. The DA must learn to read
protocols. [Interjections.] We are not cowboys. Therefore, we can’t
undermine the sovereignty of other countries by superimposition. We believe
in engagement. [Interjections.]

I am also interested to know how Mr Leon understands change when he does
not accept majority rule. Mr Leon, you don’t understand majority rule. Is
majority rule not a change from minority rule? It is. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.] The media that he relies on seems to battle with issues
that they don’t understand, but creates unnecessary sensation. They are far
from starting a debate. They only excite fools. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

At the same time, the youth leader of the DA, Sinde Nhlapho, in Phomolong
in the Free State, said, and I quote him verbatim:

  People have been unhappy for a long time. We are trying to attract
  attention to our problems. We are burning tires and setting barricades,
  but we are not fighting …”

[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Chairperson, on a point of order: Couldn’t you allow
the previous speaker another five minutes? It was most amusing. [Laughter.]

Mr R COETZEE: Chairperson, it’s very difficult to follow the active and
intellectual giant of our time, but we will do our best. [Laughter.] It is
surely obvious that no accurate assessment of the state of our nation is
possible without a long, hard look at our progress in combating and
treating HIV/Aids.

And yet characteristically the President chose instead to avert his gaze on
Friday. Of the pandemic he had only this to say: That with regard to Aids
in particular, the government’s comprehensive plan, which is among the best
in the world, combining awareness, treatment and home-based care, is being
implemented with greater vigour. But the truth is that the Aids treatment
programme in our country is not being implemented with vigour and is not
being led with the single-minded determination that is required so
urgently.

According to the latest information availed to us only 19 426 people are on
treatment, and that is a tiny number when measured against the hundreds of
thousands who need antiretrovirals. In the 2003-04 financial year fewer
than 250 000 people were tested by public health institutions in South
Africa, which is a drop in the ocean when you consider that over 20 million
sexually active adult South Africans make use of those facilities. It is
frankly unacceptable for the President of our country to be unaware of this
reality or to ignore it or to misrepresent it. [Interjections.]

What this government finally needs to accept, is that South Africa really
does belong to all who live in it – to the healthy and to the ill, to those
with HIV as much as to those without. The truth is  that this government’s
approach to HIV/Aids makes a mockery of the Freedom Charter, because until
now the only thing people with HIV have been free to do is die.

The crisis in health care goes way beyond a failure to combat HIV/Aids.
Arguably our greatest challenge is to attract and retain well-qualified
health professionals, because all the drugs in the world and the buildings
and the equipment cannot by themselves provide health care for our people.
According to the Health Systems Trust report, commissioned by this
government, 31% of posts in the public health service were vacant in 2003.
And according to the Minister of Health herself, last year over 20 000
nurses’ posts were vacant, as well as almost 3 000 doctors’ posts, almost 1
000 posts for pharmacists, over 1 300 posts for specialists and 420 posts
for dental practitioners. Yet the Department of Health is only set to
finalise the latest strategy in April to deal with this crisis. The last
strategy, the 1999 strategy, failed dismally.

But unlike the President, who has recently shown a commendable attachment
to measurable commitments, the Department of Health told the portfolio
committee that it would not set timebound targets for filling these
vacancies. And certainly in respect of the shortage of health care
professionals, the capacity problems to which the President referred on
Friday did not fall unexpectedly from a clear blue sky one afternoon.
Indeed they are the consequence of a lack of vigilance, foresight and
planning on the part of the government. Similarly, the incapacity of so
many of our public hospitals to provide an adequate standard of health care
was hardly unforeseen. It is the inevitable consequence of 10 years of
neglect. As is so often the case, the problems the President promised to
solve were self-induced.

Given their track record, you would think that those managing public health
care in our country would hesitate before inserting themselves into the
management of private health, and yet they hesitate not. They charge on. I
found it deeply ironic that the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration seems so opposed to privatisation when the Ministers of
state sitting in this House today prefer private hospitals to public
hospitals and send their children to private schools instead of public
schools. Perhaps if they sent their children to public schools and went to
public hospitals instead of private hospitals they would have a different
point of view on the private sector. [Interjections.]

Perhaps the best current example of the way in which the government has
chosen to intervene in the private sector relates to medicine prices.
Whatever the Minister says, the fact is that the committee did not consult
properly. It did not do a proper assessment of the economic consequences of
its decisions, and produced as a consequence what one High Court judge
described as a thumb suck.

The looming danger, if these things go through, is that the people who
matter most will find themselves unable to access safe medicines. The
unhappy truth is that we do not enjoy today a confluence of encouraging
possibilities in respect of the state of our nation’s health care; rather,
we face a series of interlinked crises, crises that will only be overcome
with honesty, with visionary leadership and with competent management.
These we are missing and have been missing for a long time. I sincerely
hope that will change in 2005. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M R MOHLALOGA: Chairperson, President and hon members, it would be
regrettable if hon Pheko is not aware that he is presiding over a carcass
on its way to the grave, because of the very clause he is attacking in the
Freedom Charter. I think the most honourable thing he can do is to use his
skills to write the obituary of the PAC. [Interjections.]

Again, because of that clause, the DA will remain small and ultimately die,
because the destiny of black South Africans and white South Africans is
commonly shared.

Having said this, Madam Deputy Chairperson, on an occasion such as this
one, it is important to tell a story, which will not be uncommon to most of
us who went through the apartheid education system. When I went to school
at the age of seven, I had to walk ten kilometres a day, even without food
at school. When I went to secondary school, the distance increased from ten
to twenty kilometres a day. Poor parents had to make do to buy books and
stationery. Sometimes, if you were lucky, they would give you pocket money,
buy your school uniform and pay for your school fees.

The schools I attended, both primary and secondary, had been built by the
community. Not even a single classroom or a pit latrine had been built by
the then apartheid government.

Going to school was a major headache, because you would not have enough
books and stationery or all the items which made up your school uniform.
You also would not have enough classrooms and desks at school.
[Interjections.] We had to study under trees and some of the teachers who
taught us were even paid by the community. In the eyes of the then
apartheid regime and its bantustans, we were not a priority in terms of
education, and we were less South African than our white compatriots.

As we celebrate 50 years of the Freedom Charter, we are reminded of the
importance and the significance which the people of South Africa placed on
education in the socio-economic life of our country. They envisaged a
democratic South Africa with all the doors of learning and culture wide
open. They envisaged a South Africa in which every child would have the
right and access to education. This is indeed a vision we shall tirelessly
work for, and as sure as the night follows the day we shall achieve it. We
have to achieve this vision so that the current generation of learners will
tell a different story from our own, when they come out of our education
system.

Over the past 10 years we have made tremendous strides in transforming an
education system which was based on racial and ethnic classification to the
one that treasures all the cultures of mankind that discovers, develops and
encourages natural talent for the enhancement of our cultural life.

We have made tremendous strides in transforming a Bantu education system,
characterised by low or no spending on black people, to an education system
that fosters equitable per capita spending on all learners in South Africa,
black and white. We have improved access to primary and secondary
schooling, with near universal primary schooling and more than 80%
enrolment in secondary schooling. This is marked by an increase in the
participation rate among girls, which is amongst the highest in the world.
I am not sure where hon Pheko gets his statistics.

We have improved access to school education by exempting poor learners from
paying school fees, and outlawing discrimination against and exclusion of
learners who cannot afford to pay school fees. As we speak, a plan
progressively to increase free education for all is on our agenda.

We have also made interventions to enhance access to higher education
institutions through the establishment of the National Student Financial
Aid Scheme. When it started in 1996, it had a mere R300 million and at
present it has just under R1 billion.

We have improved the performance of learners throughout the schooling
system, especially in the Grade 12 senior certificate. This has been
accompanied by the quality of our results that is assured by Umalusi. Even
the fact that we were able to pick up irregularities in Mpumalanga province
indicates that indeed the system we have established is working and it is
credible.

We have established a national strategy for mathematics, science and
technology through 102 schools with a specific mandate to promote studies
in these fields, especially among girls.

We have reduced illiteracy and aliteracy through the reading advocacy
project, Masifunde Sonke, and adult basic education and training
programmes.

However, challenges still remain. Over and above restructuring higher
education, we are faced with the challenge of broadening access to higher
education by thousands of students from poor backgrounds.

The fact that less than 2% of our population have a tertiary education is a
matter that we have to attend to, amongst other things, through reviewing
the bursary loan split by the National Student Financial Aid Scheme.

The private sector has to come to the party around this matter. The fact
that the private sector contributes just a percentage of the total
contribution to the fund is a matter for concern. Again, we should deal
with the issue of access beyond physical access, including intellectual and
cultural access.

Intellectual access requires us to rebel against curricula that exclude the
majority of our people. Curricula should be developed in the context of our
African reality, cognisant of what is happening throughout the world. We
need to root our curricula in the African soil and affirm our Africanness
as a point of departure. Only in this way can we provide intellectual
access to knowledge to the majority of our higher education students.

Providing cultural access to higher education is about establishing
cultural justice. Establishing cultural justice in higher education
requires expanding the scope of inclusion for our different languages,
lifestyles and cultural orientations, so that all our people should feel
affirmed and not feel like strangers or out of place in our institutions of
higher learning. This is a matter that we have to attend to, because the
only thing some of our historically white institutions can do is to provide
some kind of access and seek to assimilate black students into some
conservative and liberal cultural practices.

We declared the year 2003 the Year of Further Education and Training, in
recognition of the important role this sector plays in the development of
our country’s human resources. We put in place the national curriculum
framework that set the parameters for the development of responsive
programmes in this sector to keep up with modern technological
developments.

In some of the historically black technical colleges, students are still
being trained using antiquated technology that is no longer in use in the
private sector due to a lack of resources. This is a matter to which we are
paying attention.

Over the next five years, we will revitalise these FET colleges and create
the necessary synergy with our Setas. This will include recapitalisation
and the development of appropriate human resources, and a curriculum that
will allow us to produce the skilled workforce needed to sustain and
further develop our economy.

One of the challenges we face is the issue of strengthening our school
governing bodies as platforms for democratic participation in the education
of our children. Every school today has a school governing body, duly
elected by the school communities, to ensure the smooth running of our
schools. However, the problem is that in some of our former white schools,
the school governing bodies are used as platforms to frustrate
transformation. Some are still using language to exclude black learners.
This is happening here in the Western Cape, in the North West and in other
parts of our country. It must come to an end. School governing bodies must
play an important role in building a nonracial and united society by making
sure that they take steps to deracialise our classrooms and life in our
schools as a basis for constructing a single nationhood.

Elements of the curriculum inherited from apartheid do not fit with the
vision of a democratic, nonracist and nonsexist dispensation. Through our
new curriculum, we seek to develop knowledgeable, skilled, responsible and
ethical citizens, and to instill in them the values of our democracy,
social justice and equity, nonracism and nonsexism, ubuntu, the rule of
law, respect, reconciliation and nation-building.

Of course, the question is: Do we want to prepare learners for university
or for employment and lifelong learning? Do we want to educate them for the
sake of educating them or do we want to educate them to meet the demands of
our economy?

Most of our learners come out of matric with no skills to obtain gainful
employment and only a few go to university. In respect of those who come
out of our universities, there is a mismatch between the skills required by
our economy and those that they are bringing.

I was talking to the speaker of my local municipality over the Christmas
holidays. He told me that over the past four years they had appointed one
engineer after the other, because those they employ were given better
offers by other bigger municipalities or the private sector, because as a
poor municipality they cannot afford to pay them. Engineers are few and the
demand for them is high, and the same applies to other areas of skills
needed.

We shall continue to deal with the issue of classrooms and the targets that
have not been reached. It remains our commitment to make sure that our
learners have decent classrooms. Hon Holomisa may complain about tenders.
He conveniently forgets that he used to preside over ghost contracts, ghost
teachers, ghost schools and ghost learners under the former Transkei
government. He is the last to complain about tenders. We will definitely
make sure that our students receive decent classrooms.

The Departments of Education and Communications will be establishing
centres of excellence in information and communication technology in all
provinces so that we close the digital divide. Again, there is a commitment
to making sure that all our schools have telephone and Internet connection
at 50% reduced tariffs.

We have made commitments to improve the salaries of our educators, and
particularly maths and science teachers. This is an intervention that will
assist in attracting young people to the teaching profession as a career of
choice and we would like to encourage them to take it up.

One of the issues that need to be attended to, is the area of early
childhood development, as the President has indicated. For instance, our
early childhood education centres do not benefit from the food nutrition
programmes, and some of the early childhood educators are employed by the
communities and not by government. We have to get this area right.

We have to deal with the issue of the emigration of black learners from
rural areas and townships to historically white schools in suburbs. We have
to restore our people’s confidence in the schools, because there is no
difference between the curricula being used in suburban schools from that
in rural schools – they are the same. The only difference is in how they
speak English: some speak through their noses while others speak through
their mouths, but the curriculum is the same. [Laughter.]

In fact, there are instances such as in Limpopo, where two of the top three
schools are in the rural areas and the teachers are all black. For
instance, Mbilwi High School in Venda has been the top school in that
province for almost nine years. [Applause.]

Related to the above is the point made by the Minister of Labour, that the
private sector prefers graduates from historically white institutions. For
instance, a graduate with a BCom in Accounting from Wits is more likely to
get employment than a graduate with the same degree from Fort Hare. Even
though your lecturers were white and they attended the same university,
because you come from a historically black institution you must join the
queue at the tail end.

The advent of a democratic order in our schools has to be accompanied by a
climate conducive to learning in all our schools. We call on all our
teachers to provide the most efficient, effective and professional service.
This can be achieved through dedication and commitment, which will be
demonstrated through meaningful teaching, adequate preparation, and
exemplary behaviour. On the part of our students we expect nothing less
than discipline, diligence and sheer hard work to realise our objectives of
excellence and high achievement. We call on all the students to demonstrate
this new mood through regular and practical school attendance, acceptable
behaviour, and by applying themselves to their educational tasks.

We urge our parents to observe and monitor their children’s performance and
conduct, attend and take over responsibilities in governing body meetings,
and play their part in improving and securing the resources and facilities
of our schools.

Dealing boldly and vigorously with educational deprivation will remain our
top priority, because education is crucial for merging our first and second
economies and truly integrating our society.

Indeed, we shall overcome all these challenges and surely the current
generation of learners and students will tell a different story from our
own when they come out of our education system. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

  The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Madam
Chairperson, what has emerged in the course of this debate is the broad
consensus that the Congress of the People, held in Kliptown 50 years ago,
laid out the architecture of our new democracy. [Interjections.] The
architects of the Freedom Charter entrusted their plans to those who
followed, and many embraced their vision and were eager to lay the
foundations.

Today South Africa stands in our second decade of building. We have been on
site for ten years now. We have achieved much, the materials are at hand
and our people are working together as never before. [Interjections.] Our
challenge in the 50th year of the Freedom Charter is to live up to the
spirit of the Charter’s core message, namely that South Africa belongs to
all who live in it. [Interjections.]

The challenge that we have to meet is radically to advance the process of
nation-building and to create a truly nonracial and nonsexist society. This
common ideal of building our nonracial democracy must address the socio-
economic legacy of racial discrimination, and in particular the needs of
those trapped in the second economy. Our challenge therefore remains to
consolidate our successes and to further broaden the national consensus and
the critical mass of South Africans united behind and working tirelessly to
achieve these ideals.

Last year my colleagues and I adopted the Freedom Charter as a guiding
policy. [Interjections.] Never one to shy away from a spirited debate, Dr
Leopold Scholtz, deputy editor of Die Burger, which represents some of the
views here, in his recent contribution to the debate, described this
broadening of consensus as “a dramatic backwards step”. He continued:

  The Freedom Charter had very little practical meaning in the policies of
  this government.

He also added:

  In a certain sense one can therefore say that in spite of the powerful
  emotional and symbolic meaning that it, the Charter, still holds for
  millions of blacks, it was conceived and born in sin. That is, if one
  rejects communism.

In a later article Dr Scholtz explained. He said:

  The symbolism and emotion around the Freedom Charter lives virtually
  exclusively in the hearts of blacks and not whites.

But yet we all recognise the words:

  Uit die blou van onse hemel, Uit die diepte van ons see,Oor ons ewige
  gebergtes, Waar die kranse antwoord gee ...


[Interjections.] This is not modern Afrikaans. It reflects, instead, the
frontier mentality of 1918, and the century before that, that seems foreign
to our modern urbanised world. It is also true that the majority of South
Africans were excluded from these words for decades, but yet today they are
sung with passion, loyalty and pride by 45 million South African voices
every day as part of our national anthem. [Applause.]

People who had no part in their composition find power and meaning in their
message. And similarly, it is the Freedom Charter that informed our
Constitution and the Bill of Rights, and today also informs much of our
government’s programme of action. [Interjections.]

Attempts by commentators such as Dr Scholtz to label the Freedom Charter as
“communist inspired”, “from the heart of the Kremlin” - and I hear the same
interjections here - and “historically aimed at assisting in the creation
of a Leninist dictatorship”, simply do not reflect the full history. This
is like saying that because of our history, Afrikaans will perpetually be
rejected as the language of oppression, with little relevance in the modern
South Africa, or that because some senior Broederbond members played key
roles in drawing up our Constitution, it somehow comes from the heart of
the Broederbond. [Interjections.] It’s highly unlikely.

In a country and a society like ours, you often find knowledge or views
that people proclaim with the certainty of black and white, but very often
what is needed to understand such societies is not that stark division and
certainty, but rather an understanding of the difficult and shaded area in
between.

If opposition to the Freedom Charter is encapsulated in the test “conceived
and born in sin”, how then do we deal with the challenges that we have to
deal with, such as place names, accumulated wealth, ownership of land, and
many others? [Interjections.] Or do we rather try to find the answer within
the framework of historical context and a deeper understanding based on
wisdom?

The point is that acceptance and respect for history cannot come from only
one side. We cannot say that we insist on the inclusion of the previous
national anthem in the present one, or that we insist Afrikaans must get
proper, or even special recognition, but then when we ourselves are called
upon to respect and understand deserving symbols of the struggle, we
suddenly intellectualise why this is not possible. [Applause.]

A common history presupposes a broader view and a greatness of spirit which
has become the hallmark of South Africa, but which must still permeate to
all corners of our country.

Die Vryheidsmanifes is ’n produk van sy tyd, en hoewel die boodskap vandag
nog net so relevant is as vyf dekades gelede, moet ons die taalgebruik van
die manifes in sy historiese konteks lees. Dit is en dit bly ’n waardevolle
missieverklaring vir ons demokrasie, en behoort aan alle Suid-Afrikaners
van alle gemeenskappe. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The Freedom Charter is a product of its time, and although the message is
as relevant today as it was five decades ago, we should read the language
usage of the charter in its historical context. It is and remains a
valuable mission statement for our democracy, and belongs to all South
Africans of all communities.]

Anthems, vows, declarations, public contracts and charters have relevance
and value far beyond their historical context, and nowhere has this been
better illustrated than in the course of this debate about the state of our
nation in which we are reclaiming the
Freedom Charter for all South Africans.

It may surprise many in this Chamber to know that the generation of my
parents grew up singing Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrica at meetings of the Afrikaans
cultural Voortrekker movement. Even now my mother recalls the words taught
to her in her childhood. In later years, though, this hymn became a
historically and politically charged symbol of hope to many and of fear to
some. In the process its meaning and message was lost to certain South
Africans.

Today though, Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika is part of our shared history that has
been reclaimed for all. It echoes from the homes, the schools, the offices
and the churches of all South African communities.

Some people continue to dismiss or deride the Freedom Charter on the basis
of its language and turn of phrase, which often seem unfamiliar to the
modern South African ear. After all, words and phrases such as “peasants”,
“pass laws”, “compound labour” and “farm prisons” are no longer in everyday
use. The references to Basutoland and Bechuanaland in the Charter are
unfamiliar and remembered mainly as footnotes in our historical texts,
although some in this Chamber will of course recall them firsthand.

In the same way, the clauses that speak to the need for the land to be
shared among those who work it were rather in reaction to not all South
Africans being able to be owners of land. In fact, these same sentiments
have today found expression in both our Bill of Rights and the land reform
programme of this government.

The state of our nation is not in question. The state of our future is
what, ultimately, we are debating. If we are to reach out successfully to
those who remain ``marginalised in the wilderness of the second economy’’,
if we are to bring to them the benefits and the bounty of our democratic
growth and development, then we must do so in the spirit of the Freedom
Charter.

In conclusion, poverty, unemployment and hunger are incompatible with South
African success. Homelessness, illiteracy and intolerance must never define
the outer limits of our accomplishments.

For those few South Africans who still regard the Freedom Charter as the
agenda of only black South Africa: Stop looking for excuses for your fears.
[Interjections.] Put “swart gevaar” behind you once and for all - and I
know it is difficult sometimes - and join with us in celebrating 50 years
of speaking for freedom and a decade of acting together to make it a
reality. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S BOTHA): Order, members! Order!

Mr T D LEE: Madam Chair, Mr President, in 1971 the ANC stood before the UN
and called for South African sport to be boycotted. Speaking on behalf of
the ANC, Abdul Minty argued as follows:


  The moral position is absolutely clear. Human beings should not be
  willing partners in perpetuating a system of racial discrimination.
  Sportsmen have a special duty in this regard in that they should be first
  to insist that merit, and merit alone, be the criterion for selecting
  teams for representative sport.

In conclusion, he stated that all links with racialist bodies should be
abolished until sport inside South Africa was conducted on the basis of
merit alone and not on colour.

But today, under the leadership of President Mbeki, the ANC has turned this
ideal on its head. Today that principle of nonracialism has been cast aside
in favour of racial engineering.

Indeed, today I stand before an ANC so obsessed with race that it is now
threatening to introduce legislation imposing racial quotas on South
African sport. The very same ANC that once said that sport should be
conducted on the basis of merit alone, now says sport should be conducted
on the basis of race. [Interjections.]

Mr President, the people of South Africa would like to know …
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Order! Hon members, please don’t
comment so loudly.

Mr T D LEE: Which is it? Is it merit or race?

Voorsitter, Basil D’Oliveira het Suid-Afrika in 1960 verlaat omdat hy
grootgeword het met ’n stelsel wat verhoed het dat hy in sy eie land sy
volle potensiaal kon bereik. Maar vandag, in ’n nuwe Suid-Afrika, staan ons
voor presies dieselfde situasie. Spelers soos Kevin Petersen en Clyde
Rathbone, onder talle ander, voel hulle kan nie hul volle potensiaal bereik
nie en is elders heen. Suid-Afrikaanse sport dra die gevolge daarvan, en
dit alles net omdat die ANC glo dat politiek moet bepaal hoe ons sport
geadministreer moet word.

In 1997 het wyle Steve Tshwete gesê dat die regering op elke terrein van
die lewe in Suid-Afrika – ook sport – gaan inmeng. Inmenging is net ’n
ander woord vir die ANC se politieke transformasie-agenda. Deur
rasseverteenwoordigheid bo talent en vermoë te plaas, het die ANC die klem
in sport verskuif van ’n strewe om die beste te wees na ’n strewe om
demografies die verteenwoordigendste te wees. Wat kry voorrang, mnr die
President? Sport of politiek?

Mnr die President, Vrydag het u gepraat oor die skepping van ’n wennasie,
maar in Maart 2002 het u gesê: “Kom ons gee vir twee of drie jaar nie om
dat ons internasionale kragmetings verloor nie, omdat ons óns mense deel
van hierdie spanne moet maak.” Hoe kan ons ’n wennasie skep as die ANC se
obsessie met rassekwotas meebring dat ons verloor, net om die ANC se
politieke agenda te akkommodeer? Die DA glo alle Suid-Afrikaners is gelyk
en dat almal ’n gelyke kans en geleentheid moet kry om die beste te wees
wat hulle kan. Wat kry voorrang, mnr die President, wen of verloor?

Dit lyk asof die ANC net een wedstryd wil wen en dit is die wedstryd van
rassegetalle. Lojaliteit teenoor die party word ten koste van vermoë en
talent beloon. Sodoende het die ANC die klem verskuif van die ontwikkeling
van ons ontluikende talent – waar die klem juis moet val. Soos op elke
lewensterrein vereis welslae met sport, toewyding, geleentheid en tyd. Dit
is die kenmerke van sukses. Om dit te omseil, neem ’n mens bloot iemand se
volle potensiaal weg.

As enigiemand in hierdie Huis nog oor die verskil tussen die DA en die ANC
twyfel, staan dit nou soos ’n paal bo water, Trevor: Die ANC verkies ras.
Die ANC verkies politiek en verloor. Die DA verkies verdienste. Die DA
verkies sport. Die DA verkies om te wen. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Mnr die President, terwyl die agb Gaum hier gestaan het, het hy gepraat van
die goedkoop anti-Mugabe of anti-Harare propaganda van die DA. Vir die agb
Gaum is lewens goedkoop. Vryhede is goedkoop. Die vryheid van die pers, die
vryheid van assosiasie is goedkoop. Roof en moord en doodslag en
menselewens is goedkoop. Miskien kan ek verstaan waar die twee bymekaarkom.
Dit verbaas my nie dat die agb Gaum kant sal kies vir ’n mens soos Mugabe
nie. Dit herinner hom aan sy verlede en aan sy party se verlede. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, Basil D’Oliveira left South Africa in 1960 because he grew up
with a system that prevented him from reaching his full potential in his
own country. But today, in a new South Africa, we stand in precisely the
same position. Players like Kevin Petersen and Clyde Rathbone, amongst many
others, feel they cannot reach their full potential and have gone
elsewhere. South African sport has to bear the consequences of this, and
all this because the ANC believes that politics should determine how our
sport should be administered.

In 1997 the late Steve Tshwete said that the government would intervene in
every area of life in South Africa – including sport. Intervention is just
another word for the ANC’s political transformation agenda. By placing
racial representivity above talent and ability, the ANC has shifted the
emphasis in sport from striving to be the best to striving to be the most
representative demographically. What takes precedence, Mr President? Sport
or politics?

Mr President, on Friday you spoke of the creation of a winning nation, but
in March 2002 you said: “Let us not care about losing international
contests in the next two or three years, because we must make our people
part of these teams.” How can we create a winning nation if the ANC’s
obsession with racial quotas causes us to lose, just to accommodate the
ANC’s political agenda? The DA believes that all South Africans are equal
and that everyone should get an equal chance and opportunity to be the best
that they can be. Which receives precedence, Mr President, winning or
losing?

It would appear that the ANC only wishes to win one contest and that is the
contest, of racial numbers. Loyalty to the party is rewarded at the expense
of abilities and talent. In this manner the ANC has shifted the emphasis
away from the development of our emerging talent – where the emphasis
should indeed be. As in every sphere of life, success in sport requires
commitment, opportunity and time. These are the characteristics of success.
By bypassing this, one simply takes away someone’s full potential.

If anyone in this House still has any doubt about the difference between
the DA and the ANC, it is now as plain as a pikestaff, Trevor: The ANC
prefers race. The ANC prefers politics and losing. The DA prefers merit.
The DA prefers sport. The DA prefers winning. [Interjections.]

Mr President, while the hon Gaum was standing here, he spoke about the
cheap anti-Mugabe or anti-Harare propaganda of the DA. Lives are cheap to
the hon Gaum. Liberties are cheap. Freedom of the press, freedom of
association are cheap. Robbery and murder and mayhem and people’s lives are
cheap. Perhaps I can understand where the two meet. It does not surprise me
that the hon Gaum will side with a person of the likes of Mugabe. It
reminds him of his past and his party’s past. I thank you. [Applause.]]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chairperson, on a point of order:
While the hon Mr Lee was addressing the House, somebody from the ANC
benches shouted out: “You are a non-European”. [Laughter.]

We’ve heard him previously being referred to as a coconut by the hon
members there. The point I would like to make is that these racist remarks
are unbecoming to this House, and I would like you to call upon the ANC
member concerned to withdraw the remark and apologise to Mr Lee.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Order, members! I regret that I did
not hear the remark. I do not know if the hon member wants to confirm it?

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I would like to address you. The
hon Minister of Finance just confirmed that he said, “he is a non-
European”. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, I didn’t say, during the debate when
the member was speaking, that he was a ``non-European’’. If he is not a
``non-European’’, then he is a ``European’’ and I will sit down.
[Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Order! [Interjections.] May I make a
comment, please? Hon Minister, you know that these comments can be
interpreted as hurtful, so please be careful about the language you use in
Parliament.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: I don’t know what he wants …

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, can we just confirm, the
Minister of Finance having nothing to withdraw, that it is now appropriate,
according to this new rule, that hon members of this House can now be
addressed as ``Europeans’’ and ``non-Europeans’’, and that this is
appropriate in the Parliament of South Africa in 2005? [Interjections.] Is
that the effect of what Mr Manuel is saying? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): No, hon member, I won’t confirm that.
I think we’ll look at the context in which it’s used.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair, I’m sorry. I know the
day is growing older and the DA has taken a pounding. Can we please
continue with the business of the House? Please, Madam.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Hon Chief Whip, you should address
both sides of the House when you ask that.

Ms G L MAHLANGU-NKABINDE: Chairperson, hon President of the Republic, hon
members:


  In times of fundamental change, people tend to find a space, lose it and
  then find another space as life and the world transform around them. What
  does this metamorphosis entail and in what ways are we affected by it?
  How do we live through it and what may we become on our journey towards
  each other, particularly when the space and places from which we depart
  are at least on the surface so vastly different?

Thus writes Antjie Krog. And she encourages us to talk about these
differences, because they are real.

This reminds me of my experiences five years ago, when I, hon Sue van der
Merwe and a number of members of the Portfolio Committee on Environment,
including Nic Koornhof, went to Cuba. It was the first time that the hon
member Koornhof had travelled with people of a different colour – “non-
Europeans”. [Laughter.] [Applause.] Coming back from that trip, as is
usually the case with South Africans, we were more united and knew each
other even better.

A few weeks thereafter it was Nic Koornhof’s 40th birthday, and he had
become friends with Sue van der Merwe and myself, so he could not exclude
us from his guest list. He phoned Sue, and that was the end. But he phoned
me and gave me a warning, and said I am inviting you because I don’t know
how I can separate you from Sue van der Merwe, but I have never had a black
guest in my house. I have also never been at any social gathering with a
black person, or a ``non-European’’ person and neither have any of my
friends. However, I am inviting you, because you don’t know how much I was
healed during that trip; you don’t know how much I was able to deal with my
past. I would like you to come. I know there may be anger at the beginning,
but I will rely on your humour to make it easy for them to accept that
black people are equal to white people.

I have since always respected Nic Koornhof for that. [Applause.] That was
about six years ago, and the master of ceremonies was Marthinus van
Schalkwyk. Of course, we were from different worlds, but we managed to find
each other. [Applause.] It was at that time that I asked myself why the hon
Van Schalkwyk was still in the NP, because the way he spoke and the way he
carried himself, showed he belonged to the words that he just spoke here –
very good and noble words from a person who wants to build a nation. Thank
you very much, Marthinus. [Applause.]

We have to develop a truly South African vision of our country, one which
is not distorted by the prejudices that have guided viewpoints on race and
gender in the past. We have to rely on the wisdom, life experiences and
talents of all South Africans, women and men.

In his state of the nation address, President Mbeki emphasized, and I
quote:


  Central to these achievements is our success in advancing our country
  away from its divided past, towards the realisation of the vision
  contained in the Freedom Charter - whose 50th anniversary we celebrate
  this year - that “South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and
  white”.

The 8 January statement by the President celebrates that historic document
of our struggle and movement, the Freedom Charter. It spells out our tasks
as we pursue the goals spelt out in the Charter.

The Charter was not the statement of this or that section of the
population. It was a declaration of all the people of South Africa. It was
a simple, honest, unpretentious document reflecting the desires and ideas
of millions of common people.

The late Oliver Tambo spelt out the true meaning of the Freedom Charter to
our country and people in the 8 January 1980 statement, when, to mark the
25th anniversary of the Freedom Charter - during what he proclaimed as the
Year of the Charter - he said:


  The Freedom Charter contains the fundamental perspective of the vast
  majority of the people of South Africa of the kind of liberation that all
  of us are fighting for. Hence, it is not merely the Freedom Charter of
  the African National Congress and its allies. Rather it is the Charter of
  the people of South Africa for liberation … Because it came from the
  people, it remains still a people’s Charter, the one basic political
  statement of our goals to which all genuinely democratic and patriotic
  forces of South Africa adhere.

Surely, hon members, it was no coincidence when the President on Friday,
during the state of the nation address, said and I quote:


  We are not being arrogant or complacent when we assert that our country,
  as a united nation, has never in its entire history enjoyed such a
  confluence of encouraging possibilities. On behalf of our government, we
  commend our programme to the country, confident that its implementation
  will help to place us on the high road towards ensuring that we become a
  winning nation and that we play our role towards the renewal of Africa
  and the creation of a better world.

The democratic mandate of 2004 has further consolidated our democratic
system, thus ensuring the entrenchment of the Freedom Charter’s demand that
only a democratic state based on the will of all the people can secure to
all their birthright.

When two national movements, both with the interests of national unity,
were launched in the 1900s respectively, what separated one from the other
was their definition of nation. To the NP, the meaning of nation was
anything that excluded black people. The South African Native National
Congress, later to be known as the ANC, at its launch was addressed by
Pixley Seme, where he said, when he explained the purpose of this gathering
to tribes that had never met before except on battlefields:


  Chiefs of royal blood and gentlemen of our race, we have gathered here to
  consider and discuss a scheme which my colleagues and I have decided to
  place before you. We have discovered that in the land of their birth,
  Africans are treated as hewers of wood and drawers of water. The white
  people of this country have formed what is known as the Union of South
  Africa - a union in which we have no voice in the making of laws and no
  part in the administration. We have called you, therefore, to this
  conference, so that we can together devise ways and means of forming our
  national union for the purpose of creating national unity and defending
  our rights and privileges.

At this gathering, the nation referred to was all the people of South
Africa, black and white. It is true that everybody must have a right of say
in the way they are governed. That struggle of ensuring that South Africa
belongs to all who live in it, black and white, was confirmed 50 years ago
at the Congress of the People. The principles of the Freedom Charter make
sure that the people shall govern, not black people or white people, but
the people of this country.

From 1955, South Africans stuck to the Freedom Charter. This informed how
the national movement carried itself from then until today. This government
has taken South Africans on board at each and every stage, and still
continues to do so.

It was the will of the people that informed the preamble of the Harare
Declaration, a declaration of the Organisation of African Unity’s Ad Hoc
Committee on Southern Africa on the question of South Africa. The preamble
says, and I quote:


  The people of Africa, singly, collectively and acting through the OAU,
  are engaged in serious efforts to establish peace throughout the
  continent by ending all conflicts through negotiations based on the
  principle of justice and peace for all.

The preamble further says:


  We reaffirm our recognition of the rights of all peoples, including those
  of South Africa, to determine their own destiny, and to work out for
  themselves the institutions and the system of government under which they
  will, by general consent, live and work together to build a harmonious
  society. The Organisation of African Unity remains committed to do
  everything possible and necessary, to assist the people of South Africa
  in such ways as the representatives of the oppressed may determine, to
  achieve this objective. We are certain that, arising from this duty to
  help and the criminal apartheid system, the rest of the world community
  is ready to extend similar assistance to the people of South Africa.


  We make these commitments because we believe that all people are equal
  and have equal rights to human dignity and respect, regardless of colour,
  race, sex or creed. We believe that all men and women have the right and
  duty to participate in their own government, as equal members of society.
  No individual or group of individuals has any right to govern others
  without their consent. The apartheid system violates all these
  fundamental and universal principles. Correctly characterised as a crime
  against humanity, it is responsible for the death of countless numbers of
  people in South Africa, resulting in untold loss of life, destruction of
  property and massive displacement of innocent men, women and children.

When the climate was conducive to negotiations, the people were still the
deciding factor. The will of the people again became the most important
factor, and not what the politicians wished for.

On 20 December 1991, when Nelson Mandela addressed Codesa, he said about
the will of the people, and I quote:


  Today will be indelibly imprinted in the history of our country. If we,
  who are gathered here, respond to the challenge before us, today will
  mark the commencement of the transition from apartheid to democracy. Our
  people, from every corner of our country, have expressed their yearning
  for democracy and peace. Codesa represents the historical opportunity to
  translate that yearning into reality.


  South Africans of many persuasions recognise that this environment, and
  its constitutional product, Codesa, is the fruit of their sacrifices and
  struggle. They have a justifiable expectation that Codesa will set the
  country on the road to democracy.

This lead to the Constituent Assembly in 1994 and to the Constitution, with
a final draft signed into law on 10 December 1996.

The process of drafting the Constitution involved many South Africans in
the largest public participation programme ever carried out in South
Africa. The Constitution therefore represents the collective wisdom of the
South African people and affirms our promise to the people that the people
shall govern. Even after 1996, legislation passed in this House has always
been consistent with the principle: The people shall govern!

The structure closest to the people – local government – consults the
people through ward meetings. In the Constitution, the chapter dealing with
local government provides democratic and accountable governance to local
people.

In 2004, the President said during the state of the nation address, and I
quote:


  Government will complete the process of ensuring that the harmonisation
  of the Municipal Integrated Development Plan, the Provincial Growth and
  Development Strategy and the National Spatial Development Perspective
  will increase the capacity of local government to discharge its
  responsibility.


This was a further commitment by government to accelerate the
implementation system of state-wide planning, wherein IDPs serve as a basis
for aligning policy, planning and budget across all spheres. Indeed, the
people shall govern. No IDP in this country will be drawn, unless there is
consultation with the people it is intended for.

As far as we in Parliament are concerned, the structures we have put in
place for community participation in the law-making process are the highest
in terms of a people-centred government. This Parliament will never pass
any law that has not gone through the committees and to the people through
public hearings.

It is now clear to us, President, when we look back over 10 years, that
some of our processes leave a lot of South Africans outside participation,
because, relying on public hearings only here in Parliament, we leave out
thousands of people whose lives must change for the better. These are
thousands of people who are still trapped in poverty. Our approach has
changed. While we allow the hearings here for those people who can afford
to fly to Cape Town, we will go to the ordinary and poor citizens of our
country to hear their views as well. After all, Parliament belongs to the
people, and South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white.

Mr President, this country, the continent and the world respect you. We
value what you are doing for the people. You have not betrayed the will of
the people. You have instead restored their dignity and their confidence.
You have set timeframes and we as parliamentarians should ensure that we do
our oversight and accountability with aplomb in order for the timeframes to
be met. We do this in honour of our heroes and heroines who have given all
they ever had in order for all of us, black and white, to traverse thus
far. We cannot be consigned to the past. We remain committed to justice and
peace, we remain defenders of the rights of the children, the men and the
women and the beasts of the forest to live to be free and to prosper.

Hon Mr President, as you instructed, we will bring peace to our land; as
you directed, we will bring freedom and liberation to the oppressed; as you
strived, we will restore the dignity of the dehumanised; as you commanded,
we will defend the option of a peaceful resolution of our problems in South
Africa and beyond; as you prayed for the continent and the world, in all
this, we will not fail you, nor fail the peoples who have given us the
mandate. The people shall govern! I thank you. [Applause.]

Nk H ZILLE: Sihlalo, kwintetho yokuvula kwakhe iPalamente, uMongameli
wathetha ngezinto ezithile nathi esizixhasayo. Wathi uMzantsi Afrika
lilizwe labo bonke abantu abahlala kulo, abamnyama nabamhlophe. I-DA
iluxhasa kakhulu olu luvo ngekamva lethu. Sikwavumelana noMongameli ukuba
uMzantsi Afrika lilizwe elinekamva eliqaqambileyo. (Translation of Xhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Ms H ZILLE: Chairperson, in his state of the nation address, the President
talked about things which we fully support. He said that South Africa truly
belongs to all who live in it, black and white. The DA supports this view.
We also agree with the view that South Africa has a bright future.]

Of ons slaag, hang van baie dinge af. In ’n globale kennisekonomie is ’n
uitstekende onderwysstelsel egter die belangrikste. Dit is waarom ek bly
was dat die President hom nogmaals daartoe verbind het om seker te maak dat
elke kind in ’n behoorlike klaskamer kan skoolgaan, eerder as onder ’n boom
of in ’n kleihut.

Ek moet ook erken dat ek bly is dat hy erken het dat dit baie moeiliker is
om hierdie doelwit te bereik as wat hy drie jaar gelede gedink het.

Hoe moeilik dit ook al is om strukture te bou, is dit eintlik die maklike
deel van die onderwysuitdaging voor ons. Dit is baie moeiliker, en selfs
belangriker, om te verseker dat onderwys van ’n aanvaarbare standaard in
die honderde duisende bestaande klaskamers plaasvind. Dít is die grootste
mislukking op onderwysgebied.

Al die betroubare aanwysers, soos internasionale toetse, ons uitsakkoers,
ons aantal matriekvrystellings, doen aan die hand dat ons eintlik besig is
om agteruit te boer. Die eindelose moontlikhede vir ons land, wat die
President genoem het, kan vernietig word as ons hierdie krisis nie te bowe
kom nie. Dit is die enkele grootste rede waarom so baie ouers hul kinders
met groot moeite na die klein aantal skole stuur waar hul kinders onderwys
van gehalte sal ontvang.

Die jammerlike waarheid is dat die massiewe herverspreiding van hulpbronne
na voorheenbenadeelde skole in die meeste gevalle min verskil aan die
onderwysgehalte gemaak het. Derduisende ouers neem hul kinders dus weg van
skole wat baie geld van die staat kry, en stuur hulle na skole wat nou baie
minder kry. Hierdie model sal alle skole oplaas tot niet maak.

Omdat daar so ’n beperkte aanbod van gehalte is, en die vraag so groot is,
sal ouers hul kinders in Afrikaansmediumskole inskryf as dit lyk of hulle
daar beter onderwys sal kry, al verstaan hulle kinders soms geen woord
Afrikaans nie. Wanneer die kinders in die skool is, dring hulle dan aan op
hul reg om in hul keusetaal, Engels, onderrig te word.

Dit lyk dan soos ’n taalstryd, maar taal is eintlik ’n simptoom. Die ouers
veg eintlik vir gehalte onderwys. Hulle soek vergeefs daarna in verreweg
die meeste Engelsmedium skole. Hierdie versuim is ’n ontkenning van een van
die grondliggendste grondwetlike regte: die reg op ordentlike, basiese
onderwys, en dit is die ware rede waarom die skamele 3% wat gehalte
onderwys in Afrikaans bied onder so baie druk verkeer.

Die onvermydelike gevolg is nog ’n aanslag op ’n grondliggende reg: die reg
van Afrikaanssprekendes op onderrig in die taal van hul keuse, hul
moedertaal. Wanneer ouers, wat Engelsmediumonderrig wil hê, toegang tot
Afrikaansmediumskole kry, doen hulle dit in ’n konteks waar die Regering se
model van finansiering nie parallelmediumskole steun nie. Die ouers wat op
Engels aandring, kan dikwels min of geen skoolgeld betaal nie.
Parallelmediumonderrig kan nie ingestel word nie, en dikwels dwing beamptes
dubbelmedium-onderrig af, wat beteken dat twee tale in een klas gebruik
word.

Dit beteken straks dat Afrikaans deur Engels verdring word, terwyl die
ouers wat die skoolgeld betaal soms drie maal meer as kruissubsidies vir
nuwe leerders moet betaal omdat die Regering sy subsidies na armoediger
skole stuur, terwyl leerders juis in hordes van daardie skole wegvlug.

Dít is geen formule vir ’n nasie wat in uiteenlopendheid verenig is nie.
Dit is ’n resep vir verdeling, vir vervreemding en vir mislukking. Die DA
bied ’n duidelike en werkbare alternatief wat gegrond is op eerbied vir die
grondwetlike reg op gehalte basiese onderwys. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Whether we are successful will depend upon a number of factors. In a
global knowledge–based economy, an outstanding education system is of
paramount importance. Hence my pleasure that the President has once more
committed himself to ensuring that every child receives education in a
decent classroom rather than under a tree or in a mud hut. I must also
admit that I am glad that he has acknowledged that it is much more
difficult to attain this goal than originally envisaged three years ago.

As difficult as it is to build structures, it is actually the easier part
of the educational challenge that lies ahead. It is far more difficult, and
even more important, to ensure that education of an acceptable standard
takes place in the hundreds of thousands of existing classrooms. That is
the greatest failure of our educational system.

All the reliable indicators, such as international tests, our dropout rate,
the amount of matric exemptions, suggest that we are actually going
downhill. The endless opportunities for our country, of which the President
has made mention, can be destroyed if we cannot get the better of this
crisis. This is the single most important reason why so many parents go to
so much trouble to send their children to the small number of schools where
their children receive quality education.

It is a sad truth that the massive redistribution of resources to
previously disadvantaged schools, in most cases, made no difference to the
quality of education. Thousands of parents are therefore removing their
children from schools that receive a great deal of money from the state and
sending them to schools that now receive far less funding. This model will
be the ultimate downfall of all schools.

Because there is such a limited supply of quality, and the demand is so
great, parents will enrol their children in Afrikaans-medium schools if it
appears that they will receive a better education there, even though their
children may not understand one word of Afrikaans. When the children have
enrolled, they then insist upon their right to receive instruction in the
language of their choice, namely English.

It then seems like a language struggle, but language is actually a symptom.
The parents are in fact fighting for quality education. Their search for
this, at most English medium schools, is in vain. This omission negates one
of the most fundamental constitutional rights: the right to decent, basic
education, and that is the real reason why the meagre 3% that provide
quality education in Afrikaans, are placed under such severe pressure.

The unavoidable result is yet another attack on a fundamental right: the
right of Afrikaans speakers to receive instruction in the language of their
choice, their mother tongue. When those parents who wish to receive English-
medium instruction gain entry to Afrikaans-medium schools, they do so in a
context in which the government’s funding model does not support parallel-
medium schools. Those parents who insist on English-medium instruction can
often afford to pay little or nothing in the way of school fees.  Parallel-
medium instruction cannot be implemented, and often officials impose the
implementation of dual-medium instruction, which means that two languages
are used in one class.

This possibly means that Afrikaans is pushed aside by English, whilst the
parents who pay the school fees have at times to pay thrice the cross-
subsidy amount for new learners as the government subsidises poorer
schools, whilst learners are fleeing from those schools in droves.

This is not a formula for a nation that has been united in diversity. It is
a recipe for division, for alienation and for failure. The DA offers a
clear and workable alternative that is based on respect for the
constitutional right to quality basic education. [Applause.]]

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Mongameli, amatshivela mathathu elizweni; ngu
“Asindim”, “Andazi”, “Andikhathali”. Ngoko ke amalungu achasene
norhulumente akhokelwa ngohlonophekileyo uTony Leon ngamatshivela
angenaxanduva emagxeni awo.

Thina singurhulumente sinomgomantsi esijongene nawo. Abakhalazayo,
Mongameli, basazalwa nanamhlanje. Izinja ziyayikhonkotha imoto ehambayo,
emileyo ziyayintsontsela. Abalifumani, mongameli, ithuba lokukuntsontsela
ngoba akuqhokrwanga, ukhuthele, ungumthandi wesizwe nabantu bakowenu.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Speaker, there are three irresponsible people in
the world, who go by the names of “It’s not me”, “I do not know” and “I do
not care”. Members of the opposition, led by the hon Tony Leon, are people
who do not have any responsibility.

As government, we have a responsibility. President, people never cease to
complain. Only those who work hard are being criticised. They cannot
criticise you because you are not lazy and you are a patriot.]

With regard to Aids, quoting your speech, Comrade President, particularly
the government’s comprehensive plan …

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, on a point of order …

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S BOTHA): Hon Minister, will you please take
your seat?

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: … which is among the best in the world …

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Hon Minister, would you please take
your seat?

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: I can’t hear you. Your voice is very sweet. I
couldn’t hear it. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: That is rather patronising too, isn’t it? On a point of
order: The hon Minister talks about urinating on people, on a party and so
on. [Laughter.] I cannot believe, under the circumstances, that this is
parliamentary. I ask you please to give a ruling on this matter.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: May I enlighten you, Madam Chair?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): No, may I enlighten you, please, hon
Minister. I also think that that is not acceptable language.
[Interjections.] And therefore I support the point of order and I ask you
please not to use that kind of language.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair! I am sure in the
interpretation it might sound unparliamentary, but it is a Xhosa phrase.
[Interjections.] It is an idiom and it does not refer to anyone. The
message is that if you are doing something, there will always be people who
will criticise you. I understand it might come across as crude in the
interpretation, but it is an idiom.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Hon member, I accept that this could
be a language issue, but I hope that it won’t come up again. Please
proceed. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: With regard to Aids in particular, the government’s
comprehensive plan is among the best in the world – and I am quoting the
President. This is true, whether the hon Tony Leon believes it or not. We
have, in this country, an HIV and Aids code. I want him to tell me: Which
country has an HIV and Aids code for employees and employers in the
workplace? Secondly, Comrade President, in this country, which is led by
you, Sir, we have HIV and Aids technical assistance and guidelines. Which
country has technical assistance and guidelines to help employers and
employees in the workplace? Whether you like it or not, there is a
programme in this country which is among the best in the world. [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: Order! Order, please!

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Amatshivela mathathu elizweni; nguAsindim,
Andazi, Andikhathali. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Hon President, there are three irresponsible
people in the world. These are “It’s not me”,  “I do not know”, “I do not
care”.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Hon members! Hon Minister, one moment
please. Please give the Minister an opportunity to speak. I cannot hear him
from where I am sitting.

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Sekela-Mhlalingaphambili obekekileyo, sukuba
nexhala, ndingumshumayeli. Ndishumayela ngaphaya kwabantu abachanwa lilizwi
likaThixo, ungabi naxhala. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Umbutho wesizwe, i-ANC, uneminyaka engamashumi alithoba anesithathu ubudala
kulo nyaka. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Deputy Chairperson, do not worry because I am a lay preacher. I preach
more than those who claim to have been born again. [Applause.]

The ANC celebrates 93 years of existence today.]

And all these years, hon Tony Leon, we have been fighting against racism,
and we will continue to do so, Sir. We are going to transform this country,
whether you like it or not.

Ivili lenkululeko – phind’uphakame ukorekishe mkorekishi owazi isiXhosa
ngapha [Kwahlekwa.] – liqengqiwe, libaleka ngesantya esiphezulu kakhulu.
Silwa ucalucalulo. Uze ungemi phambi kwalo, hleze likucumze intloko,
upharhazeke ubuchopho. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Thina ke babekhe bazingela siyazi ukuba intaka ibethwa nomthi wayo.
[Uwelewele.] Eyona njongo kukuzingela intaka, kodwa ke xa ndidubula ngeketi
ukuba ithe yasithela ngesebe lomthi, ayizo njongo zam ukubetha isebe lomthi
liwe; ezona njongo zam kukuzuz’intaka. Ukuba ke kukho abantu abazenza
amasebe omthi, igama leNkosi malibongwe. [Uwelewele.] (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The wheel of freedom is spinning, and at a fast pace. You can correct my
Xhosa, you who know too much. [Laughter.] We are fighting against
discrimination. Do not stand before the wheel in case it crashes your head
and your brains spill out. [Applause.]

As people who used to hunt, we know that when you aim for a bird on a tree,
the chances are that you will hit the bird and the branch too.
[Interjections.] Although my interest would be in killing the bird, it
would happen that I hit the branch, accidentally, of course. If there are
people who choose to be the branches, then praise the Lord.
[Interjections.]]

Let all who love their people and their country now say as we say here: We
will fight for these freedoms, side by side, throughout our lives, until we
have won our liberty. [Interjections.]

Thina ke, singuNkongolo, siya kulwa kude kuphume igazi ukuba kufuneka
liphumile, njengokuba isitsho incwadi yabaseKorinte. Ndicaphula
eBhayibhileni ke ngoku, andazi ke ukuba baza kuthini ke bona. [Uwelewele.]
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[The ANC will fight until blood flows if the need arises, as it is said in
the Book of Corinthians. That is mentioned in the Bible, so I do not know
what those people over there are going to say. [Interjections.]]

We never fought against white people in this country. Never! What we fought
against was racism and we will continue to do so. We did not  invent
racism. We do not even have the ability to introduce reverse racism,
because we did not introduce first-gear, second-gear, third-gear or fourth-
gear racism. What are you talking about when you say that we are
introducing reverse racism? It is certainly not the ANC that you are
talking about. [Applause.]

Comrade President, we need to discuss this matter of languages.

Ndinomntwana, igama lakhe nguSimile. Ufunda ibanga leshumi kulo nyaka.
Ngoku ujongene nomgomantsi wokufunda iilwimi ezintathu. Ngumntwana wam lo
ndithetha ngaye. Sele etshone ibanga leshumi engekazibhali iimviwo zalo,
ngoba ujongene neelwimi ezintathu. Thina silibele kukuteketa apha, sidlala;
abantwana bethu bayonzakala.

Kufuneka siyixoxe into yokuba kwezi zikolo kufunda kuzo abantwana bethu
bafundiswa iilwimi ezingezo zabo, zabumini, abavele nje babanjwa ngofele
lwentamo kwathiwa kubo: “Uyanyanzeleka ukuba ufunde isiBhulu, isiNgesi
nesiXhosa.” Andazi ke xa abantu benkwiniziswa nayinto enakho ukusonjululwa
kungayiwanga enkundleni. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[I have a son and his name is Simile. He is in Grade 12. He is now in the
predicament of having to learn three languages. I am talking about my own
child. He has not written his Grade 12 examinations and he is doomed to
fail because of that. Our children’s lives are being destroyed while we are
sitting here saying nonsensical things.

We need to engage in discussions about what should be done about this
matter of our children being compelled to learn three languages, Afrikaans,
English and isiXhosa. This matter can certainly be resolved without having
to go to court but people seem to be concerned already.]

Afrikaans belongs in this country. It is not going to disappear. It is not
going to die, unless people abuse it and misuse it. It belongs to the
people of this country who were unable to speak Dutch, and as a result of
that, they coined a language of their own, which is today called Afrikaans.
The people who coined that language were South Africans. They belong in
this country and nowhere else. It will never, ever die. It is only those
people who are abusing Afrikaans who will probably disappear and not the
Afrikaans language.

Ngoko isiBhulu masingenziwa isebe lokusithela. Khumbula ke, intaka ibethwa
nomthi wayo. Ukuba ulisebe, wenzakala ukhab’ iimviko nje. IsiBhulu siza
kusikhusela. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Let people not use Afrikaans as a scapegoat. Be careful of your actions.
We will always defend and protect Afrikaans as a language.]

This ANC will defend Afrikaans but unfortunately it cannot defend you, my
brother, if you are misusing Afrikaans. [Interjections.]

Comrade President, you are asking us to complete the systems of exemptions
for small, medium and micro enterprises. This work has begun. I don’t even
know what these people are talking about. The problem is: They do not read
the policies of government. On page 22 here it says very clearly:

  First is the need to secure an appropriate balance between security and
  flexibility in the labour market.

It goes further to say:

  ... a continuous process of review of our legislation and policy with
  respect to their impact on both worker welfare and economic efficiency;
  consider appropriate modifications to accommodate, among others, the
  needs of small-scale enterprises, labour-intensive industries, unemployed
  youths and of the unemployed generally …

He is asking why it is not being done. Let me inform him: Out of a total
number of 58 bargaining councils, 44 reported on applications for
exemptions; 7 373 exemption applications were received and 4 344, or 59% of
them, have been granted. A total of 5 670 applications were granted, of
which 3 407 were granted to SMMEs. You are saying that we must complete
this task. Comrade President, we must make sure that even those that have
not been granted, are granted. There is absolutely nothing wrong with that.

The hon member Tony Leon does not even read the policies. He was, by the
way, a member of the Portfolio Committee on Labour. During the last reform
of the labour laws, no one, not a single party in this Parliament, opposed
them. He voted for it because we were doing that reform. What is this hon
member talking about? [Applause.] Comrade President, it is a pity that …

... uQabane, uTata uMeshoe abe akakho apha kuba bendiza kumkhumbuza
okuthile laa mfundisi. Sithi: “Abstain, be faithful, condomise.” Masivume
... (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[... comrade Meshoe is not here, as I was going to remind him about
something. We say: “Abstain, be faithful, condomise”.  Le us accept that
...]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Hon Minister, please take your seat.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Chairperson, is the hon Minister permitted to
deliberately mislead Parliament and tell Parliament lies? The DA, or its
predecessor at that stage, the DP, certainly did not support that
legislation. The Leader of the Opposition mentioned it today and the hon
Minister knows it very well. He is deliberately misleading Parliament.
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: I want to speak. I am not going to apologise to the
DA. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S BOTHA): I regret, hon Gibson, that I
certainly cannot decide the truth of this and you cannot accuse a member of
deliberately misleading the House. You can, if you feel that way, raise the
issue in another forum or during the debate at some other time. Please,
will you withdraw this statement?

Mr D H M GIBSON: Yes, I withdraw it. [Applause.]

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Ukuba umfundisi uMeshoe ebekhona apha, bendiza
kuthi kuye: Mongameli, masivume singabashumayeli nabefundisi abakhoyo apha,
Mfundisi uStofile, ukuba soyisakele kukwenza umsebenzi wethu. Umsebenzi
wethu kukushumayela inyaniso. Ukuba uGawulayo neNtsholongwane yakhe, Qabane
uMongameli, ebesiza ngesonka, besiya kuthi abantu mabangasityi isonka.
[Kwahlekwa.] Ngelishwa, Mongameli, akezi ngasonka. Ufuna ukuba thina
singabashumayeli sikhwele eqongeni ecaweni sixelele abantu ngendlela
yokuziphatha. Iza kusinceda loo nto … [Kwaqhwatywa.] … ndaweni yokuthi
singabefundisi siphakame sigxeke inkqubo karhulumente. (Translation of
Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Hon President, if Rev Meshoe were here I would say to him and to Rev
Stofile that we should accept the fact that we failed to do our job. Ours
is to spread the Word and truth. If HIV/Aids, hon President, were in the
form of bread, for instance, we would easily tell people not to eat it.
[Laughter.] Unfortunately, hon President HIV/Aids does not present itself
like that. We need to go to our churches and teach people about how to
conduct themselves. That will help, rather than criticising government’s
programmes. [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Order, hon members! Continue, hon
Minister. I was giving you an opportunity to be heard. I wasn’t calling you
to order, I was calling the members to order.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: I am very obedient.

UMateyu uthi: “Akufuneki gqirha kophilileyo.” Ngoko ke, njengomshumayeli
waseRhabe, andivumelani noMfundisi uMeshoe. Urhulumente uvala isikhewu
esivulwe sithi ngokungafuni ukushumayela ngesondo phaya ecaweni.
[Kwaqhwatywa.]

Ngelishwa imihla nezolo siphehlelela abantwana babantwana. Into esiyenzayo
kukuba, sisuka sisike la magosa enza amanyundululu apha ezicaweni,
abantwana bona sithi kubo mabakhe baye kulala emakhaya, sithi sakugqiba
sithi mabaphehlelelwe. Masivume, maKrestu, ukuba asiwenzi umsebenzi wethu.
Mna ke Mongameli ndithi, inkqubo karhulumente mayiqhube kuba thina maKrestu
sizizifede asifuni ukuwenza umsebenzi wethu. Isono sime emnyango, silinde
thina ukuze sisilawule.

Mnu Seremane, malunga neZimbabwe, ndifuna nje ukuthi kuwe, mhlekazi, inkani
ayigotywa ngenkani. Isankxwe nengxolo yenza inyongo nakubani na. Esi
sankxwe nisenzayo ngezi vuvuzela zenu aziwenzi lula umsebenzi karhulumente
phaya kweliya likaMzilikazi. Niza kutsha ke kuba nikhasela eziko. Mamelani
xa nixelelwa. Hanewu! Sanukuyenza into yokucinga ukuba urhulumente
waseZimbabwe yinkomo yomdongwe, yona uyibeka etafileni wakugqiba uthi:
“Hamba”, ube uyihambisa ngokwakho. Ayizi kwenzeka ke loo nto.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] Siyacela ukuba nithobele umthetho wamanye amazwe, niyeke
ukutyhala ngesifuba kuba niza kwenzakala, niphinde nicele kwalo Mongameli
ukuba aze kunikhulula xa nithe nonzakala. [Uwelewele.] (Translation of
Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[In Matthew 9:12 it says, “Healthy people do not need a doctor, the sick
do.” As a lay preacher and a member of the Presbyterian Church of South
Africa, I do not agree with Rev Meshoe. Government is trying to fill a gap
created by our not wanting to address sexuality in our churches.
[Applause.]

It is unfortunate that we baptise other children’s children in our churches
every day. We only suspend those elders that would be found guilty of
misconduct and later allow their illegitimate children to be baptised. As
Christians we should accept that we are not fulfilling our mission. Let
Christians accept the responsibility that they are not doing their work.
Hon President, I would like to say that government must continue with its
implementation programme, as Christians are not delivering. There is a
serious problem facing us and we must solve it.

I would like to address hon Seremane on the matter of Zimbabwe. I want to
say that we need not be stubborn here. If we want to address a problem we
should seek reasonable means to do so. You are not making it any easier for
our government in Zimbabwe, the land of Mzilikazi. If you crawl towards the
hearth, you will get burnt. You must listen to others. Do not make a
mistake and think that the Zimbabwean government is an ornament or toy that
you can push around. [Applause.] We beg you to respect other countries’
laws and stop interfering in matters not of your concern because you will
find yourselves in trouble and later expect the President to help you when
you happen to get hurt. [Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Order!

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: ... ingqondo uyayisebenzisa. [Kwahlekwa.]
Ndikholelwa ekubeni noko ezi zinto ubuzithetha apha zinokuthethwa kuphela
ngumntu ongayisebenzisi kakuhle ingqondo. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[You can use your brains. You can think. [Laughter.] I believe that it is
only a person who does not use his mind who can only say all that you have
said here. Thank you.]

Debate interrupted.

The House adjourned at 20:10.

                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                          MONDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 2004


TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     Letter from the Minister of Arts and Culture dated 29 October 2004 to
     the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of
     the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining
     the delay in the tabling of the Annual Reports of Arts, Culture and
     Heritage Institutions for 2003-2004:

         Dear Madam Speaker

         EXPLANATIONS FOR THE LATE TABLING OF ARTS, CULTURE AND HERITAGE
         INSTITUTIONS' ANNUAL REPORTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 65(2)(a)
         OF THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, NO 1 OF 1999: 2003/2004

         In terms of section 65(1)(a) of the above-mentioned Act the annual
         reports and financial statements, and the audit reports on those
         statements, of the Arts, Culture and Heritage institutions listed
         below were tabled late or have been tabled.

         The following are reasons for late tabling of reports or for
         reports which have not yet been submitted:


         1. The completion of the Annual Report and Financial Statements of
              the National Arts Council was delayed as a result of the
              suspension of three memebrs of senior management, the
              completion of a forensic audit and the subsequent disciplinary
              procedure against the three persons.

         2. The Reports of the Robben Island Museum were delayed because
              the Auditor-General insisted the a count of fixed assets be
              conducted and that the asset register be brought up to date. A
              further contributing factor is that a CEO for the museum has
              to date still not been appointed.

         3. The Reports of the Windybrow Centre for the Arts were delayed
              due to the fact that the printer commissioned to do the
              printing went bankrupt and another printer had to be sourced
              to do the printing.

         Yours sincerely,

         signed
         Z PALLO JORDAN, MP
         MINISTER



                          TUESDAY, 16 NOVEMBER 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 16 November
         2004:


         (i)     Finance Bill [B 13 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77)


         (ii)    Petroleum Pipelines Levies Bill [B 18 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)


         (iii)   Securities Services Bill [B 19B - 2004] (National Assembly
              - sec 75)


         (iv)    Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill [B 20B - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)

National Assembly

1.    Submission of Private Members' Legislative Proposals:


     (1)    The following private member's legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Speaker on 9 November 2004, in accordance with
         Rule 234:


         (i)     Admission of Advocates Amendment Bill (Adv H C Schmidt).

         In accordance with Rule 235 the legislative proposal has been
         referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members' Legislative
         Proposals and Special Petitions by the Speaker.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
         Intellectual Property Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    The National Industrial Participation Programme for 2003-2004.

                         WEDNESDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 17 November
         2004:


         (i)     National Small Business Amendment Bill [B 23B - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)


         (ii)    Water Services Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)


         (iii)   Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 -2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)


         (iv)    Second Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 25 -2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)


         (v)     Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 21 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)

2.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


         (i)     Nasionale Kleinsakewysigingswetsontwerp [W 23 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the National
         Small Business Amendment Bill [B 23 - 2004] (National Assembly -
         sec 75).

National Assembly

1.    Messages from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly:


     (1)    Bill, subject to proposed amendments, passed by Council on 17
         November 2004 and transmitted for consideration of Council's
         proposed amendments:


         (i)     Petroleum Products Amendment Bill [B 16 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
              Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 27 October
              2004, p 985).

              The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Minerals and
              Energy of the National Assembly for a report on the amendments
              proposed by the Council.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of Pension
         Funds for 2003.

     (b)    Exhange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Government of the People's Republic of China
         concerning the provision of water supply materials [No. 198],
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution of the
         Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

     (c)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the People's Republic of China concerning the provision of water
         supply materials [No. 198].

     (d)    Exhange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the decentralised development planning programme [No.
         141], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution of the
         Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

     (e)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Exhange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the decentralised
         development planning programme [No. 141].

     (f)    Exhange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Government of the People's Republic of China
         concerning the Implementation of a Human Resources Project [No.
         579], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution of the
         Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

     (g)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Exhange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the People's Republic of China concerning the Implementation of a
         Human Resources Project [No. 579].

     (h)    Programme Grand Agreement between the Global Fund to Fight Aids,
         TB and Malaria and the Government of the Republic of South Africa:
         Strengthening national capacity for treatment, care and support
         related to HIV and TB, building on successful behaviour change
         initiatives in South Africa (SAF-102-G02-C-00) [No. 480], tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of
         South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

     (i)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Programme Grand Agreement between
         the Global Fund to Fight Aids, TB and Malaria and the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa: Strengthening national capacity
         for treatment, care and support related to HIV and TB, building on
         successful behaviour change initiatives in South Africa (SAF-102-
         G02-C-00) [No. 480].

     (j)    Programme Grand Agreement between the Global Fund to Fight Aids,
         TB and Malaria and the Government of the Republic of South Africa:
         Enhancing the care of HIV/AIDS infected and affected patients in
         resource - constrained settings in Kwazulu-Natal (SAF-102-G03-C-
         00) [No 462], tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of
         1996).

     (k)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Programme Grand Agreement between
         the Global Fund to Fight Aids, TB and Malaria and the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa: Enhancing the care of HIV/AIDS
         infected and affected patients in resource - constrained settings
         in Kwazulu-Natal (SAF-102-G03-C-00) [No 462].

     (l)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Germany concerning financial
         co-operation for 2001-2002 [No. 612], tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996
         (Act No 108 of 1996).

     (m)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
         of Germany concerning financial co-operation for 2001-2002 [No.
         612].

     (n)    Programme Grand Agreement between the Global Fund to Fight Aids,
         TB and Malaria and the Government of the Republic of South Africa:
         Strengthening national capacity for treatment, care and support
         related to HIV and TB, building on successful behaviour change
         initiatives in South Africa (SAF-102-G01-C-00) [No. 479], tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of
         South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

     (o)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Programme Grand Agreement between
         the Global Fund to Fight Aids, TB and Malaria and the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa: Strengthening national capacity
         for treatment, care and support related to HIV and TB, building on
         successful behaviour change initiatives in South Africa (SAF-102-
         G01-C-00) [No. 479].

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    Proclamation No R.49 published in Government Gazette No 26905
         dated 18 October 2004: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1995 (Act No 74 of
         1996).

     (b)    Proclamation No R.50 published in Government Gazette No 26912
         dated 20 October 2004: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1995 (Act No 74 of
         1996).

     (c)    Proclamation No R.51 published in Government Gazette No 26912
         dated 20 October 2004: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1995 (Act No 74 of
         1996).

     (d)    Proclamation No R.52 published in Government Gazette No 26912
         dated 20 October 2004: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1995 (Act No 74 of
         1996).


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert 1ATC1117


                          FRIDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Mineral and Energy Laws Amendment Bill, submitted by the
         Minister of Minerals and Energy on 5 November 2004. Referred to
         the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy and the Select
         Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs.


     (2)    Co-operatives Bill, submitted by the Minister of Trade and
         Industry on 11 November 2004. Referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on Economic and
         Foreign Affairs.

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Assembly

     The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr B W Kannemeyer vacating his seat
     in the National Assembly with effect from 1 November 2004, had been
     filled with effect from 11 November 2004 by the nomination of Mr B M
     Mkongi.

2.    Annual Report of Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence

     The annual report of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence for
     the reporting period ended 31 March 2004 was tabled on 20 September
     2004 (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p 806) as the
     report adopted by the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence on 31
     March 2004.

     As this was the report of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence
     of the previous Parliament, it was formally considered and adopted by
     the current Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence on 3 November
     2004.

     The Committee has requested that the report be considered.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Veterinary
         Council for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Annual Financial Statements from the National Agricultural
         Marketing Council on the Statutory Levy Administrators on
         Agricultural Products for 2001-2002 and 2002-2003, including the
         Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2001-2002 and 2002-2003 [RP 1-2004].

2.    The Minister of Transport


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 - Department of
         Transport for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
         Aviation Authority (CAA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
         [RP 164-2004].

3.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration


     (a)    African Union Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
         Corruption, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
         1996.

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the African Union Convention on the
         Prevention and Combating of Corruption.

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Trade and Investment South
         Africa (TISA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
         164-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
         Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for the year ended June
         2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for the year ended 2004.

     (c)    Sustainability Report of the Industrial Development Corporation
         of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
         Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     (a)    Letter from the Minister of Finance dated 16 November 2004 to
         the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 8(3) of
         the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
         explaining the delay in the tabling of the consolidated financial
         statements for 2003-2004:

         Dear Madam Speaker

         Reasons for the delay in submitting the consolidated statements in
         terms of section 8(3) of the PFMA

         I am writing to advise that the tabling of the consolidated
         financial statements in terms of section 8(3) of the PFMA will be
         delayed and to request an extension for the tabling thereof in
         Parliament as required by the Act.

         Section 8(3) of the PFMA stipulates "The Minister must submit the
         consolidated financial statements and the audit report on those
         statements within one month of receiving the report from the
         Auditor-General, to Parliament for tabling in both houses". The
         timing referred to in this instance is by the end of October 2004.
         Section 8(5)(a) requires me to provide a written explanation
         setting out the reasons for failing to submit the statements on
         time.

         The cause for the delay is due to the following:


         *  The financial year that ended on 31 March 2004 is the first for
              which such consolidated financial statements are required.
              Departments and entities have thus been exposed to the
              complexities of these requirements for the first time. The
              formats for the consolidation thus pose a challenge to all the
              stakeholders;

         *  The sequence of submitting the financial statements in terms of
              section 40 of the PFMA results in certain difficulties in
              meeting timelines;

         *  The consolidations done on the previous years' information
              raised serious issues with regard to the integrity of the
              information, hence the need for a more thorough approach
              during the first year of consolidation;

         *  The systems are not functioning optimally and are not readily
              aligned to cater for the new requirements. As a result, the
              consolidation is essentially done manually with the use of
              spreadsheets;

         *  Most public entities did not comply with the deadline for
              submitting the statements; and

         *  The audits for most of the departments were only finalised
              during September 2004. This was largely due to problems
              experienced with the quality of the information submitted to
              the Auditor-General.

         The National Treasury expects to table the consolidated financial
         statements in terms of section 8(3) of the PFMA by February 2005.
         I have instructed the National Treasury to put mechanisms in place
         to prevent the recurrence of these problems in future.

         The National Treasury and the Auditor-General have discussed the
         possibility of delaying the consolidated financial statements.
         Both parties have agreed that it would be sensible to delay
         publishing and first allow for the issues to be addressed
         comprehensively in order to ensure a firm foundation for the
         future.

         Kind regards,

         signed
         TREVOR A MANUEL, MP
         MINISTER OF FINANCE


     (b)    Letter from the Minister of Transport dated 19 November 2004 to
         the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a)
         of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
         explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the
         Department of Transport and other public entities for 2003-2004:

         Dear Madam Speaker

         WRITTEN EXPLANATION ON THE LATE SUBMISSION AND TABLING OF THE
         ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
         TRANSPORT AND OTHER PUBLIC ENTITIES FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH
         2004

         I write to inform Parliament that in terms of sections 65(1)(a) of
         the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), as
         amended (PFMA), I was unfortunately not able to table the
         following Annual Reports and audited Financial Statements for the
         year ended 31 March 2004. The written explanations in terms of sub-
         section (2)(a) of the PFMA for the late tabling of the Reports
         are:-

         *  DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT

              Certain editing and information changes took longer than
              expected to complete. (The Annual report has since been tabled
              on 19 November 2004).

         *  THE SOUTH AFRICAN CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY (CAA)

              Delay in the printing of the Annual Report - the printing
              company went bankrupt. (The Annual Report has since been
              tabled on 19 November 2004).


         *  THE SOUTH AFRICAN RAIL COMMUTER CORPORATION LIMITED (SARCC)

              Disclosures in the Financial Statements had to be amended to
              fully comply with Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.

         *  THE SOUTH AFRICAN MARITIME SAFETY AUTHORITY (SAMSA)

              The late completion of the 2003 Audit Report had a serious
              rollover effect on the 2004 audit and its completion in time.
              The Financial Statements also had to be re-submitted to the
              auditors.

         *  THE CROSS-BORDER ROAD TRANSPORT AGENCY (C-BRTA)

              The C-BRTA received the audited Financial Statements from the
              Auditor-General on the 31st August 2004. Thereafter, the
              combined Report had to be sent back to the Auditor-General for
              scrutiny to ensure that the Annual Report and the Financial
              Statements are not in conflict with each other.

         *  THE ROAD ACCIDENT FUND (RAF)

              The audit could not be completed in time due to the extent of
              the audit.

         *  THE ROAD TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT CORPORATION (RTMC)

              An unforeseen delay occurred in the auditing of the Financial
              Statements.

         *  THE RAILWAY SAFETY REGULATOR (RSR)

              Disclosures in the Financial Statements had to be amended to
              fully comply with Generally Accepted Accounting Practice. The
              Financial Statements therefore had to be re-submitted to the
              Auditor-General.

         I have instructed the DOT to ensure that the outstanding Reports
         are tabled as soon as possible.

         I trust that this will be in order.

         Kind regards,

         signed
         JEFF RADEBE, MP
         MINISTER OF TRANSPORT

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert 1ATC1119


                         WEDNESDAY, 24 NOVEMBER 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Calling of Joint Sitting of Parliament

     The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the Acting
     Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in
     terms of Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
     Parliament for Wednesday, 24 November 2004, at 14:00 to pay tribute to
     the late hon Ms Joyce Lesawana Kgoali, Chairperson of the National
     Council of Provinces, who passed away on Sunday, 21 November 2004.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Sectional Titles Amendment Bill, submitted by the Minister for
         Agriculture and Land Affairs on 17 November 2004. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and the Select
         Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.



                           MONDAY, 17 JANUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Finance Bill [B 13 - 2004] - Act No 26 of 2004 (assented to and
         signed by President on 28 November 2004).

2.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Health


         (i)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op Sterilisasie [W 12 - 2004]
              (National Council of Provinces - sec 76)

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
         Sterilisation Amendment Bill [B 12 - 2004] (National Council of
         Provinces - sec 76).

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Assembly

     The vacancy that occurred owing to Ms R Taljaard vacating her seat with
     effect from 1 January 2005, has been filled by the nomination of Ms A
     Dreyer with effect from 1 January 2005.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and Chairperson


     (a)    Activity Report of the Auditor-General for 2003-2004 [RP 211-
         2004].

     (b)    Special Report of the Auditor-General on the delays in the
         tabling of Annual Reports and Consolidated Financial Statements of
         National Government for 2003-2004 [RP 208-2004].

     (c)    General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcome for
         2003-2004 [RP 210-2004].

2.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
         on the Registrar of Friendly Societies for 2003.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Government Employees
         Pension Fund for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP
         1-2004].

     (c)    Government Notice No R1289 published in Government Gazette No
         26938 dated 5 November 2004: Determination of amounts in terms of
         sections 1 and 5 of the Military Pensions Act, 1976 (Act No 84 of
         1976).

     (d)    Government Notice No R1334 published in Government Gazette No
         26981 dated 19 November 2004: Exemption of Telkom SA Limited and
         its subsidiaries and any entities under its ownership control in
         terms of section 92 of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
         (Act No 1 of 1999).

     (e)    Government Notice No R1353 published in Government Gazette No
         27011 dated 19 November 2004: Amendments to the exemptions made in
         Government Gazette No 24176 dated 20 December 2003, in terms of
         section 74 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No
         38 of 2001).

     (f)    Government Notice No R1354 published in Government Gazette No
         27011 dated 19 November 2004: Second Reporting Exemption in terms
         of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of
         2001).

     (g)    Government Notice No R1354 published in Government Gazette No
         27012 dated 19 November 2004: Amendment of prescribed fees, made
         in terms of section 36 of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24
         of 1956).

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Sedibeng Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Ikangala Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Lepelle Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Magalies Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Rand Water Board for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (g)    Report and Financial Statements of the Bushbuckridge Water Board
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (h)    Report and Financial Statements of the Umgeni Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (i)    Report and Financial Statements of the Overberg Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (j)    Report and Financial Statements of the Botshelo Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (k)    Report and Financial Statements of the Bloem Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (l)    Report and Financial Statements of the Pelladrift Water Board
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (m)    Report and Financial Statements of the Namaqua Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (n)    Report and Financial Statements of the Amatola Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (o)    Report and Financial Statements of the Albany Coast Water Board
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

4.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


     (a)    The following person has been appointed by Cabinet as a member
         and chairperson of the South African National Parks Board, in
         terms of section 8 of the National Parks Act, 1976 (Act No 57 of
         1976):

         Ms C Carolus.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
         Service for 2002-2003, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP 221-2003].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
         Service for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 176-2004].

     (d)    Government Notice No 2483 published in Government Gazette No
         26969 dated 5 November 2004: Invitation to apply for experimental
         longline fishing permits for the catching of Patagonian tooth fish
         (Dissostichus SPP), tabled in terms of the Marine Living Resources
         Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

5.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry Company
     Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent-Auditors
     on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     (a)    Letter from the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
         dated 1 December 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
         terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act,
         1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of
         the Annual Reports of the South African Weather Service for 2002-
         2003 and 2003-2004:

         Dear Ms Mbete

         EXPLANATION ON THE LATE SUBMISSION AND TABLING OF THE ANNUAL
         REPORTS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN WEATHER
         SERVICE FOR 2002-2003 AND 2003-2004

         In terms of section 55(1)(d) of the Public Finance Management Act
         (PFMA), the South African Weather Service in its capacity as
         Public Entity must submit an Annual Report for approval by the
         relevant authority (Parliament). In terms of section 65(2)(a) of
         the PFMA, the responsible Minister must table a written
         explanation in the legislature explaining the reasons for the
         delay.

         In that regard, I would like to inform the legislature that the
         delay in tabling these reports is as a result of delayed audit
         reports from the Auditor-General. The audit report for the year
         2002/2003 was received on 26 August 2004 and the audit report for
         the year 2003/2004 was received on 27 August 2004. The Board of
         the South African Weather Service was able to approve these
         reports at its meeting of 23 October 2004, after which the text
         could be finalised and the reports printed.

         The Annual Reports are hereby submitted for tabling and I trust
         that this explanation will be received favourably in the National
         Assembly.

         Yours sincerely

         signed
         MARTHINUS VAN SCHALKWYK
         MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM


     (b)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
         dated 26 November 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly
         informing Members of the National Assembly of the employment of a
         member of the South African National Defence Force:

         EMPLOYMENT OF A MEMBER OF THE THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
         FORCE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE
         REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE GOVERNMENT OF MOZAMBIQUE

         This serves to inform the National Assembly that I authorised the
         employment of a member of the South African National Defence Force
         (SANDF) to the Republic of Mozambique as part of the Southern
         African Development Community Electoral Observer Mission in
         fulfillment of the obligations of the Republic of South Africa
         towards Mozambique during the forthcoming elections in Mozambique.

         This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions
         of section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
         Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 93 of the
         Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

         One person will be employed from 24 November 2004 to 4 December
         2004.

         The total cost of the deployment is R 17 233, 00 will be funded
         from the Department of Defence's current allocation for the Joint
         Operations Division.

         I will communicate this report to the Members of the National
         Council of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing
         Committee on Defence, and wish to request that you bring the
         contents hereof to the notice of the National Assembly.

         Regards

         SIGNED
         T M MBEKI


     (c)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
         dated 3 December 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly
         informing Members of the National Assembly of the employment of
         members of the South African National Defence Force:

         EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN
         FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF
         SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE

         This serves to inform the National Assembly that I authorised the
         employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
         personnel to the Republic of Mozambique to provide logistical
         assistance in fulfillment of the obligations of the Republic of
         South Africa towards the Government of Mozambique during the
         forthcoming elections in Mozambique.

         This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions
         of section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
         Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 93 of the
         Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

         Sixty-six persons will be employed from 04 December 2004 to 10
         December 2004. The total cost of the employment is R 10 262 719-
         00.

         I will communicate this report to the Members of the National
         Council of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing
         Committee on Defence, and wish to request that you bring the
         contents hereof to the notice of the National Assembly.

         Regards

         SIGNED
         T M MBEKI


     (d)    Reply from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
         Development in regard to the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on
         Special Report of the Public Protector, as adopted by the House on
         24 June 2004, concerning a complaint by the Deputy President:

              REPORT OF THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL
              DEVELOPMENT ON THE MATTERS RAISED BY THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON
              THE SPECIAL REPORT OF THE PUBLIC PROTECTOR CONTAINED IN ITS
              REPORT OF 23 JUNE 2004

              The National Assembly, towards the end of June 2004, accepted
              the report of its Ad Hoc Committee on the Special Report on
              the Public Protector dealing with the investigation of a
              complaint by the Deputy President against the National
              Director of Public Prosecutions and the Prosecuting Authority.
              In terms of the recommendations contained in the report, I had
              to report to Parliament on some of the issues within a period
              of 60 days. I, on 8 September 2004, in an interim report to
              the Speaker, a copy of which is enclosed herewith, however
              indicated that it was impossible for me to report back within
              the particular timeframe.

              On the relevant issues raised by the Ad Hoc Committee in its
              report to the National Assembly, I wish to report as follows:


              (a) Establishment of a Ministerial Co-ordinating Committee in
                  terms of section 31 of the National Prosecuting Authority
                  Act, 1998

                  As indicated in my interim report, the Committee
                  envisaged by section 31 of the Act has been established.
                  It has already met on 4 occasions. The Committee is
                  scheduled to meet on a regular basis in future.


              (b) Meeting between the National Director of Public
                  Prosecutions and the Public Protector to resolve
                  differences

                  The National Director of Public Prosecutions at the time,
                  Mr Bulelani Ngcuka, has, as Parliament is aware, vacated
                  office with effect from 1 September 2004. I have
                  nevertheless, prior to his departure, met with him and
                  the Public Protector individually and, in the process,
                  raised the relevant issues with them.

                  I have since met with the Acting National Director of
                  Public Prosecutions, Dr Silas Ramaite SC, and the Public
                  Protector, Mr Mushwana, and discussed with them the
                  development of effective measures to enhance co-operation
                  between the Prosecuting Authority and the office of the
                  Public Protector. It was a fruitful discussion and I
                  believe that they will find a way to, in future, avoid
                  differences of the nature in question.


              (c) The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development to
                  take immediate steps to establish an effective system of
                  information security within the Prosecuting Authority

                  This matter is attended to on an ongoing basis.

              I trust that this would dispose of the matter.


              MS B S MABANDLA, MP
              MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT

         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development.



                          TUESDAY, 25 JANUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Public Investment Corporation Bill [B 6B - 2004] - Act No 23 of
         2004 (assented to and signed by President on 11 December 2004);


     (2)    Dental Technicians Amendment Bill [B 63 - 2003] - Act No 24 of
         2004 (assented to and signed by President on 25 November 2004);


     (3)    Public Audit Bill [B 1 - 2004] - Act No 25 of 2004 (assented to
         and signed by President on 14 December 2004);


     (4)    Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 21 - 2004] - Act No 27 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 1 December 2004);


     (5)    Petroleum Pipelines Levies Bill [B 18 - 2004] - Act No 28 of
         2004 (assented to and signed by President on 14 December 2004);
         and


     (6)    National Small Business Amendment Bill [B 23B - 2004] - Act No
         29 of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 11 December
         2004).

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


         (i)     Minerals and Energy Laws Amendment Bill [B 1 - 2005]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 26778 of 17 September 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
         and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 18 January 2005.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.



TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     (a)    Letter from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry dated 17
         January 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
         section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act
         No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
         Reports of the Water Boards for 2003-2004:

         Dear Madam Speaker,

         EXPLANATION FOR APPARENT DELAY IN TABLING OF THE ANNUAL REPORTS OF
         FOURTEEN WATER BOARDS

         In terms of the Water Services Act (108 of 1997) all Water Boards
         which have their financial years ending on the 30th of June, must
         table their reports with Provincial Premiers and in Parliament by
         30th December of the same year.

         All of the Water Boards have indeed provided me, and the
         Provincial Premiers, with their Annual Reports for 2003-2004, and
         these have been forwarded to Parliament, for tabling at the first
         opportunity. These are Albany Coast, Amatola, Bloem, Botshelo,
         Bushbuckridge, Ikangala, Lepelle Northern, Magalies, Mhlatuze,
         Namakwa, Overberg, Pelladrift, Sedibeng, Rand and Umgeni Water
         Boards.

         Due to the rising of Parliament in mid-December, the first
         Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports (ATC) listing, will
         only appear in January 2005. This may create an erroneous
         impression that the Annual Reports of the Water Boards were
         provided to Parliament after the end of the year. I therefore
         write this explanation to ensure that Parliament is fully informed
         of the process we have followed.

         Please accept my assurance and the assurance of my Department that
         they will at all times adhere to guidelines and prescriptions for
         providing information to Parliament.

         Sincerely yours


         BP Sonjica, MP
         MINISTER



                          THURSDAY, 27 JANUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Science and Technology. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of Vote 18 is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 - Department of Science
         and Technology for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 145-2004].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Government Notice No 850 published in Government Gazette
              No 26576 dated 23 July 2004: Appointment of members and
              alternate members of the Public Accountants' and Auditors
              Board in terms of section 3(6) of the Public Accountants and
              Auditors Act, 1991 (Act No 80 of 1991).

         (b)     Government Notice No 860 published in Government Gazette
              No 26576 dated 23 July 2004: Appointment of member to the
              Amnesty Unit in terms of section 23 of the Exchange Control
              Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws Act, 2003 (Act No 12 of
              2003).

         (c)     Government Notice No 886 published in Government Gazette
              No 26602 dated 30 July 2004: Exemptions: Financial
              Intelligence Centre in terms of section 92 of the Public
              Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

         (d)     Government Notice No 896 published in Government Gazette
              No 26603 dated 30 July 2004: Cancellation of appointment of an
              authorised dealer in foreign exchange in terms of paragraph
              (3)(a) of the Exchange Control Regulations Government Notice
              No R1112 of 1 December 1961 as amended: Regal Treasury Private
              Bank Limited in terms of the Currency and Exchanges Act, 1993
              (Act No 9 of 1933).

         (e)     Government Notice No 853 published in Government Gazette
              No 26588 dated 30 July 2004: The dimension of, design for, and
              compilation of, the commemorative R2 circulation coin in terms
              of section 19(1)(a) of the South African Reserve Bank Act,
              1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

         (f)     Government Notice No 854 published in Government Gazette
              No 26588 dated 30 July 2004: The dimension of, design for, and
              compilation of, the new R5 bi-metal circulation coin in terms
              of section 16(2) of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989
              (Act No 90 of 1989).

         (g)     Government Notice No 855 published in Government Gazette
              No 26588 dated 30 July 2004: Amendment of schedule 2 section
              (b) of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of
              1989).

         (h)     Government Notice No R1128 published in Government Gazette
              No 26853 dated 30 September 2004: Policyholder Protection
              Rules (Short-term Insurance), 2004, in terms of the Short-term
              Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 53 of 1998).

         (i)     Government Notice No R1129 published in Government Gazette
              No 26854 dated 30 September 2004: Policyholder Protection
              Rules (Long-term Insurance), 2004, in terms of the Long-term
              Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 52 of 1998).

         (j)     Government Notice No 1130 published in Government Gazette
              No 26860 dated 30 September 2004: Statement of the National
              Revenue, Expenditure and Borrowing as at 31 August 2004 in
              terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
              1999).

         (k)     Government Notice No 2174 published in Government Gazette
              No 26863 dated 4 October 2004: Draft Preferential Procurement
              Regulations, 2004, in terms of the Preferential Procurement
              Policy Framework Act, 2000 (Act No 5 of 2000).

         (l)     Amendment to the exemptions made in Government Notice No
              R1596 published in Government Gazette No 24176 dated 20
              December 2003, under section 74 of the Financial Intelligence
              Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).

         (m)     Explanatory Memorandum on the second reporting exemption
              in terms of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act
              No 38 of 2001).


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
         Commission (FFC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 159-
         2004].


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy, the Portfolio Committee on Health and the
         Portfolio Committee on Labour. The Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and
              Safety Inspectorate for 2003-2004 [RP 142-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and
              Safety Council for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              136-2004].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Nuclear Energy Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
              Regulator (NNR) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              113-2004].


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Sport and Recreation and to the Portfolio Committee on Health. The
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the South African Institute for
         Drug-Free Sport for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 118-2004].


     (7)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education. The Reports of the Independent Auditors and the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 15 - Department of
              Education for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 144-
              2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Council for Educators (SACE) for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
              for 2003-2004.


     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education and to the Portfolio Committee on Labour. The Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour Relations
         Council (elrc) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 151-2004].


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education and to the Portfolio Commitee on Finance. The Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the National Student Financial
         Aid Scheme (NSFAS) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 172-
         2004].


     (10)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Public Protector of South
         Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 114-2004].


     (11)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:


         (a)     Report on the removal from office of Magistrate P P
              Mkalipi on account of his incapacity to carry out his duties
              of office efficiently.

         (b)     Government Notice No R880 published in Government Gazette
              No 26601 dated 23 July 2004: Magistrates' Courts: Amendment of
              the Rules of the Court, in terms of the Rules Board for Courts
              of Law, 1985 (Act No 107 of 1985).


     (12)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs. The Reports of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Land and
              Agricultural Development Bank (Land Bank) for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 147-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural
              Research Council (ARC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
              [RP 88-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Bala Farms (Pty)
              Ltd for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
              on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 166-2004].


     (13)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 - Department of
              Labour for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 64-
              2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
              Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 83-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment
              Insurance Fund (UIF) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
              [RP 65-2004].

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation
              Commissioner for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              65-2004].


     (14)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry. The Reports of the Auditor-General and
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred
         to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 - Department of
              Water Affairs and Forestry for 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004 [RP 131-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon
              Tunnel Authority (TCTA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
              the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.


     (15)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry:


         (a)     Government Notice No 897 published in Government Gazette
              No 26602 dated 30 July 2004: Proposal for the establishment of
              the Mvoti to Mzimkulu Catchment Management Agency in terms of
              section 78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
              1998).

         (b)     Government Notice No 898 published in Government Gazette
              No 26602 dated 30 July 2004: Proposal for the establishment of
              the Crocodile (West) - Marico Catchment Agency in terms of
              section 78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
              1998).

         (c)     Government Notice No 937 published in Government Gazette
              No 26649 dated 13 August 2004: Release of parts of state
              forests which are no longer required for forestry in terms of
              the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

         (d)     Government Notice No 966 published in Government Gazette
              No 26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Jan
              Fourieskraal Irrigation Board, Division of Calitzdorp,
              Province of the Western Cape, into the Jan Fourieskraal  Water
              User Association, Water Management Area Number 16, Province of
              the Western Cape, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (e)     Government Notice No 967 published in Government Gazette
              No 26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the
              Stompdrift-Kamanassie Irrigation Board, Division of Oudtshoorn
              and Calitzdorp, Western Cape Province, into the Stompdrift-
              Kamanassie Water User Association, Water Management Area
              Number 16, Western Cape Province, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (f)     Government Notice No 968 published in Government Gazette
              No 26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the
              Stellenbosch, Helderberg and Lower Eertse River Irrigation
              Boards, Division of Stellenbosch, Province of the Western
              Cape, into the Wineland Water User Association, Water
              Management Area Number 19, Province of the Western Cape in
              terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (g)     Government Notice No 969 published in Government Gazette
              No 26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Zanddrift
              Irrigation Board, Division of Robertson, Western Cape
              Province, into the Zanddrift Water User Association, Water
              Management Area Number 18, Western Cape Province in term of
              the national Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (h)     Government Notice No 970 published in Government Gazette
              No 26663 dated 20 August 2004: Establishment of the
              Vanrhynsdorp Water User Association, Division of Vanrhynsdorp,
              Province of the Western Cape, Water Management Area Number 18,
              Western Cape Province in terms of the National Water Act, 1998
              (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (i)     Government Notice No 971 published in Government Gazette
              No 26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Lower
              Sundays River Irrigation Board, Magisterial Districts of
              Alexandria, Jansenville, Kirkwood, Port Elizabeth, Somerset
              East and Uitenhage, Eastern Cape Province, into the Lower
              Sundays River Water User Association, Water Management Area
              Number 12, Eastern Cape Province in terms of the National
              Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (j)     Government Notice No 985 published in Government Gazette
              No 26698 dated 18 August 2004: Proposal for the establishment
              of the Breede-Overberg Catchment Management Agency in terms of
              section 78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
              1998).

         (k)     General Notice No 1767 published in Government Gazette No
              26704 dated 20 August 2004: Invitation for written comments on
              the Water Services Amendment Bill, 2004.


     (16)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements to be referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum of
              Bloemfontein for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              84-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys
              Art Gallery for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
              Theatre for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Blind
              Workers Organisation for 2003-2004, including the Report of
              the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.

         (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the
              Boer Republics for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Performing Arts
              Centre of the Free State (PACOFS) for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004.

         (g)     Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
              Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (h)     Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004.

         (i)     Report and Financial Statements of the National English
              Literary Museum for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (j)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
              South Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (k)     Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
              Institutions for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              139-2004].

         (l)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and
              Video Foundation of South Africa for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 109-2004].

         (m)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Heritage Resources Agency for 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004 [RP 112-2004].

         (n)     Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
              Museum for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (o)     Report and Financial Statements of the Freedom Park Trust
              for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
              the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (p)     Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of
              Cape Town for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 104-
              2004].

         (q)     Report and Financial Statements of the Voortrekker and
              Ncome Museums for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (r)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
              Language Board (PANSALB) for 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004 [RP 166-2004].

         (s)     Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for
              2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


     (17)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements to be referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 - Department of
              Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004.

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              National Parks for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism
              for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
              the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Greater St Lucia
              Wetland Park for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


     (18)   The following papers are referred to the  Portfolio Committee on
         Communications. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements to be referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
              Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA) for 2003-
              2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 106-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 - Government
              Communication and Information System for 2003-2004, including
              the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              for 2003-2004 [RP 148-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Sentech for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


     (19)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and to the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:


         (a)     The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 29
              August 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing
              Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South African
              National Defence Force in the Republic of the Congo.

         (b)     South African Export Statistics for Conventional Arms for
              2003.


     (20)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and to the Joint Standing Committee on Defence. The Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 22 to
         be referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 - Department of Defence
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of Vote 22 - Defence for 2003-2004 [RP 137-
         2004].


     (21)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs and to the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs:


         (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Rwanda on the
              Waiver of Visa Requirements for holders of Diplomatic and
              Official/Service Passports, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
              of the Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
              Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
              Rwanda, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
              1996.


     (22)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcomes of
              Local Government for the year ended 30 June 2003 [RP 123-
              2004].

         (b)     Letter from the Minister of Public Enterprises dated 1
              October 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms
              of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
              (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
              Annual Report of Arivia.kom for 2003-2004.


     (23)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises. The Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements to be referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of Arivia.kom for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004.


     (24)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements to be referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 - Department of
              Trade and Industry for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for
              2003-2004 [RP 110-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and
              Human Resources for Industry Programme (THRIP) for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise
              Finance Limited 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.


     (25)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry and the Portfolio Committee on Labour:

         Employment Equity Report of the Department of Water Affairs and
         Forestry in terms of section 22(2) of the Employment Equity Act,
         1998 (Act No 55 of 1998).


     (26)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Safety and Security for consideration and report:

         Declaration of An Amnesty in terms of section 139(2)(a) of the
         Firearms Control Act, 2000 (Act No 60 of 2000).


     (27)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report and the Portfolio Committee
         on Provincial and Local Government:


         (a)     Government Notice No R.2458 published in Government
              Gazette No 26945 dated 29 October 2004: Draft Regulations
              published for public comment in terms of the Local Government:
              Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

         (b)     Government Notice No 1156 published in Government Gazette
              No 26866 dated 14 October 2004: Setting out particulars of
              areas demarcated by municipalities of Johannesburg and Cape
              Town, which shall constitute urban development zones, in terms
              of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


     (28)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications. The Reports of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Group Annual Financial Statements of the South
              African Post Office Limited for 2002-2003, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Group Annual
              Financial Statements for 2002-2003.

         (b)     Report and Group Annual Financial Statements of the South
              African Post Office Limited for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Group Annual
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


     (29)   The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Communications:


         (a)     Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 9
              November 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
              terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management
              Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the
              tabling of the Annual Reports of South African Post Office
              Limited for 2002-2003 and 2003-2004.

         (b)     Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 9
              November 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
              terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management
              Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the
              tabling of the Annual Reports of The Universal Service Agency
              and the Universal Service Fund for 2003-2004.


     (30)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence for consideration and report and the Portfolio Committee
         on Foreign Affairs:


         (a)     Southern African Development Community (SADC) Mutual
              Defence Pact ("the Pact"), tabled in terms of section 231(2)
              of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Southern African Development
              Community (SADC) Mutual Defence Pact ("the Pact").

         (c)     United Nations Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
              Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
              Conflicts, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
              Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the United Nations Optional
              Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
              Involvement of Children in Armed Conflicts.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail Commuter
     Corporation Limited (SARCC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 105-
     2004].

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Government Notice No 1135 published in Government Gazette No
         26848 dated 8 October 2004: Establishment of the Ventersdorp-
         Dolomite Water User Association, Magisterial district of Coligny,
         Koster, Lichtenburg and Ventersdorp, in the North West Province,
         Water Management Area number 9 in terms of the National Water Act,
         1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (b)    Government Notice No 1136 published in Government Gazette No
         26848 dated 8 October 2004: Transformation of the Elands Valley
         Irrigation Board, Magisterial districts of Belfast, Waterval Boven
         and Nelspruit, Mpumalanga Province, into the Elands River
         Catchment Area number 5, Mpumalanga Province in terms of the
         National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (c)    Government Notice No 1138 published in Government Gazette No
         26848 dated 8 October 2004: Restrictions on the taking of water
         from the Tosca Molopo Dolomite Aquifer in terms of the National
         Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (d)    Government Notice No 1316 published in Government Gazette No
         26962 dated 12 November 2004: Proposal for the Establishment of
         the Crocodile (West)- Marico Catchment Management Agency in terms
         of section 78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
         1998).

     (e)    Government Notice No 2478 published in Government Gazette No
         26962 dated 12 November 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires
         in the open air: Districts of Clanwilliam, Piketberg, Ceres,
         Tulbagh, Worcester, Caledon, Paarl, Stellenbosch, Strand and
         Somerset West in terms of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No
         84 of 1998).

     (f)    Government Notice No 2479 published in Government Gazette No
         26962 dated 12 November 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires
         in the open air: Districts of Swellendam and Montagu in terms of
         the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (g)    Government Notice No 2480 published in Government Gazette No
         26962 dated 12 November 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires
         in the open air: Western Cape in terms of the National Forests
         Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     The Acting President of the Republic submitted the following letter
     dated 10 January 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing
     Members of the National Assembly of the employment of the South African
     National Defence Force in Sudan:

     EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN SUDAN IN
     FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH
     AFRICA TOWARDS THE AFRICAN UNION

     This serves to inform the National Assembly that I authorised the
     employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
     personnel to Sudan for service in fulfillment of the international
     obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards the African Union,
     as part of the enhanced African Mission in the Sudan.

     This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
     section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
     1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 93 of the Defence Act,
     2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

     A total of 329 members of the SANDF will be deployed for the mission as
     from mid-January 2005 to March 2006.

     The total estimated cost to be borne by South Africa for the deployment
     of personnel to the mission until 31 March 2006 will be R76 570 247.

     I will communicate this report to the Members of the National Council
     of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
     Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
     notice of the National Assembly.

     Regards


     SIGNED

     J Z ZUMA
     ACTING PRESIDENT


                          TUESDAY, 01 FEBRUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2004] - Act No 32 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 18 January 2005);


     (2)    Second Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 25 - 2004] - Act No 34 of
         2004 (assented to and signed by President on 18 January 2005); and


     (3)    Securities Services Bill [B 19B - 2004] - Act No 36 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 18 January 2005).

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (i)     Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 2 - 2005] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              27001 of 18 November 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as well
         as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 1 February 2005.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    Report on the removal from office of Magistrate P W Phiri on
         account of his incapacity to carry out his duties of office
         efficiently.

     (b)    Proclamation No R.58 published in Government Gazette No 28990
         dated 19 November 2004: Amendment of Proclamation in terms of the
         Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act
         No 74 of 1996).

     (c)    Proclamation No R.59 published in Government Gazette No 28990
         dated 19 November 2004: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996).

                          THURSDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2005

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Assembly


     (1)    The vacancy that occurred owing to the resignation of Mr B W
         Kannemeyer on 1 November 2004, has been filled with effect from 11
         November 2004 by the nomination of Mr B M Mkongi.

     (2)    The vacancy that occurred owing to the resignation of Ms R
         Taljaard on 1 January 2005, has been filled with effect from 1
         January 2005 by the nomination of Ms A M Dreyer.

2.    Membership of Rules Committee


     (1)    The following change was made to the membership of the Rules
         Committee of the National Assembly:

         Appointed: Johnson, C B (Alt)
         Discharged: Gaum, A H

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate R
         Ameer.

     (b)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate M
         S Makamu.

     (c)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Senior
         Magistrate M J S Nhleko.

     (d)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate M
         K Chauke.

     (e)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate L
         D Monageng.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated 27
     January 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing Members
     of the National Assembly of the employment of the South African
     National Defence Force in the Democratic Republic of Congo:

     EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN THE
     DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, FOR SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE
     INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE
     DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

     This serves to inform the National Assembly that I authorised the
     employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
     personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo, for service in
     fulfillment of the international obligations of the Republic of South
     Africa towards the Democratic Republic of Congo in the provision of
     support in the integration and training of the new restructured forces.

     This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
     section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
     1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 93 of the Defence Act,
     2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

     A total of 40 members are employed as from mid-January 2005 for a
     period of 12 months.

     The total estimated cost to be borne by South Africa for the deployment
     of personnel is R 25 600 036.

     I will communicate this report to the Members of the National Council
     of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
     Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
     notice of the National Assembly.

     Regards


     SIGNED

     T M MBEKI
     PRESIDENT

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the National Ports
     Authority Bill [B 5B - 2003] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 18
     November 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having considered the
         subject of the National Ports Authority Bill [B 5B - 2003]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 5C - 2003].



                          MONDAY, 07 FEBRUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


         (i)     Intergovernmental Relations Framework Bill [B 3 - 2005]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 27031 of 26 November 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial
         and Local Government of the National Assembly, as well as referral
         to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
         of Joint Rule 160, on 7 February 2005.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


     (a)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Citrus Board for 2001-2002 [RP 204-2004].

     (b)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Meat Board for the year ended 31 December 2001 [RP 196-2004].

     (c)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         President's Fund for 2002-2003 [RP 84-2004].

     (d)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Special Pensions Board for 2003-2004 [RP 193-2004].

2.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Government Notice No 1474 published in Government Gazette No
         27124 dated 23 December 2004: Adjusted allocations in terms of the
         Division of Revenue Act, 2004 (Act No 5 of 2004).

     (b)    Proclamation No R.62 published in Government Gazette No 27139
         dated 22 December 2004: Fixing of date on which sections 121(1)
         and 148(1)(e) of the Second Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2001 (Act
         No 60 of 2001), and section 164(1)(c), (i) and (j), sections
         169(1)(e) and section 170(1)(b) of the Revenue Laws Amendment Act,
         2003 (Act No 45 of 2003), shall come into operation in terms of
         the Second Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2001 (Act No 60 of 2001)
         and Revenue laws Amendment act, 2003 (Act No 45 of 2003).

     (c)    Government Notice No 1429 published in Government Gazette No
         27070 dated 10 December 2004: Notice fixing amount of tax in
         dispute for purposes of appeal to Tax Board in terms of section
         83A of the Income Tax Act, 1962 and section 33A of the Value-Added
         Tax Act, 1991 in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
         1962).

     (d)    Government Notice No 1432 published in Government Gazette No
         27077 dated 10 December 2004: Notice setting out particulars of
         areas demarcated by Municipalities of Ethekwini, Tshwane,
         Emfuleni, Sol Plaatje, Manguang, Buffalo City and Mbombela in
         terms of section 13quat of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
         1962), which shall constitute urban development zones.

     (e)    Government Notice No 1404 published in Government Gazette No
         27044 dated 1 December 2004: Exemptions from supply chain
         management provisions in terms of the Local Government: Municipal
         Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

     (f)    Government Notice No 1405 published in Government Gazette No
         27044 dated 1 December 2004: Amendment of Government Notice No 773
         dated 1 July 2004 in terms of the Local Government: Municipal
         Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

     (g)    Government Notice No 1433 published in Government Gazette No
         27084 dated 8 December 2004: Approval of allocations in terms of
         the Division of Revenue Act, 2004 (Act No 5 of 2004).

     (h)    Discussion Paper on Retirement Fund Reform.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     Letter from the Minister of Public Enterprises dated 3 February 2005 to
     the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of
     the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining
     the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of Alexkor for 2004:

     Dear Madam Speaker

     Tabling of Annual Report: Alexkor

     In terms of Sections 65(1)(a) and (2) of the Public Finance Management
     Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), as amended, the Minister must table in
     Parliament Annual Report and Financial Statements within six months
     after the end of the financial year to which those Statements relates.
     As the financial year of Alexkor ended on 30 June 2004, the Annual
     Report and Financial Statements was supposed to be tabled in Parliament
     not later than 31 December 2004.

     Alexkor experienced difficulties with the printers. The printers
     indicated that the report had to go through various stages in the
     production process before delivery. Therefore, the report was only
     ready in January 2005.

     This written explanation is submitted in terms of Section 65(2)(a) of
     the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999) setting out
     reasons for the delay.

     Please accept my sincere apology.

     Yours sincerely

     signed

        Alec Erwin, MP

     Minister of Public Enterprises


                         TUESDAYS, 08 FEBRUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    The following changes have been effected to the Joint
         Committees, viz:

         Budget:

         Appointed: Burgess, Mr C V

         Defence:

         Appointed: Burgess, Mr C V
         Discharged: Jankielsohn, Mr R; Sinclair, Mr K

         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
         Disabled Persons:

         Appointed: Gore, Mr V C

         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women:

         Appointed: Batyi, Ms F; Camerer, Ms S M (Alt); Mdlalose, Ms M M
         (Alt)

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    The following changes have been effected to the membership of
         Portfolio Committees, viz:

         Agriculture and Land Affairs:

         Appointed: Green, Mr L M (Alt); Zikalala, Ms C N Z (Alt)

         Arts and Culture:

         Appointed: Biyela, Inkosi B P (Alt); Mdlalose, Ms M M

         Communications:

         Appointed: Ndlovu, Mr V B (Alt)

         Correctional Services:

         Appointed: Biyela Inkosi B P (Alt)

         Defence:

         Appointed: Ndlovu, Mr V B; Mncwango, Mr M A (Alt)

         Education:

         Appointed: Zulu, Prince N E (Alt)

         Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

         Appointed: Durr, Mr K D S (Alt); Zikalala, Ms C N Z; Zulu, Prince
         N E (Alt)

         Finance:

         Appointed: Wood, Dr G G (Alt); Durr, Mr K D S

         Health:

         Appointed: Sibuyana, Mr M W (Alt); Steyn, Mr A C
         Discharged: Waters, Mr M

         Home Affairs:

         Appointed: Chang, Prof E S (Alt); Mars, Ms I

         Housing:

         Appointed: Ngema, Mr M V (Alt)

         Finance:

         Appointed: Durr, Mr K D S; Van der Merwe, Mr J H (Alt)

         Foreign Affairs: Subcommittee on International Affairs

         Appointed: Van der Merwe, Mr J H (Alt)

         Foreign Affairs: Subcommittee on African Union

         Appointed: Joubert, Mr L K (Alt)

         Justice and Constitutional Development:

         Appointed: Joubert, Mr L K (Alt)

         Labour:

         Appointed: Mpontshane, Mr A M (Alt)

         Minerals and Energy:

         Appointed: Rabinowitz, Dr R; Zondi, Rev K M

         Provincial and Local Government:

         Appointed: Seaton, Ms S A (Alt)

         Public Enterprises:

         Appointed: Roopnarain, Dr U (Alt)

         Public Service and Administration:

         Appointed: Mdlalose, Ms M M (Alt)

         Public Works:

         Appointed: Khumalo, Rev M S; Ngiba, Mr B C (Alt)

         Safety and Security:

         Appointed: Vezi, Mr T E (Alt)

         Science and Technology:

         Appointed: Bekker, Mr H J (Alt); Bhengu, Mr M J
         Discharged: Chang, Mr E S

         Social Development:

         Appointed: Ngema, Mr M V (Alt); Waters, Mr M
         Discharged: Botha, Ms C S

         Sport and Recreation:

         Appointed: Dhlamini, Mr B W; Lucas, Mr E J (Alt)

         Trade and Industry:

         Appointed: Bhengu, Mr M J (Alt); Chang, Prof E S

         Transport:

         Appointed: Dhlamini, Mr B W (Alt); Swathe, Mr M M
         Discharged: Waters, Mr M

         Water Affairs and Forestry:

         Appointed: Joubert, Mr L K (Alt)


     (2)    The following changes have been effected to the membership of
         Standing Committees, viz:

         Private Members' Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions:

         Appointed: Burgess, Mr C V

         Public Accounts:

         Appointed: Bhoola, Mr R B (Alt); Pule, Mr B E; Vezi, Mr T E (Alt)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Supplementary Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
     Division of Revenue Bill for 2005-2006 and the Medium Term Expenditure
     Framework (MTEF) for 2005-2008, tabled in terms of section 9(1) of the
     Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).


                         THURSDAY, 10 FEBRUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Water Services Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2004] - Act No 30 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 7 February 2005);


     (2)    National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment
         Bill [B 2B - 2004] - Act No 31 of 2004 (assented to and signed by
         President on 7 February 2005);


     (3)    Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and
         Related Activities Bill [B 12F - 2003] - Act No 33 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 4 February 2005).


     (4)    Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 66B - 2003] - Act No 35
         of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 7 February 2005);


     (5)    Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill [B 20B - 2004] - Act No 37
         of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 4 February 2005);
         and


     (6)    Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 72D - 2003]
         - Act No 38 of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 4
         February 2005).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency

     Strategic Plan of Government Communication and Information System
     (GCIS) for 2005-2008.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Bilateral Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic
         of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of Croatia,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum of the Bilateral Trade Agreement between
         the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
         of the Republic of Croatia.


                          TUESDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


         (i)     Co-operatives Bill [B 4 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec
              75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 27257 of 4
              February 2005.]

              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
              and Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160, on 14 February 2005.

              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
              (JTM) within three parliamentary working days.


         (ii)    Close Corporations Amendment Bill [B 6 - 2005] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              27281 of 11 February 2005.]

              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
              and Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160, on 16 February 2005.

              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
              (JTM) within three parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (i)     Citation of Constitutional Laws Bill [B 5 - 2005]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 27278 of 10 February 2005.]

              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
              Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
              (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 15
              February 2005.

              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
              (JTM) within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    South African Abattoir Corporation Act Repeal Bill, 2005,
         submitted by the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs on 4
         February 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture
         and Land Affairs and the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs

     The Employment Equity Report of the Independent Electoral Commission
     for 2003, tabled in terms of section 22 of the Employment Equity Act,
     1998 (Act No 55 of 1998).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert 1ATC0215

