---
title: 'National Assembly - 07 June 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-06-07
---

TUESDAY, 7 JUNE 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.




                              NOTICE OF MOTION


Mr G B MAGWANISHE: Madam Speaker, I shall move that the House debates the
role of human rights and equality before the law as mechanisms to
facilitate the realisation of human potential, promotion of community and
nation-building, as well as affirming all sectors that have been
marginalised in law and protection rights in the past.


  JOINT SITTING TO BID FAREWELL TO RETIRED CHIEF JUSTICE ARTHUR CHASKALSON


                             (Draft Resolution)
UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEQELA ELIKWISININZI: Somlomo, ndiphakamisa ngaphandle
kwesaziso ukuba le Ndlu –

  (1) iqaphele ukuba uMongameli weli lizwe uthe, ngokoMgaqo-siseko
       nangokweMithetho yale Ndlu, wabiza iNdibano eyiNtlanganisela yeziNdlu
       ezimbini zePalamente ngoLwesihlanu, umhla we-10 kuJuni ka-2005,
       ngentsimbi ye-11:00, ukwenzela ukuthi ndlela-ntle kuJaji Arthur
       Chaskalson obephethe iNkundla yoMgaqo-siseko nokwamkela iinkokeli
       ezintsha zale nkundla;


  (2) ikhumbule ukuba ngomhla we-11 kuFebhuwari ka-2005 uMongameli wathi xa
       wayethetha kule Ndlu wacela ukuba le Ndlu idale ithuba lokuba kuthiwe
       ndlela-ntle kweli qhawe uJaji Chaskalson; kwanokuba


  (3) igqibe ekubeni, ngemvumelwano neBhunga leSizwe laMaphondo, ukuba
       kumenywe iJaji le imenywe ukuba ize kuthabatha inxaxheba kule Ndibano
       eyiNtlanganisela yeZindlu zePalamente ngomhla we-10 kuJuni ka-2005.
(Translation of Xhosa draft resolution follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House -


  (1) notes that the President of the Republic of South Africa has in terms
       of the Constitution and the Rules called a Joint Sitting of the two
       Houses on Friday, 10 June 2005 at 11:00 to bid farewell to the hon Mr
       Justice Arthur Chaskalson, the outgoing Chief Justice of the Republic
       of South Africa, and to welcome the incoming leadership of the
       Judiciary;


  (2) recalls the wish expressed by the President in his State of the Nation
       address delivered on 11 February 2005  for Parliament to create an
       opportunity to bid farewell to Judge Chaskalson; and


  (3) resolves, subject to the concurrence of the National Council of
       Provinces, to invite the retired Chief Justice to attend and
       participate in the Joint Sitting of the Houses on 10 June 2005.]


USOMLOMO: Chief Whip [Mbhexeshi oyiNtloko], mandithi “owayesakuba yiJaji
eyiNtloko”. [The SPEAKER: Chief Whip, let me correct you. It’s “former
Chief Justice”.]

Agreed to.



                             CHURCH FOR THE DEAF


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K O BAPELA (ANC): Madam Speaker, this past Sunday we paid a visit to a
church – not a normal church, but a special church. It is called the Bible
Baptist Church for the Deaf. Our visit to the church was part of the ANC
parliamentary programme to reach out to people, to expand the ANC social
base in society, and to take parliamentarians or public representatives to
the people.

On arrival, we were received by Pastor Chris Rautenbach, the founder of the
church. According to him, this is the only church for deaf people in the
country, and he hopes it will also grow to be a national one. Members of
the church’s congregation come from the Gauteng areas of Tembisa,
Phomalong, Kempton Park, Alexandra, Johannesburg, Boksburg, Daveyton and
Soweto, as well as from the North West province.

We all enjoyed and marvelled at the sermon, which was done in sign
language. The singing by the congregation was also in sign language. The
choir also entertained us, and all the activities were done in sign
language, as the congregation is deaf. Fortunately, Father Chris is a
hearing person, whose wife is a deaf person, and was able to interpret for
us.
After the sermon we spent time listening to the sad stories of how deaf and
dumb people are discriminated against in society. The stories were about a
lack of access to further education – in that after being accepted at a
tertiary level, they are told that they have to get their own interpreters,
which costs R8 000 a month. Or, when going to government offices to access
our services, there is no one who can do sign language in the government
offices.

We therefore call on the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of
Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons to
present reports on the successes and challenges faced by these vulnerable
groups in society in order to ensure that our constitutional obligations of
equality for all in society are realised. I thank you. [Applause.]


                ANC ALLIANCE PARTNERS’ SUPPORT FOR JACOB ZUMA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Speaker, in response to the guilty verdict in
the Shaik trial, the ANC correctly noted that as a young democracy we need
to resist all efforts from whatever quarter to circumvent the due process
of law or undermine the spirit and letter of the Constitution.
It is unfortunate that the ANC’s alliance partners have ignored the ANC’s
plea. In an extraordinary act of political thuggery, the ANC Youth League
showed no respect for the rule of law, launching racist attacks on Judge
Squires as an old, apartheid, Rhodesian minister, and accusing him of
issuing a political verdict that was wrong and baseless. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon members!

Mrs S M CAMERER: Likewise, the Young Communist League, which accused
Squires of being a cynical, mad person; ditto Cosatu, which dismissed the
judgment as nothing but a political trial in absentia.

We are appalled at the methods used by the ANC’s alliance partners, who
continue to support Deputy President Zuma no matter how much embarrassment
he causes the ANC in South Africa. We trust that respect for constitutional
democracy and the rule of law will ultimately prove more important to the
ANC than keeping the radical elements in the alliance happy. Thank you.


   IFP’S SUPPORT FOR RECOMMENDATIONS OF COMMISSION FOR AFRICA, AND FOR DR
                             KAUNDA AS AU ENVOY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a two-part
statement.

The IFP supports the recommendations of the Commission for Africa on
development aid to African countries, including debt relief of all debts
owed to donor countries and international financial institutions.

In order to prevent the debt of the poor nations from becoming a permanent
feature on the agenda of the rich nations, it is of cardinal importance
that the efforts of the Commission for Africa are steered to complement the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development. Parallel economic and development
initiatives will only serve to revisit and reinforce the past imperial and
colonial tendencies of economic and political domination of African
colonies. For this reason, President Mbeki’s international forays to garner
support for Africa are appreciated.

In the deep quest for peace, stability, co-operation and development in
Africa, the African Union has honourably appointed the former President of
Zambia, Dr Kenneth Kaunda, as the AU’s envoy to the African state of Togo.
Dr Kaunda joins the past presidents of Botswana, Mozambique and South
Africa. This is also in pursuit of the substantive and salient requirements
contained in the 1991 Kampala document, seeking to reverse the predicament
faced by the postcolonial nation state. The IFP supports this initiative.
Thank you.


            BENEFICIARIES OF THE EXPANDED PUBLIC WORKS PROGRAMME


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B A RADEBE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the Sowetan on Monday reads: “Hope at
last for jobless”. It reads further: “Gelile Lukhele has finally found work
at” ... [Inaudible.] ... “Luphusi road project in Westbridge”. Lukhele, a
mother of three, is quoted as saying:


    I was unemployed and could not support my children, but I was recently
    given an opportunity to earn a living. If getting my clothes dirty and
    my skin burnt by the sun means I will be able to put food on the table,
    I’ll do it with pride.

Lukhele, Lindi Magagula and Grace Mashego are amongst many who are
beneficiaries of the Expanded Public Works Programme. Equally, Joseph
Masilo is quoted as saying:

I lost my eyesight but I still have my health to keep me alive. So I’ll
make bread until I’m the best in the world. Opportunities like this show
that we have a government that is willing to make a better life for poor
people like me.

This affirms the vision of the Freedom Charter that states: “There shall be
work and security.”

The committee will be visiting Mpumalanga, the Northern Cape and the North
West next week to evaluate their conditions, and the integration and
implementation of the Expanded Public Works Programme at local municipality
level where the challenge is prevalent. We commend the work that has been
done by the department to date. Thank you.


   COMPETITION COMMISSION TO LAUNCH PROBE INTO SOUTH AFRICA’S HIGH BANKING
                                   CHARGES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G T MADIKIZA (UDM): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The UDM welcomes the fact
that the Competition Commission is to launch a probe into South Africa’s
high bank charges.

For many years South African consumers have been receiving the short end of
the stick. Last year this was confirmed by the Treasury and the Reserve
Bank who found that South Africa had the highest banking charges in the
world. This is simply ridiculous considering our status as a developing
country. Some of the fees charged in South Africa are 150% higher than
those charged in any other country.

South Africa’s banking sector is the only one in the world that makes more
from charges than from interest. We are apparently the only country in the
world that charges people to make deposits. What is apparent from all these
statistics is that banking in South Africa does not follow the accepted
banking business model, and instead has developed into an uncompetitive and
exploitative form of business. To the extent that most of the banks are
equally guilty, they would also appear to be guilty of collusion. We
sincerely hope that the Competition Commission will show as little fear or
favour in this case as it has shown in previous probes into various
sectors.

The banks have had many opportunities to reform and, from their impressive
annual financial statements, it is clear that they are in a position to
reform. The time has come to put the consumer first, because it is only
with a properly banked and serviced population that we can hope to extend
our economic gains to all South Africans. I thank you.


          SCHABIR SHAIK CASE AGAIN PUTS ARMS DEAL AT THE FOREFRONT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A HARDING (ID): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The outcome of the court case
against Mr Schabir Shaik has again put the arms deal at the forefront of
the South African political agenda.

Patricia de Lille has taken a lot of abuse and public ridicule for blowing
the whistle on the arms deal acquisition process. A lot of this abuse was
state-generated, and we are not amused that so many opportunists in
Parliament are now jumping on the bandwagon. In the ID we agree that the
seriousness of this matter calls for reserve, balance and careful handling.

This is not a political issue. This is now a legal issue. The courts and
the judiciary should be responsible for ensuring that justice is done. The
Deputy President is innocent until proven guilty by a court of law. South
Africa is a constitutional democracy, and the rule of law forms an integral
part of that dispensation. This case has such a high profile at the
international level that it has done irreparable damage to our image.
Perhaps a way forward to protect the country and our democracy would be for
the Deputy President to temporarily step down until he has been afforded
the opportunity to clear his name.

Patricia de Lille should be given an official apology by those who were at
the forefront of this ferocious smear campaign waged against her. The ID is
committed to bringing to the forefront any corruption between business and
government. Thank you.


                           STILFONTEIN EARTHQUAKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF Plus): Agb Speaker, op 9 Maart 2005 het een van die
grootste aardbewings in Suid-Afrika, wat 5,3 op die Richterskaal gemeet
het, Stilfonteindorp getref. Wonderbaarlik was daar slegs ‘n lewensverlies
van twee persone, maar verskeie geboue is vernietig of beskadig, waarvan
die skade konserwatief bereken word op minstens R20 miljoen.

As gevolg van dié aardbewing het DRD Gold sy mynbedrywighede in die
Noordwes gestaak, met die gevolg dat 6 513 werkers werkloos gelaat is. As
die huisgesinne ook in berekening gebring word, is minstens 20 000 mense
hierdeur in ellende gedompel.

Daar bestaan ‘n wanpersepsie dat indien ‘n aardbewing nie gepaard gaan met
groot lewensverlies nie, is dit nie ‘n ramp nie. Die werklikheid is dat
daar tans kospakkies aan minstens 1 200 inwoners uitgedeel moet word.
Hierdie probleem het toegeneem in so ‘n mate dat die polisie verlede week
ingeroep moes word om openbare orde te handhaaf by die uitdeel van die
kospakkies. Die rede was omdat baie meer mense nou nie meer kos op die
tafel het nie, en van dié kospakkies nodig het.

Die VF Plus het reeds op 19 April 2005 die President versoek om die proses
aan die gang te sit om die Stilfonteingebied tot rampgebied te verklaar.
Tot op hede is nog niks gedoen nie, en is daar geen staatshulp verleen aan
mense wat honger ly nie. Daar word weer eens ‘n beroep op die kantoor van
die President gedoen om daadwerklik in te gryp en die gebied tot rampgebied
te verklaar en sodoende geld beskikbaar te stel om mense te voed.
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF Plus): Hon Speaker, on 9 March 2005 one of the
biggest earthquakes in South Africa, measuring 5,3 on the Richter scale hit
Stilfontein. Miraculously only two lives were lost, but various buildings
were destroyed or damaged, of which the damages are conservatively
estimated at at least R20 million.

As a consequence of this earthquake DRD Gold ceased its mining operations
in the North West, with the result that 6 513 workers have been left
jobless. If the families are also taken into consideration, then at least
20 000 people have been plunged into misery as a result of this.

A misconception exists that if an earthquake is not accompanied by massive
loss of life, then it is not a disaster. The reality is that food parcels
now have to be distributed to at least 1 200 residents.

This problem has increased to such an extent that the police were called in
last week to maintain public order during the distribution of these food
parcels. The reason was that many more people no longer have food on the
table, and are in need of these food parcels.

The FF Plus requested the President as long ago as 19 April 2005 to start
the process of having the Stilfontein area declared a disaster area. To
date nothing has been done, and there is no government aid being given to
people who go hungry. Once again an appeal is being made to the office of
the President to intervene decisively and to declare the area a disaster
area in order to make funds available to feed the people.]


                  ALLEGATIONS BY MEMBERS REGARDING PETROSA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N F MATHIBELA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC’s record of clean governance
is without parallel among political parties in this country. [Laughter.]
The hon Peter Smith and the hon Pieter Mulder are surely ignorant of
political trends in this country. [Interjections.] Why else would Mr Smith
allege that the ANC is attempting to cover up the PetroSA story when
actually an ANC-dominated minerals and energy portfolio committee has
decided to question PetroSA when it makes its annual appearance before the
committee. [Interjections.]

That this allegation is made, among others, by an IFP member is in itself
interesting. The IFP’s track record on matters of transparency and clean
governance established during decades of its KwaZulu-Bantustan rule is, to
be mild about it, laughable.

The hon Smith and hon Mulder would surely agree with us that it would not
be proper if the minerals and energy portfolio committee’s agenda was to be
determined on the basis of media reports.

The ANC-led committee has taken a decision that PetroSA will be questioned
at a proper and relevant point in time, and this, indeed, is the correct
approach. I thank you. [Applause.]


                       INVESTIGATION OF CHIPPIE SHAIK


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E W TRENT (DA): Madam Speaker, recent events throw into question the
awarding of the Corvette contract, which formed part of the arms deal.
Evidence in the Shaik trial brings into sharp focus the role of Schabir
Shaik’s brother, Chippie. He was central in the whole arms deal. He managed
it, he drove it, and he was privy to every bit of information, reaction,
debate and response.

The JIT report found that, despite Chippie Shaik’s obvious conflict of
interest, he did not properly recuse himself when the awarding of the
contracts to Thomson and ADS were discussed. Chippie Shaik also acted
irregularly when he changed the minutes of another meeting to reflect that
a decision was taken to award a contract to BAE Saab. The contents of the
decision reflected in these minutes were contested by former secretary of
defence, Pierre Steyn.

Therefore, in the light of the judgment, and his highly improper conduct
throughout the arms deal process, it is clear that the National Prosecuting
Authority has no choice but to launch a criminal investigation into the
role of Chippie Shaik. Clearly Schabir Shaik solicited a bribe from Thomson
on behalf of the Deputy President in return for the Deputy President’s
protection.

This is common cause, and this proves that they had something to hide; they
had something to hide. What other conclusion can any of us possibly draw
from what the judge found in that judgment? Thank you.


                       CONCERNS REGARDING HIV REGIMES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE (Azapo): Madam Speaker, Azapo notes that the HI virus
was discovered by researchers in France in 1984 and was immediately seen as
a breakthrough in the fight against a syndrome of infections affecting
homosexual males, intravenous drug abusers and haemophiliacs.

Since then it has been largely accepted by many scientists that the HI
virus causes Aids, and that the virus is transmitted by sexual contact or
direct introduction of infected fluids into the bloodstream. Today millions
of people throughout the world are either living with HIV, suffering from
Aids, or dead. South Africa is reported to be amongst the worst affected.

Pharmaceutical companies offer regimes ranging from AZT, AZT plus 3TC,
nevirapine and others. The nature of toxic material present in these drugs
has been the subject for debate and numerous studies and trials have been
conducted in some countries, notably Uganda, and are subject to
controversy.

It has been noted that there have been irregularities in collecting the
data and keeping the records during the trials to validate the use of
nevirapine in Uganda. Although the US Food and Drug Administration did not
approve nevirapine for Americans, American pharmaceutical companies
recommended it to South Africans, and strongly objected when the government
was cautious about its use in South Africa.

Even if nevirapine has side effects it does not matter to those
pharmaceutical companies since, to them, we cannot afford better drugs. To
them, African governments must just accept everything even if it kills our
people. [Interjections.] Azapo rejects these attitudes. Our people deserve
protection from pharmaceutical companies that are motivated by capitalist
greed. I thank you. [Applause.]


                            CHILD PROTECTION WEEK


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs T J TSHIVHASE (ANC): Speaker, this is Child Protection Week. Your child
is my child. Noting that the Minister launched Child Protection Month on
Monday, 30 April 2005, the ANC joins the Minister and calls upon all
communities to work closely with government and law-enforcement agencies in
establishing a safer environment for our children, particularly the girl-
child.

We support government in its fight for children’s rights in South Africa
and the world at large. The Children’s Bill, which is still before the
Portfolio Committee on Social Development, is one of many measures by the
ANC government to raise awareness regarding the protection of children.

The registration of all eligible children under 14 years for the child
support grant, and ensuring that orphans and other vulnerable children are
given the necessary care and support, are concrete indications of the
seriousness of the ANC-led government to protect children and create an
environment that nurtures their development. I thank you.


                              INTIMATE FEMICIDE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms J A SEMPLE (DA): The DA is deeply concerned that the rate of murder of
South African women by their intimate partners is the highest in the world.
Hardly a week goes by without a front-page newspaper story detailing the
killing of a South African woman by her intimate partner – a phenomenon
known as intimate femicide.

Research by the MRC shows that one woman is killed by her partner every six
hours. The DA is appalled by the fact that only slightly more than a third
of the men who kill their wives or girlfriends are convicted of murder.
Nearly 70% of perpetrators escape punishment because of lack of evidence.

We share the concern that our country’s high intimate femicide rate is an
indictment of a deeply patriarchal society. Ineffective implementation of
court protection orders and police apathy about domestic violence are also
to blame. [Applause.]


                           ARREST OF SANDF COLONEL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Speaker, a colonel of the SANDF who was
stationed in Bloemfontein was arrested last week by Western Cape police for
allegedly supplying hand grenades, firearms and ammunition to a Cape Flats
gang. The weapons were taken from a strongroom at the Tempe army base in
Bloemfontein in 1998 and 1999.

Gangsterism and gang warfare on the Cape Flats claim many lives every year,
and many of those killed are innocent children. There has been an ongoing
struggle for many years to try and rid the Cape Flats of gangs so that the
residents can once again lead normal lives without the fear of being killed
or terrorised by gansterism. It is therefore very disturbing and
disgraceful that a member of the SANDF must have played a part in
supporting the reign of terror in these gangs.

The police officials and all involved in the investigation and ultimately
the arrest should be congratulated for their efforts. We hope that the
maximum-allowed sentence is handed down to this army colonel if he is found
guilty. We also urge the SANDF to ensure that they have adequate security
and storage measures in place with regard to their weapons to prevent
similar incidents from happening in future. I thank you.

                ALLOWING DUE PROCESS IN CASE OF SCHABIR SHAIK


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr M SEFULARO (ANC): Madam Speaker, the recent behaviour of the opposition
in this House, following the conviction of Mr Schabir Shaik, has been
unbecoming of parliamentarians. Their attacks on the person and office of
the Deputy President are malicious and wrong.

The findings against the Deputy President were made without him being given
an opportunity to give his side of the story. We must resist the temptation
to turn Parliament into a kangaroo court.

Two major features of this trial are worth noting: Firstly, notwithstanding
the fact that his name was repeatedly and prominently mentioned in the
case, there was no interference from the Deputy President. Secondly, the
ANC-led government allowed due process to run unhindered. This is
unchallengeable proof of the ANC’s commitment to clean government and the
rule of law.

The matter of Schabir Shaik is still before the courts of law; it can only
be regarded as concluded once Mr Shaik has exhausted all constitutionally
guaranteed options available to him. These options include appeals to the
highest courts in the country. In this context we call on all South
Africans, including political parties, to demonstrate respect for the rule
of law, the fundamental principles of justice and the values that underpin
our constitutional order.

We should not allow the pursuit of narrow party interests to undermine the
right of the individual as enshrined in the Constitution, including the
right to a fair hearing through the due process of law. I thank you.
[Applause.]

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE AND LAND
      AFFAIRS – PUBLIC HEARINGS ON PACE OF LAND REFORM IN SOUTH AFRICA

Ms E NGALEKA: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen: “The land shall be shared amongst those who work it”. The
Freedom Charter is a statement of aims. It is a definition of the goals of
our liberation movement. It is the sum total of our national democratic
aspirations and the democratic life that we all need. On the basis of the
Freedom Charter are founded the cornerstones of our principles of freedom
and democracy. In his biography, Let my people go, Chief Albert Luthuli
said:
  The Freedom Charter attempts to give flesh and blood meaning in the South
  African setting, to such words as democracy, freedom and liberty. If the
  Charter is examined it will be seen that freedom means the opening up of
  the opportunity to all South Africans to live full and abundant lives in
  terms of country, community and individual.


It seemed fit for the ANC, after the first decade of freedom, to get a view
from the people we in this House claim to represent as to how the
democratic government has performed in terms of land delivery to them. We
needed to know what the beneficiaries think of the mechanisms this
government has chosen to use to assist in reaching the objective of
bringing about equity in land ownership.

It is for this reason that our committee undertook public hearings on the
pace of land reform from 18 to 20 October 2004. It became much more
significant for us to debate this report on the pace of land reform during
the year of the 50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter.

It came out strongly during the public hearings that the pace of land
reform has been very slow. While we understand the frustrations of the
people who have been waiting patiently to get back their land for the past
10 years, we want to appeal to them to take cognisance of the fact that the
first five years of our democracy was about putting the legal framework and
institutions of governance in place to lay a solid foundation for the
implementation of land and agrarian reform. As a result, the pace of land
delivery was slower in the beginning but, as we all could see, there was an
improvement since 1999.

Inkezo Land Company, in its presentations, raised a lack of co-operation
between the three spheres of government as a challenge. It has been our
call and we will continue calling on all spheres of government to work
together in addressing the needs of our communities. Local government as
the sphere closest to the people must become more closely involved in land
reform.

The SA Human Rights Commission supported and echoed the call from the many
landless people that the pace of land reform was too slow. At the same
time, the SA Human Rights Commission recognised, within a human rights
framework, that there had been progressive realisation of the property
rights contained in the Constitution that seek to redress the imbalances of
the past.

The denial of access to land to the majority of the country’s people during
apartheid was one of the greatest challenges that our young democracy
faced.
When one looks at statistics, it is true that the pace of land reform is
not what we predicted it would be; though we need to commend the department
for the commitment shown and hard work they are doing in restoring dignity
to the beneficiaries.

As the ANC we want to make a call on communities, when viewing their
options on restitution, to choose land because the value of money
depreciates while land’s value appreciates.

Secondly, we want to change land ownership patterns in South Africa to
reflect the South African community. In the report of the Commission on
Restitution that we received today there was a worrying fact, which shows
that for the financial year ended March 2005, R1 729 billion was spent on
land acquisition while R2 454 billion was spent on financial compensation.

This is not land reform. We want land reform to reflect that people own
land and that the land ownership patterns have changed in this country.
Farm dwellers should not end up being evicted from farms due to restitution
or land reform. More should be done to safeguard the needs of people
working on farms.

Financial compensation as a form of redress should be discouraged for the
following reasons. Firstly, it is attractive to the poor to address poverty-
related needs, but it is short-term poverty-relief because it does not
offer lasting solutions to poverty. Secondly, it does not contribute to
resolving the problem of skewed ownership of land. Lastly, in many cases,
financial compensation leads to family disputes and fraud.

The issue of determining just and equitable compensation in line with our
Constitution is still a challenge in some cases, given the collusion
between valuers, landowners and some of our commissioners.

On this point, we note the Mpumalanga case and commend the Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs for the swift action taken in this case to
implement measures to stop this evil from spreading to other parts of the
country.

In terms of land tenure, it has been shown in public hearings that despite
the Acts we pass to prevent eviction, farmworkers are still evicted and
maltreated on the farms. It is important that improving living conditions
of farmworkers become the cornerstone of our land reform. We cannot anymore
allow a situation where the people who actually toil on the land to produce
the food for us are maltreated. It is for these reasons that the committee
recommended that the department tighten up all loopholes in relation to the
Extension of Security of Tenure Act and the Land Reform (Labour Tenants)
Act to ensure the security of tenure of the people who live in rural areas.

The ANC government once again demonstrated its commitment to land reform by
increasing the budget by R6 billion, and I believe that this government is
still committed to continuing to increase funding as and when it is needed
because land ownership is close to our hearts.

During the public hearing, we had an opportunity to listen to the people
and to share the experiences that they experience daily in their lives.
Once again, we want to remind everyone that we all have a responsibility to
ensure that wherever we are, whether we are in local, provincial or
national government, we all have a responsibility to make sure we
contribute. Even the public sector needs to contribute in making sure that
we share the land because the Freedom Charter, as the guiding document,
makes it clear that, “The land shall be shared amongst those who work it”.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A H NEL: Speaker, there is no doubt that land reform is a very emotional
issue for all the stakeholders. Therefore, we as members of the portfolio
committee and other decision-makers should tread lightly in this emotional
minefield. We must also remember what land reform is about, namely that we
all agree that the skewed distribution is the responsibility of us as a
nation.

The responsibility can thus only be fulfilled by the government of the day
through the various taxes it collects from us all. This view is shared by
the Department of Land Affairs, which stated in the annual report that they
derived their mandate “from section 25 of the Constitution which protects
property rights, while placing an obligation on the government to implement
land reform”.

Many of the organisations and also some members of the committee put the
blame on the present landowners, as if they were personally guilty of all
the atrocities and displacement of people in the past. If this is true,
then the landowner is guilty because he abided by the laws of a government,
which were legitimate in the eyes of the world. Then, in time, we will get
another government that will make laws that forbid racial reference. Then,
again, the landowner will be guilty because it states on his title deed:
Maans Nel, owner of land; race: white. So who are the real culprits? It is
the political parties that when they are elected, form governments and put
their policies into law.

Now this committee recommends that the Office of the Registrar of Deeds
should register land in terms of race. This government, by mouth of the
Minister, gave notice that she would give effect to this recommendation. It
is almost unbelievable that an ANC government that fought against racism
all its life, that reminded us every day that it is a nonracist and
nonsexist party, and whose founding document, the Freedom Charter, states
that the rights of the people shall be the same regardless of race, colour
or sex, could use race as a determining factor. How is it possible?

I voted for a government that used race as a yardstick for almost
everything. I’ve seen what this has done to people. I will never again in
my life support any measure that will bring back a system of racial
classification.

Die Minister het ’n komitee aangestel om buitelandse grondbesit in Suid-
Afrika te ondersoek. Nog voordat die komitee behoorlik sy werk begin het,
kom doen die Portefeuljekomitee oor Landbou en Grondsake die aanbeveling
dat die regering ’n moratorium op enige verkope aan buitelanders moet
plaas. Om nou die meriete van die saak te bespreek of om ‘n moratorium te
vra voordat die komitee sy verslag uitgebring het, lyk vir my voortydig.
Die voorstel van die komitee laat dit egter lyk asof die ANC lankal besluit
het om verkope van grond aan buitelanders te staak.

Baie van die meer linkse organisasies het voorstelle gedoen soos dat die
hoeveelheid grond wat besit mag word, beperk word; dat progressiewe
grondbelasting ingestel moet word; en dat in die algemeen ‘n minder
markgerigte proses gevolg moet word met grondhervorming. Hierdie sentimente
is ook later by ander geleenthede deur sekere komiteelede asook amptenare
van die departement geopper. Hierdie links-sosialistiese denke kom van ‘n
party wat aan ‘n markgerigte ekonomiese stelsel glo en in hulle
besprekingsdokument voorstelle doen wat verder in hierdie rigting gaan.

Ek wil vir u ook dieselfde vraag vra wat die President nou die dag aan die
DA gevra het, naamlik of ons dan nie wil hê dat swartes ook miljoenêrs moet
word nie. Ons antwoord is ja; hoe meer markgerig u beleid word, hoe meer u
DA-beleid toepas, hoe meer sal daar wees. Ons het ook nie ‘n probleem
daarmee dat swartmense gehelp word nie. Ons het wel ‘n probleem daarmee dat
net dieselfde mense oor en oor gehelp word. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Nou vra ek vir die lede van die komitee en vir die Minister van Landbou en
Grondsake, as ‘n swart persoon of enigiemand die vermoë het en hard werk,
hoekom moet hy in die landbou beperk word en nie in staat gestel word om ‘n
landboumiljoenêr te word nie?

Ons het reeds in die komitee aangedui dat die DA hierdie verslag sal
teenstaan, eerstens weens die eensydige opsomming van die aanbevelings aan
die komitee; tweedens omdat die komitee ‘n moratorium aanbeveel op die koop
van grond deur buitelanders nog vóórdat die komitee wat dit ondersoek,
verslag gedoen het; en derdens omdat die komitee aanbeveel dat ras aangedui
moet word by die registrasie van titelaktes. Dit is totaal onaanvaarbaar.
Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The Minister has appointed a committee to examine foreign land ownership
in South Africa. Even before the committee could properly start with its
work, the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs came with the
recommendation that the government should place a moratorium on any sales
to foreigners. To discuss the merits of the matter now or to request a
moratorium before the committee has published a report, seems premature to
me. The proposal of the committee, however, makes it seem as if the ANC
decided long ago to stop the sale of land to foreigners.

Many of the more leftist organisations made proposals such as that the
quantity of land that may be owned be limited; that a progressive land-tax
must be established; and that in general a less market-oriented process
should be followed with land reform. Certain committee members as well as
officials of the department also later voiced these sentiments on other
occasions. This leftist-socialistic thinking comes from a party that
believes in a market-oriented economic system and that makes proposals in
its discussion document that move further in this direction.

I want to put the same question to you as the President put to the DA the
other day, namely whether we do not want blacks to become millionaires too.
Our answer is yes; the more market-oriented your policy becomes, the more
you put DA policy into practice, the more there will be. We also do not
have a problem with black people being helped either. We do have a problem
with only the same people being helped over and over again.
[Interjections.]

Now I want to ask the members of the committee and the Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs, if a black person or anyone has the ability
and works hard, why must he be limited in agriculture and not be enabled to
become an agricultural millionaire?

We have already indicated in the committee that the DA will oppose this
report, firstly because of the one-sided summary of the recommendations to
the committee, secondly because the committee recommends a moratorium on
foreigners buying land even before the committee that is investigating it
has reported on it; and thirdly because the committee recommends that race
must be indicated upon the registration of title deeds. This is totally
unacceptable. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Mr M V NGEMA: Madam Speaker, government’s land reform programme, which
consists of redistribution, restitution and tenure reform, is at the heart
of its land policy. In recent times, the success or lack thereof of this
programme has come under the spotlight, especially when it became obvious
that the goal of 30% redistribution of agricultural land would not be
reached in the set timeframe.

The portfolio committee conducted public hearings on the pace of land
reform in South Africa from 18 to 20 October last year. An indication of
the importance of this issue and the many people that it affects could be
witnessed by the number of submissions that were received from a diverse
spectrum of people and organisations. A total of 61 written submissions
were received from various stakeholders, 34 of whom appeared before the
portfolio committee for oral presentations.

The IFP encourages the Minister to take the opportunity presented by this
report to drive home to the entire government the point that the land
reform programme cannot be allowed to take a back seat in terms of the
priorities of government. The land issue is not only a sensitive matter,
but also has the potential to become the number one problem undermining our
democracy.

The marches and the protests that we are seeing are strong indicators of
the seriousness with which this matter should be viewed. As a proactive
move the government must come to the point at which it views the
R6 billion, allocated to complete the land restitution programme this
financial year, as the first significant investment in land reform towards
achieving the estimated budget of R30 billion in 10 years, as suggested by
the Agricultural Business Consultancy in its submission.

The portfolio committee is lending its support to the Minister by
highlighting this important matter for Parliament. Throwing the lack of
funds at this challenge will not make it go away. Strategic planning on
this matter, accompanied by a significant budget and by efficient and
effective delivery of the plans will go a long way towards achieving the
common understanding that we all need if we are to settle the land question
in this country beyond doubt. I thank you.

Mr J BICI: Madam Speaker, during the course of the public hearings we were
reminded of how complicated the issues relating to land reform are, and
especially how confusing it is for the intended beneficiaries and affected
stakeholders.
The committee was engaged by a wide variety of stakeholders, all of whom
demonstrated an intense interest in land reform. It is apparent that land
remains one of the most emotional topics in our country. The committee
received many valuable suggestions for improving the slow pace of land
reform; and we have, therefore, been in a position to make a comprehensive
list of recommendations. Amongst these are improved information and
training for law enforcement agencies, a bigger land reform budget and
greater integration of land reform across all spheres of government.

Finally, the UDM urges the Minister to consider these recommendations as a
package that, if applied in unison, will improve the pace of land reform.
What is abundantly clear is that no single one measure alone will improve
matters. A supple and integrated approach is required to ensure that we
continue to manage this sensitive issue with the least amount of conflict
and dissent, whilst improving the pace of delivery. I thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Madam Speaker, it goes without saying that land is an
extremely emotive issue in South Africa. As a party that is committed to
bridging the divides in our country, the ID maintains that addressing the
inherited land inequalities in South Africa is crucial to creating a stable
and prosperous nation.
Unfortunately the pace of land reform has been far too slow, and we need to
find ways of improving it to address the very real concerns of our people.
In doing this, we also need to recognise the changes that our agricultural
sector has undergone over the last 10 years. We have moved from a highly
protected and subsidised agricultural sector to one of the least protected
in the world, which in the face of huge agricultural subsidies in the North
has made farming a very risky profession.

The ID believes that greater priority must be given to agriculture in South
Africa, and that more financial and technical resources must be directed at
it. This is particularly the case regarding small-scale agriculture ,
which, if nothing else, could be a very effective poverty alleviation
strategy, and provide a sustainable livelihood for many rural people who
are enduring grinding poverty. There are many constraints in the current
land reform approach adopted by the state, which will make it difficult to
reach the 30% target by 2015.

The ID would argue that we need a more proactive strategy towards land
reform, which is not just driven by market supply, but by a systematic
assessment of all land needs in a particular area. In doing this we need to
build trust between all the different stakeholders so that the optimum
solution, not just for individuals, but for society as a whole, is
obtained.

There are successful examples where previous landowners have assisted land
reform beneficiaries in turning the land into productive farming units. We
need to learn from these examples and, wherever possible, replicate them.
The ultimate challenge for land reform is not only to transfer land, but to
ensure that the land generates welfare for the beneficiaries and society as
a whole. To do this, the level of post-settlement support needs to be
drastically improved.

The Freedom Charter says: “The state shall help peasants with implements,
seed, tractors and dams to save the soil and assist the tillers.” I know of
many rural communities that don’t receive a fraction of that support, and
it is time for us to prioritise their needs. Only with the right political
will, financial resources and partnerships built on trust can we hope to
turn what is potentially a divisive issue into a source of strength for our
country. I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, today Africa is faced with many challenges,
especially those relating to land ownership and restitution. The principle
of restitution is a biblical principle. It is interesting to note that in
ancient Israel the people could not be legally alienated from their land
for longer than 49 years.

All people who lost their land due to hardship or debt, or for any other
reason, would regain their land legally during the jubilee year. In other
words, every 50 years the land was handed back to its original owners.

Our country is faced with the challenge of land restitution, and we also
face the issue of limited government funds. Of course land restitution must
occur. The issue is the way in which we are going to do it. We, unlike
ancient Israel, do not have these laws that says that after 50 years the
land must go back to the original owners. We have other laws. What we need
for the healing of this nation is to reconstruct the idea of loss and
translate it into one of shared wealth for the prosperity of all people.

In May this year we witnessed a landmark judgment on upholding property
rights in South Africa, which sent a very clear message that farm invasions
will not be tolerated. The Modderklip Farm case judgment, given in the
Constitutional Court, strikes a balance between the rights of the owners of
Modderklip Farm and thousands of people without houses.

The Deputy Chief Justice at the time, Pius Langa, said:
   Land invasions of this scale threaten far more than the private rights of
   a single owner and have the capacity to be socially inflammatory and the
   potential to have serious implications for stability and public peace.


Finally, government has a legal duty to protect the property of owners as
it sought to do in the Modderklip matter. It must not evade this
responsibility. However, government also has an equal responsibility to the
landless people of this nation. I thank you.

Dr E A SCHOEMAN: Madam Speaker, colleagues, comrades, the debate on the
issue of the necessity and pace of land reform is of national importance
and it is imperative that a broad consensus regarding this goal be reached.
The time for backtracking and the scoring of cheap political points has
passed.

Accordingly, it is hardly surprising that virtually all the submissions,
oral and written, expressed varying degrees of concern about the slow
progress. From these submissions, it became evident that what the land was
needed for varied, namely land for housing or dwellings, land for
subsistence farming - small gardens, a few animals on identified communal
land - small semicommercial units and fully fledged commercial units. It
also became evident that although these needs were identified, there was an
inability to quantify them. In part, this fact does create difficulty for
government to address these needs proactively; this also complicated the
budgeting process.

Despite the disputed necessity for more equitable land ownership, the
impression was that many of the submitters expressed unrealistic
expectations regarding the purported advantages of land acquisition. Land
remains a finite resource and only a limited number of people will be able
to make a living from it in a sustainable way. The many settlement projects
for emerging farmers that have failed, bear testimony to this.

The lack of administrative capacity both in the Department of Land Affairs
and the Department of Agriculture has aggravated the situation.

Despite these constraints, the performance of the Department of Land
Affairs in finalising the restitution process by 2008, deserves
commendation. The fact that the Department of Land Affairs is a national
competency, while the Department of Agriculture is predominantly a
provincial competency, further complicates the issue. If this fact proves
to be a significant factor in retarding the pace and effectiveness of land
reform, a re-assessment is justified. Indications are that agricultural
extension services in most provinces lack capacity and motivation. There
should also be a focus on long-term solutions in preference to a short-term
approach. The personnel shortages and capacity within the department should
also be addressed as a matter of urgency, if government intends to keep
pace with the demands of the communities.

The overall goal should always be the maximum utilisation of the
agricultural potential of South Africa, on a sustainable basis.
Accordingly, the agricultural wealth of South Africa must be shared in a
just and equitable manner by those who have the need to become active
participants in agriculture.

To achieve this goal within a realistic and acceptable timeframe, both the
public and private sectors have vital roles to play. In this regard,
neither of these two role-players dare shift their obligations to the
other.

Besides the problems within government, which have been identified, the
biggest constraint is a financial one. If land reform is conducted
according to strict legalistic and constitutional principles, incredible
fiscal demands will have to be met. We acknowledge the fact that the budget
increases of R6 billion in the next three years have been allocated. The
advisability of creating a fund, specifically earmarked for land reform in
South Africa, with an international basis, should be seriously considered.
We are aware that the Belgian government has contributed R53 million for
post-settlement support, and we appreciate that. The effects of an
unstructured and ill-considered land reform programme should be obvious to
all. We are also aware of the effect of the LRAD, CASP and Mafisa
programmes on the departments, and we appreciate their contribution to post-
settlement support.

Conversely, as mentioned, the active involvement and participation of the
private sector in the process of land reform is crucial. Despite many
active and structured mentorship programmes by commercial farmers, this
programme can be vastly improved. The involvement of previous landowners
is, at times, still regarded with suspicion. A well-structured, transparent
programme is essential. Each district should have an active land reform
committee consisting of representatives from the commercial farming sector,
local and provincial authority, new farmers and prospective new farmers.
These committees could identify actual needs, prospective beneficiaries and
suitable land.

The active involvement of farmworkers within the farming enterprise is also
essential in providing security of tenure for farm dwellers. Different
models of participation, such as share equity schemes, the provision of
land for their needs, etc, are all models, which can be developed.
Different models to suit specific enterprises and for different climatic
regions, should be available. This is a challenge for commercial
agriculture, which may not fail.

It is also of concern that labour legislation pertaining to agriculture is,
in some cases, applied in a punitive way, thus disturbing relations. The
minimum wage should not become the maximum wage and the practice of
charging exorbitant rentals for basic dwellings and services is
unacceptable.

The challenge of land reform, our approach thereto and the way it is
executed are essential determinants of our future. The quest for land or
territory can either be divisive or act as a unifying force in the process
of nation-building. Many wars have been fought over land, leaving scars
that take centuries to heal. The issue is complex and will require the
wisdom of Solomon to resolve, but the choice is simple: we unify and become
a winning nation, or we perpetuate the divisions and inequities of the
past, and lose. Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Geagte Speaker, almal stem saam dat ’n gesprek oor
grondhervorming ’n uiters sensitiewe en emosionele saak is. As
grondhervorming ter sprake is, word daar ook altyd verwys na die Zimbabwe-
situasie. Die ironie van Zimbabwe is dat 4 000 blanke, kommersiële boere
verminder is na 500. Die land is nou in ’n krisis. Hulle beleef
hongersnood, en nou vra hulle dieselfde blanke boere om weer terug te kom
om te kom help.

Die emosie ten opsigte van die grondkwessie spruit uiteraard uit die
raskwessie wat daaraan gekoppel word. Dit gaan nie oor die meriete van
boerdery nie. Dit gaan nie oor of ’n boer bevoeg of kundig is om deur
landbou die volk te voed nie. Die emosies word opgejaag deur grondbesit te
koppel aan ras, en dit is die groot probleem ten opsigte van
grondhervorming.

Die VF Plus is van mening dat indien die raskwessie uit grondbesit geneem
word, en as grondbesit gekoppel word aan die vermoë van die grondbesitter
om produktief en kundig te kan produseer, ongeag ras, sal die grondkwessie
opgelos kan word.

Die verslag onder bespreking is duidelik ’n verslag behep met ras. By
registrasie van titelaktes moet ras nou aangedui word. In plaas daarvan dat
hierdie verslag gekonsentreer het op die werklike probleem van
grondhervorming, naamlik die administrasie wat daarmee gepaard gaan - wat
eintlik maar ’n frustrasie is - kon dit ’n bydrae gelewer het om die proses
van grondhervorming op te los, maar dit is ’n administratiewe probleem wat
ontstaan as gevolg van onbevoegde en onkundige amptenare wat nie weet hoe
om die proses te bestuur en te hanteer nie. Dit veroorsaak dat daar
probleme ontstaan en dan word daar geskuil agter die raskwessie en boere
wat kwansuis nie hulle grond wil beskikbaar stel nie.

Hierdie verslag dra net by om emosies te verhoog oor grond en lewer nie ’n
bydrae om oplossings te vind nie, en daarom sal die VF Plus dit nie steun
nie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Speaker, everyone agrees that a discussion about
land reform is a very sensitive and emotional matter. When land reform is
being discussed reference is also always made to the Zimbabwean situation.
The irony of Zimbabwe is that 4 000 white commercial farmers have been
reduced to 500. The country is now in a crisis. They are experiencing
famine, and now they are asking the same white farmers to come back and
help.

The emotion in respect of the land question inevitably stems from the
question of race which is connected to it. The merits of farming are not at
issue. It does not matter whether a farmer is skilled or capable of feeding
the nation by means of agriculture. Emotions are being stirred up by the
fact that land ownership is connected to race, and that is the great big
problem in respect of land reform.

The FF Plus is of the opinion that if the question of race is removed from
land ownership, and if land ownership is connected to the ability of the
landowner to produce in a productive and skilled manner, regardless of
race, the land question will be able to be resolved.

The report under discussion is clearly a report obsessed with race. When
title deeds are registered race must now be indicated. Instead of
concentrating on the actual problem of land reform, namely the
administration attached to it – which is nothing more than a frustration –
this report could have made a contribution towards solving the process of
land reform, but it is an administrative problem that occurs as a result of
incapable and unskilled officials who do not know how to manage and handle
the process. This causes problems to occur, and then people hide behind the
race issue and farmers who ostensibly do not want to make their land
available.

This report merely contributes to heightening emotions and does not make a
contribution to finding solutions, and therefore the FF Plus will not
support it.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Modulasetulo le badiri mo Palamenteng, re le komiti re
lebogela tsibogelo ya ditheo tse di farologaneng mo thebolong ya mafatshe.
Bontsi jwa ditshwaelo bo ne bo itshetlegile ka fa bokoeng jwa bonya jwa
lefapha le go sa feng tshedimosetso e e maleba mo kopanong tsa bakopi. Selo
se segolo e ne e le tiego ya go araba bakopi.

Lefatshe le na le mokgwa wa lona o le o tsenyang mo gare ga ditšhaba ka go
sa utlwaneleng melelwane le ka go thukuthelela se e leng sa mong. A re
tsepameng mo go ruteng batho tiriso ya lefatshe le go itsise ka ga lona.
Lefatshe le seke la rebolelwa batho fela ka gore ba batla, mme bogolosegolo
e nne ka tshwanelo. (Translation of Tswana paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson and colleagues, we as the committee are thankful for the
response from different departments on land redistribution. Most of the
suggestions were based on the slowness of the department and its not giving
the relevant information at meetings with the applicants. The main thing
that slows the process is the response to the
applicants.

Land has its own way of causing members of the community to fight for what
is not theirs and causing disagreements on boundaries.  Let us focus on
teaching the community about the usage of land and informing them about it.
The land must not be given to anyone just because they want it; most
importantly, it must be rightfully theirs.]

They must qualify for ownership on merit to own land. Emphasis must be on
proper utilisation of land. Agricultural training for black farmers must be
focused by providing competence in a production environment as well as
creating competency in understanding the interaction with the full
agricultural value chain. There is no structural approach to gathering
information about small-scale tillers of the land to define the impact of
the food situation in the country.

We should not lose sight of the co-operation of all stakeholders when
dealing with the issue, including that of current landowners. Furthermore,
we must accelerate state acquisition of land for redistribution. A very
important point was raised by traditional leaders that the 1998 deadline
was not communicated properly, hence some legitimate claims were not
lodged. This point must be followed up, evaluated and revised. In our
democratic society land reform should take place where there are voluntary
sellers and voluntary buyers.

Transfer of land should take into account the continuation of production
levels of the land as before, otherwise it will lead to increased poverty.
The people who have got the land have been disappointed because, after a
few months, the land that was productive was no longer productive.

UCDP e ema pegelo e nokeng. Ke a leboga [The UCDP supports the report.
Thank you.]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Speaker, comrades and hon members, the PAC wants to
thank the portfolio committee for having brought the debate on the pace of
land reform to the fore. We have always adumbrated that all was not well
and that there is room and need for much urgent improvement or a paradigm
shift in our approach to land reform. What the presentations in the report
are largely saying is a vindication of our position on this question. The
PAC supports the report unreservedly. It has aptly captured the salient
points raised in the presentations, and the portfolio committee’s own
recommendations, when implemented, will go a long way to improve the lot of
the land-hungry Africans.

The PAC fully agrees with the need to urgently tighten the security of farm
dwellers, placing a moratorium on farm evictions, the calls for a
moratorium on leasing and selling land to foreigners, and the need to
review the current market-based approach to land reform. We support
appropriation as an option that should be readily and resolutely used. We
condemn as racist, obstructionist and counterproductive the inflation of
prices as a form of resistance to land acquisition.

We hope the Minister will, as reported in today’s papers, sign the
expropriation orders in respect of the reported cases in Gauteng and the
North West. That should send a strong and clear message that we are serious
about agrarian reform. Any equivocation will only embolden the
intransigents.

The PAC also supports the registration of land ownership in terms of race
and gender. Land deprivation in this country is not only race-based, but it
also carries the face of an African woman. So as we strive for equity in
patterns of land ownership, the aspect of gender balance must be central to
it. What is clear here is that the cry continues, and will continue to
reverberate from the valleys and hills, the squalid squatter settlements to
the pigsties of the farm compounds that: Mayibuye,i-Africa! i-Africa, izwe
lethu! [Africa will return! Africa our country!][Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, since 1994 land reform in the form of
redistribution, land restitution and land tenure reform has played a large
role in giving back to the people, providing equal opportunity and
contributing to the democracy, which we so much desire. Though progress and
development is evident in this sector, a large backlog exists that makes
one unsure as to whether the 2005 commitment to restitution will be met.

However, the MF has confidence in our President’s words and we have
confidence that this sector can deliver. It is reports such as this that
make this delivery possible. Through the eyes of our portfolio committee
and the hands-on approach to matters that need to be addressed, we as
Parliament are able to identify problems, loopholes, failures and
successes. Through these we are guided to where we are going right and
where we are going wrong. This gives us room for the corrections and
alternatives, and to turn our failure and loopholes into success.

From this report it is evident that this sector is experiencing a number of
problems that may be addressed in terms of the recommendations. Considering
that we are just months away from 2006, the MF suggests the immediate
activation of such recommendations to ensure delivery to the long-awaiting
applicants. At our offices we have had a restitution claim since 1998 that
has not yet been addressed. It is a claim for restitution of land, not
money.

The MF calls for the immediate redress of administration of the Department
of Land Affairs and Commission on Land Restitution, and seriously hopes for
delivery in 2005, if possible. The MF supports this report. [Applause.]

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, I wish to refer to the speech by the hon member
Nel, and I want to say at the outset that I realise that the hon Nel
naturally speaks for the DA and what the DA believes in. He said that they
will oppose this report and gave three reasons for this.

Die een rede is dat die verslag se opsomming eensydig was. Dan wil ek
onmiddellik vir die agb lid vra: As u nou voel dat dit eensydig was, hoekom
het die DA nie sy eie minderheidsverslag uitgebring nie? Dan sou ons mos
die twee teen mekaar kon opweeg. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[One of the reasons is that the summary of the report was biased. Hence I
immediately want to ask the hon member: If you feel that it was biased, why
did the DA not bring out its own minority report? Then we could have
compared the two reports.]

We want to say that the submissions and the report form part of a résumé of
all written and oral submissions received and heard by the portfolio
committee. Does the DA want us to prostitute what the people said, the
submissions that we received and put into a report that which the DA as an
opposition wants us to put into such a report?

Secondly, it is unfortunate that the hon Nel, whom I know is a good human
being, made no reference whatsoever and showed no concern whatsoever in his
speech for the dispossessed, other than the little, fleeting reference to
the fact that skewed distribution must be corrected. He did not come along
here and tell us how that skewed distribution needs to be corrected. I
repeat again: That is what the DA believes in.

He said that the other reason for his opposition to the report was that
there is the moratorium on the ownership of land by foreigners. I want to
ask the hon members of the DA: Whose agenda are you pursuing? Do you not
believe, many of you who are born and bred South Africans, that your
children and my children and our children have no right to property in the
majority of the countries in the world, including the Western world? But
we, with the precious little that we have, must be prepared to make our
land available to all and sundry and become foreigners in our own land.

Die agb lid sê dat ons moenie ras aandui op titelaktes nie. [The hon member
says that race must not be indicated on title deeds.]

How else are you going to repair the skewed ownership of land? There are
Nels and Van der Merwes who belong to the disadvantaged and the
dispossessed groups as well, who share the same surnames as you have. We
need to know who is the owner of the land, so that statistics can show us
whether we are making progress or not. [Interjections.] Having said that of
the DA, I need to take issue also with the FF Plus.

Mr M J ELLIS: I am sure they are shivering in their shoes.

Mr S ABRAM: The hon Groenewald had referred to it here and said . . .

Daar is kommer oor die raskwessie - weer eens die kwessie van ras wat
ingebou gaan word in titelaktes. Almal van ons hier het al die jare hierdie
“tags” gedra wat aan ons gegee is. Ons was geklassifiseerd as “Coloured”,
“Other Coloured”, “race unknown” en allerhande ander goed. Nou wil u sê dat
u daarteen gekant is, maar dit was goed gewees toe ons aan die ontvangkant
daarvan was. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Daarom as ’n mens sou sê dat die verslag behep is met ras, natuurlik moet
ons mos die kwessie van grondeienaarskap en grondbesit in die land regstel.
As ons dit moet regstel, dan moet ons mos sê dat soveel persent van die
bevolking wat swart is, het geen grond of toegang tot grond gehad nie. Dit
is mos vanselfsprekend dat jy na ras behoort te verwys in die opset waarin
ons leef. U sien, vriende, ons probleem met veral die DA is dat hy hom
voordoen as ’n Afrika-party, maar hy het sy een-en-’n-half bene in die
Westerse lande! [Gelag.] Hy wil Westerse standaarde hier kom afdwing op ons
arm Afrikane. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[There is concern about the race issue; once again the issue of race being
embodied in title deeds. All of us here have for many years carried these
tags that were given to us. We were classified as “Coloured”, “Other
Coloured”, “race unknown” and so forth. Now you want to say that you are
against it, but it was good enough when we were at the receiving end of it.
[Interjections.]

Therefore, if one were to say that this report is obsessed with race, then
of course we must rectify the issue of land ownership and land tenure in
this country. If we are to rectify that, then we have to say that so many
per cent of the population that are black, owned no land or had no access
to land. It then stands to reason that one should refer to race in the
society in which we live. You see, friends, our problem with especially the
DA is that it masquerades as an African party, but it has one and a half
legs in the Western countries! [Laughter.] It wants to impose Western
standards on us poor Africans.]

The evolution of political systems in South Africa encompasses parallels of
conquest and liberation, as well as divergences in the form and content of
the way in which land issues were addressed. New forms of governance in the
postapartheid period determined legislative and policy reforms in South
Africa. Land, its ownership and use has always played a pivotal role in
shaping the political, economical and social processes in South Africa.

The postdemocracy land reform programme has, since 1994, achieved many of
the objectives that the government had set out to do, in terms of balancing
the unequal scale of land ownership of apartheid South Africa. However, the
government had set itself certain targets, for example, settling all
restitution claims by December 2005 and redistributing 30% of agricultural
land to the previously disadvantaged.

Ten years hence, it was prudent for the portfolio committee to conduct this
particular inquiry. By and large, the bulk of the representations made to
the portfolio committee enshrine the principles contained in the Freedom
Charter, which, amongst other things, states that, ``South Africa belongs
to all who live in it, black and white’’, ``The people shall share in the
country’s wealth’’, and, ``The land shall be shared among those who work
it’’.

In the submissions received, many say that existing landowners have been in
a strong position to determine what land is available and at what price.
Even in cases of restitution or tenure reform, particularly commercial
farms, the transfer of ownership was largely determined by the co-operation
or lack of co-operation of the landowners.

The market-based approach currently being pursued is a policy choice on the
part of the government, so they say, and is not specifically mandated by
the Constitution, which allows for nonmarket approaches.

It is our view that the willingness of the state to pay market prices
ensured that land reform remained expensive and there was the widespread
perception that landowners were exploiting this willingness in order to
obtain exorbitant prices.

The lack of tenure security for farmworkers and farm dwellers proved to
have one of the most detrimental effects on the lives of farmworkers. Many
farmworkers’ families had to endure farm evictions, both legal and illegal,
and no alternative accommodation has been provided for those affected.

There were many women who were assaulted and evicted from farms. The
violation of human rights was still ongoing, as if there were no justice
system in place. Discriminatory inheritance practices served to disinherit
women. South Africa still suffered from extreme levels of inequality, where
African women remained the most marginalized and most vulnerable group.
Strong views were expressed regarding what is perceived as a lack of
holistic strategy involving all state departments, provincial and local
governments and other stakeholders for land reform and rural development.
These issues need to be addressed. In conclusion ...

In hul voorlegging het die Gereformeerde Kerke van Suid-Afrika wat volgens
1996-statistiek 184 000 ha in Suid-Afrika besit, gesê die kerk van Jesus
Christus het ’n roeping en moet met profetiese getuienis betrokke raak by
die proses van grondhervorming en pastorale hulpverlening. Derhalwe vertrou
ek dat die kerke dit sal goed dink om van hul grond aan te bied vir
grondhervorming, wat tot dusver nog nie gebeur het nie.

Daar was ook sterk gevoelens in van die voorleggings wat ons ontvang het,
dat talle organisasies, welsynsorganisasies en ander, heelwat grond in die
land besit, maar dat hierdie grond verhuur word in stede daarvan dat dit
deel word van die regstelling van die verkeerde patrone van grondbesit in
ons land.

Ons hoop en vertrou dat kerke en ander instansies dit sal goed dink om
betrokke te raak by hierdie belangrike taak van enersydse versoening en
regstelling van die probleme wat deur die voorsate van die blanke
gemeenskap in hierdie land veroorsaak is. Ons hou dit nie teen die huidige
geslag witmense nie. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[In their submission the Reformed Churches of South Africa – which,
according to the 1996 statistics own 184 000 ha in South Africa – said that
the church of Jesus Christ has a calling and must become involved in the
process of land reform and pastoral aid by way of bearing prophetic
witness.  Therefore, I trust that the churches will think it proper to
offer some of their land for land reform, which has not happened so far.

In some of the submissions that we received there were also strong feelings
that many organisations – charitable and other – own a lot of land in the
country, but that this land is put out to lease instead of forming part of
the rectification of the wrong patterns of land ownership in our country.

We hope and trust that churches and other institutions will think it proper
to become involved in this very important task of reconciliation on the one
hand, and the rectifying of problems that were caused by the forefathers of
the white community in this country, on the other hand. We do not hold it
against the present generation of white people. Thank you very much.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order, the hon member who has
just spoken now spoke very piously, but he would know, as a former
presiding officer in this House during the old apartheid era, that there
are things called Rules.

He spoke about the fact that the hon Nel should have submitted a minority
report, if he felt that strongly. But Rule 137(4) says that a committee may
not submit a minority report, except where provided for in these Rules. I
do not believe that these Rules provide for a minority report on this
particular matter. So I would like him to withdraw that particular remark.
Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Well, hon member, the hon member is no longer at the podium. I
will look at that specific issue and we will then take it forward on that
basis. I now recognise the hon Whip on behalf of the Chief Whip.

Mr L J MODISENYANE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, I move that the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to (Democratic Alliance, African Christian Democratic Party
and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Report accordingly adopted.

 THE ROLE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THE LAST DECADE IN ENHANCING PARTICIPATORY
             DEMOCRACY, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND NATION-BUILDING

Mr S A MSHUDULU: [Interjections.] Malibongwe! [Let it be praised!]

Madam Speaker, hon Deputy Minister, hon members and the nation at large, a
statement was made this morning in a committee meeting of Water Affairs and
Provincial and Local Government by Ms Gugu Moloi, from Umngeni Water Board,
as follows, and I quote:

The problem we face in South Africa is that those with services decide for
those who do not have services, hence implementation of decisions taken is
delayed.

The statement might find expression in an environment where the first
economy dictates the existence and the future of the second economy. On
this day, 20 days before the 50th celebration of the people’s charter, the
Freedom Charter, which was signed in Kliptown in 1955, we as the ANC
reaffirm the relevance of a fundamental principle in our democratic
dispensation, that, and I quote, “The people shall govern.”

We take this vision of our forebears forward with confidence after the
majority of our people demonstrated through the ballot box that the ANC
government is a government of the people and a government that will unite
this society, which has been divided and humiliated by colonial and
apartheid rule in the past.

In my analysis, the situation in various areas in our country today, where
communities march against lack of service delivery or poor service
delivery, is, in some instances, a result of the following. Firstly,
inherited delivery backlogs; secondly, past development of our areas by the
then rulers that did not recognise the right of black people to be in urban
areas after forced removals and deprivation was legislated and enforced;
thirdly, development that was directed at a specific, selected section of
our society, which of course was predominantly white; and fourthly, the
past systems of local governance that did not recognise the right of the
majority of South Africans to participate in decision-making processes, as
well as their right to be informed.

The effects of the Freedom Charter on the democratic change in the past 10
years can be identified in our policy, constitutional, legislative and
institutional framework as follows: Reconstruction and development in terms
of the people-centred principle, a people-driven and democratic government;
in the local government White Paper, which lays the foundation for a
restructured and developmental local government; in the Constitution of
South Africa, which states in its preamble, and I quote:

Heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic
values, social justice and fundamental human rights ...

and -

We, the people of South Africa, believe that South Africa belongs to all
who live in it, united in our diversity.

In terms of the Constitution, the objects of local government are, and I
quote: “to provide democratic and accountable government for local
communities” and “to encourage the involvement of communities and community
organisations in matters of local government”.

The Constitution also entrenches an obligation to have a developmental
local government that guarantees quality service delivery in terms of free
basic services, namely water, sanitation, refuse removal and electricity,
and equitable distribution of such resources.

It is provided in the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, the Local
Government: Municipal Demarcation Act and the Electoral Act that municipal
structures should legislate for a restructuring of 24 municipalities,
arranging them into 284 wall-to-wall municipalities that are manageable and
that integrate the previously isolated and underdeveloped rural areas with
the resourced and affluent areas, in terms of Chapter 7 of the
Constitution. Hence the once-divided communities are combined today in
terms of the demarcation process and the Electoral Act, which establishes
wards and entrenches a gender perspective.
The Local Government: Municipal Structures Act also legislates for the
establishment of ward committees, where possible. These are structures that
allow for a 10-member committee in every ward, chaired by a ward
councillor. All sectors should be represented in subcommittees, eg,
business, people with disabilities, women, the youth, sports, education,
health, safety, churches, etc.

It is these committees that together with councillors represent the needs
and aspirations of communities and account for what government has done or
is doing, and/or what services government will prioritise in future within
the Integrated Development Plan that informs our budgets.

The Local Government: Municipal Systems Act entrenches the very fundamental
principle underpinning the Constitution in terms of its preamble. It also
defines a municipality as including communities, councillors and
administrative structures.

The Local Government: Municipal Systems Act also includes the rights and
responsibilities of communities within the concept of Masakhane and the
Batho Pele principle. It has a chapter dedicated to community participation
and declares it a community’s right, and not a favour.

It also has a chapter dedicated to the process of the Integrated
Development Programme, which allows for stakeholders, including ward
committees, to be part thereof from the needs identification phase to the
prioritisation and consolidation of needs phase, the strategic planning
phase, the cost and norms analysis phase, the implementation phase, and
monitoring and research phase.

Not only does the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act guarantee a
developmental local government, but it also includes protection in terms of
an indigent policy that is pro-poor and pro-indigent. It also includes
codes of conduct for councillors and government officials, as well as for a
performance management system that allows for agreed key performance
indicators.

The elaborate explanation that I’ve just given represents the commitment
the ANC-led government has displayed and demonstrated in the past 10 years.
Participatory democracy is deep-rooted in the tradition of the ANC.

The ANC is a mass-based organisation that is democratic, nonsexist and
nonracial. Furthermore, the ANC-led government has strategically adopted
integrated and decentralised service delivery. It is, therefore, true that
in deepening democracy and the inclusion of all other stakeholders, the ANC
also developed mechanisms and strategies to strengthen organs of civil
society through public meetings or imbizos, IDP forums, ward committees,
community policing forums, traditional councils, public hearings in
Parliament, access to councils by citizens and the Commission for the
Promotion and Protection of Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic
Communities.

Let me quote from our strategies and tactics: “The central aim of
transformation is to improve the conditions of the people, especially the
poor.” It is, therefore, correct and appropriate to say that in terms of
addressing the capacity of the state to ensure national and social cohesion
consistent with the prescription of the Constitution, and in line with what
President Thabo Mbeki and the ANC stand for, we are on course.

Ke tla rata hore ke toboketse hanyane bakeng sa ho kopa ho batho ba rona
hore ba tsamaye dikopano tsohle tsa bomasepala. Ke kope hape hore
dikopanong tse bitswang, haholoholo tsa dikomiti tsa diwate le tsa diIDP,
re nkeng karolo. (Translation of Sotho paragraph follows.)

[I would like to take this opportunity to urge the electorate to attend all
municipal meetings. I further implore them to voice their opinions at such
meetings, especially in IDP and ward committee meetings.]

Kubantu bakuthi ndithi, bantwana bomthonyama nelizwe liphela, xa abantu
bakuthi bethabatha inxaxheba kwizinto ezinxulumene nempilo yabo okanye
norhulumente onyulwe ngabo, mabangaxokiswa okanye balahlekiswe ziingcuka
namatshivela ayengakwazi nokuvula imilomo ngexesha lengcinezelo okanye
lomzabalazo. Nale nkululeko abayivuyelayo namhlanje yalwela yi-ANC,
engumbutho wabantu. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[To our people I say, children of the soil and the nation at large, when
our people participate in matters that relate to their health or the
government they voted for, they should not be lied to or deceived by lazy
people who could not open their mouths during the apartheid era or the
struggle. Even this freedom that they are happy about today was fought for
by the ANC, the people’s organisation.]

In the one minute that I have left, I would like to mention an issue that
was reliably reported. For example, here in the Western Cape there is
evidence of lack of maximum community participation. Here is a case of
delay in the implementation of the regional electricity regulator, pending
the establishment of ward committees, which were only established on 25 May
2005. This has led to the present ANC government correcting the wrongs done
by the DA, which was previously in government in this province, by putting
this issue on the council agenda, for the first time.

I’m calling upon members of Parliament perhaps to agree that, in those
areas where there are riots, we should engage with ward committees and find
out whether a communication mechanism is in place so that if there is a
vacuum, we then fill it. Amandla! [Power!] [Applause.]

Hon MEMBERS: Ngawethu! [It’s ours!]

Mr W P DOMAN: Chair, I feel for the hon Mshudulu, because he can only refer
to legislation and the theory, because in practice we really see very
little of this today.

National intelligence investigations into the unrest in local government
spheres don’t have to focus on the reason. It is clear that nondelivery is
the cause. It is also unnecessary to try and unearth a third force that
does not exist. The investigation, however, can have some merit if it
determines the threat that general uprisings in the local government sphere
can present to democracy and stability in South Africa.

President Mbeki in his budget speech the other day considered the matter,
and said that it does not pose a threat - in any event, not at the moment.
It is a pity that the ANC allowed the situation to develop to this degree.
We don’t revel in the situation; we are all in the same boat. If South
Africa burns, all of us will be affected. If democracy is threatened, all
of our rights are in jeopardy.

Local government is the sphere where the state meets the demands of
citizens head-on. We admit that the ANC faced serious backlogs in
infrastructure, human skills and uneven development when it came into
power. We also appreciate that resources are limited, and that it takes
time to address people’s needs.

However, for its part, the ANC should admit that it has made a few serious
mistakes of its own. Instead of making use of the well-developed skills
base existent in municipalities around the country, the ANC opted for a
policy of transformation that excluded experienced municipal officials
along racial lines. In the Western Cape, and to a lesser extent in the
Northern Cape, it was not only whites but also Coloured people who were
sidelined when they still had much to offer.

The blame must be laid squarely at the feet of local government politicians
who implement transformation with a racial zeal that I believe is often
cause for dismay for some responsible leaders within the ANC.
The DA believes that the skilled people who remain in local government must
be retained through the creation of hospitable working conditions and
through merit-based appointments and career-pathing. The Minister should do
a stocktaking of present skills in municipalities and do all in his power
to retain and advance this skills base.

In this regard, the Minister should be very wary of Salga’s plan to
amalgamate all local government pension funds, as this will seriously
destabilise the municipal workforce. But most often, it is the politicians
themselves who are failing the people. There is no excuse for the fraud,
corruption, self-enrichment, nepotism and lavish privileges in travel,
offices, entertainment, cars, cell phone accounts, etc, that they afford
themselves. The discretionary funds that mayors, deputy mayors, speakers
and their cronies vote for themselves, and what they spend it on are quite
shocking. Strange decisions like the Tlhageng local municipality spending
R87 000 on a councillor’s funeral – R17 000 on the coffin alone – are
commonplace all over South Africa. [Interjections.] I’m coming to that.

It’s also a tragedy that councillors are found illegally lending themselves
hundreds of thousands of rands, but not repaying a cent when caught out,
and continuing in their positions as if nothing had happened. All over the
country people are beginning to turn against these councillors, and are
wondering what the liberation struggle was all about. They could be
forgiven for thinking that many ANC councillors struggled only to enrich
themselves through fraud and corruption. They trample on the trust that
ordinary people have put in them. They destabilise our communities and
threaten the health of our democracy.

All political parties must commit themselves to dealing ruthlessly with
corrupt councillors. The hon Van Wyk can now listen. The DA is at present
conducting an investigation into the alleged misbehaviour of one of our
mayors. Although we are disappointed about the allegations, we are
committed to showing that we will not tolerate misbehaviour in our party,
and we challenge other parties and this House to do the same.

The ANC governs in more than 260 out of the 284 municipalities, and if you
can instil discipline amongst your councillors, it can change local
government in South Africa totally.

Die voorstelle van dié mosie gee ook hoop oor hoe die plaaslike regering
demokrasie versterk het. Ek het so pas betoog dat swak dienslewering en
menige korrupte raadslede juis die demokrasie bedreig.

Nog ‘n saak wat ondemokraties totaal hande uitruk is die regering agter
geslote deure deur die uitvoerende burgemeesterskomiteestelsel. Dis net
verstommend dat die ANC, wat so hoog opgee oor openheid en deursigtigheid,
‘n stelsel bevorder waar die publiek en die media doelbewus uitgesluit
word.

Daar word vandag by munisipaliteite oneindig meer besluite agter geslote
deure geneem as ooit in die apartheidsera. Die doel van dié stelsel was vir
vinniger besluite en meer direkte verantwoordelikheid, maar die rade
misbruik nou ‘n tegniese punt in die wet om agter geslote deure te
vergader. Én, weens die swak regering van verskeie rade het hierdie
geheimhouding nou ‘n gemaklike skuiling geword en moet ons dié wet
verander.

Ons sal graag ook wil sien dat subrade by metropolitaanse munisipaliteite
uitgebou word - maksimum afwenteling - sonder om die een stad, een
begroting in gedrang te bring. Dis mos duidelik dat metro’s geweldig
onpersoonlik en ver van die mense te staan gekom het.

Die Minister en die ANC én die vorige spreker roem aan hoeveel wykskomitees
oor die land tot stand gekom het, en spog selfvoldaan dat dit nou
demokrasie bevorder.

Inteendeel, wykskomitees verskraal die demokrasie. Hoe kan tien persone die
wye skakering van belange in ‘n wyk verteenwoordig? Hoekom is daar ‘n wet
vir die raadslede dat hulle verder moet rapporteer, maar daar is geen wet
vir daardie mense om weer met die gemeenskap te werk nie. Dis ‘n belaglike
situasie.

Wat ons nodig het, is dat die wykraadslede tweemaandeliks moet
terugrapporteer by vergaderings, en dat enige belangegroep en lid van die
publiek daarheen moet kan kom, en nie net tien mense nie. Ons moet dít
totaal hervorm.

Ek maak dus die punt dat daar oplossings vir probleme bestaan. Maar,
ongelukkig, het die Minister en sy departement en die ANC iets ideologies
gebind aan ‘n paar heilige koeie, en wil hulle nie nuut dink oor dié saak
nie. [Tyd verstreke.] [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The proposals of this motion also give hope regarding the way local
government has strengthened democracy. Just a moment ago I argued that poor
service delivery and the many corrupt councillors were in fact endangering
democracy.

Another matter that is getting completely out of hand in an undemocratic
way is the governing behind closed doors through the executive mayoral
committee system. It is just so amazing that the ANC, which makes so much
of openness and transparency, is promoting a system that deliberately
excludes the public and the media.

Infinitely more decisions are being made secretively by municipalities
today than during the apartheid era. The purpose of this system was to
expedite decisions and to increase direct responsibility, but the councils
are now misusing a technical point in the law to meet behind closed doors.
And, this secrecy has become a convenient cover because of the poor
governing of various councils, and we must change this law.

We would also like to see that subcouncils at metropolitan municipalities
be extended – maximum devolution– without jeopardising the concept of one
city, one budget. It is clear indeed that metros are extremely impersonal
and were established far away from people.

The Minister and the ANC and the previous speaker pride themselves on how
many ward committees have been established across the country and boast
with great satisfaction that this is promoting democracy.

On the contrary, ward committees attenuate democracy. How can ten people
represent the wide range of interests in a ward? Why is there a law for
councillors to give further account, but there is no law for those people
to work with the community again? It is a ridiculous situation.

What we need is for the ward councillors to report back at meetings on a
bimonthly basis and for any interest group and member of the public to be
able to attend, and not just ten people. We must completely reform this.

I am therefore making the point that there are solutions to problems. But,
unfortunately, the Minister and his department and the ANC are
ideologically attached to a few sacred cows and refuse to rethink this
matter. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr P F SMITH: Chair, the IFP would like to start by commending Ms Bhengu,
who is not here today, I think, for her motion. The topic of discussion
today is, ``The role of local government in enhancing participatory
democracy, economic development and nation-building’’. We think that is a
very important topic, but there is one glaring omission: she doesn’t
mention in this topic the issue of service delivery.

Frankly, the most important issue facing municipalities today is not the
three issues she’s mentioned, but the improvement of service delivery.
We’ve all heard stories. Let’s take up the issues here. The first is
participatory democracy. We’ve all heard of many instances, for example, of
municipal councillors who, in 2001, very enthusiastically called community
meetings to discuss delivery, but the self-same councillors today are not
doing so because the municipalities have not delivered, and they are too
embarrassed to go back to their constituents on the lack of delivery. The
key issue is delivery, not these other issues.

However, I would like to say a few words on them, because they are the
subject of discussion. On the issue of participation and enhancing
participation in local government, this is a constitutional injunction. The
object of local governance includes enhancing and participating in
municipalities.

If you look at the legislation we have cast, the structures Act and the
systems Act, they both provide for extensive consultation in respect of
IDPs, the budget process and a whole range of matters. So, as a party, we
are happy with this broad framework, but there are a number of
implementation issues that are problematic, even in respect of
participation.

For example, in connection with ward committees, my colleague Mr Doman
mentioned a few problems. They are problematic, and the issue needs to be
resolved. There is the manner in which councils meaningfully integrate the
community inputs into their governance processes. One doesn’t want a pro
forma consultation process; it’s got to be a genuine one. In too many
instances, it is community-driven, it’s consultant-driven, and it is not
really serious.

Issues of failure to deliver are being addressed as opposed to failure to
communicate. You cannot pretend that the issues around the country are
simply a failure to communicate. They are in fact a failure of delivery.

The second issue Ms Bhengu puts in her motion is that of economic
development. This is again a constitutional injunction, and if we look at
the legislation, we have provisions encouraging municipalities to get
involved. We have local economic development, LED; we have community
development programmes.

But, again, many speakers have mentioned in the past that South Africa
comprises two economies – the rich and the poor. That self-same
categorisation of rich and poor applies also to municipalities. There are
rich municipalities and there are very poor ones. It’s all very well to
talk about municipalities encouraging local economic development, but if
they lack human capacity if they lack the financial capacity and the
residents themselves are extremely poor, it’s extremely difficult for them
to engage in that. In fact, it’s totally unrealistic for them to be
expected to deliver local economic development under those circumstances.

Again, this is an issue we raised in our budget debate. We think that the
funding regime, especially for the poor rural municipalities, needs to be
reviewed because you cannot expect things of them if they do not have the
resources to do it.

When it comes to nation-building, this is not really a local government
function whatsoever. I am not quite sure why it’s included in the subject
heading at all. Nonetheless, we must accept that everything we do as
individuals, as spheres of government, as NGOs or churches, impacts upon
nation-building. So, it’s true to say that municipalities should indeed
assess what they do and it’s contribution to nation-building. That applies
to the rhetoric used by local politicians as well as the actual delivery.
Are people getting the free basic services? That is a positive contribution
to local delivery.

I do want to emphasise again that the real issue before us is that of
delivery, and these other issues are peripheral. Right now the national
executive council of the ANC, for example, has accepted that the mass
protests around the country reflect legitimate concerns by residents about
nondelivery. It’s not a figment of anybody’s imagination. Though these
grievances are not universal, they are widespread, and people’s
expectations are not being met. We believe that municipalities should focus
more on their core activities, and that is service delivery.

Mr M DIKO: Madam Chair and hon members, our constitutional state is
premised on the assumption that local government, as a tier of government
closest to the people, should play a pivotal role in participatory
democracy, economic development and nation-building. This was the intention
of the writers of the Constitution. However, we need to measure reality
against this ideal and come to the unequivocal conclusion that local
government has failed to live up to this constitutional expectation.

Whilst local government was intended to be the most accessible tier of
government, the experience on the ground has proven otherwise. It is
therefore also not surprising that participation in local government
elections is far lower than that in the national and provincial elections.
It would also be incorrect to ascribe this lack of interest of local
residents to a lack of interest in local government, because recent
protests and mass actions across the country have proven that people are
interested in local issues.

The failure of local government to encourage participatory democracy is a
core reason for these often violent protests. People have tried to
communicate with their local governments, as that is their constitutional
right. However, they are often ignored or fobbed off with empty promises by
very arrogant officials and sometimes by politicians.

The national government needs to intervene in terms of what is happening at
the local level because we do not have a federal state in South Africa. I
thank you.

Mr A HARDING: Madam Chair, the people most affected by municipal
infrastructure and service delivery programmes have thus far been somewhat
excluded from the national policy debate. There is a chance to change that
reality, given the politicised nature of these issues at present.

What is needed is for South African policy-makers to take seriously the
kinds of lessons that exist. For example, even the World Bank is ready to
concede regarding the case for state intervention and higher infrastructure
standards. There is, in addition, a growing political imperative associated
with aligning infrastructure and service delivery to developmental goals.

This reality is reflected in the severe tensions – particularly evident
during the past several months – associated with the cutting off of
services by municipalities as well as the wave of protests in the
townships. Some cut-offs have occurred in such a manner that even important
community organisations have been unable to mediate or justify them, and
that has intensified local-level alienation and anger. This is aggravated
by the fact that councillors do not engage their communities, as they
should, in terms of the integrated development programme.

Furthermore, a breakdown in intergovernmental relations further ferments
the fragmentation of service delivery. Policy-makers must incorporate into
infrastructure policy programme and project design the full economic cost
and benefits of different options. While the broader net economic benefits
of higher infrastructure standards should become self-evident, they are not
yet fully reflected in local level implementation.

In terms of delegating powers and responsibilities to municipalities, the
issue of unfunded mandates should be avoided, as funds need to follow the
delegated functions. However, coming to this conclusion is not only a
matter for open-minded technical specialists, it is a political struggle.
The balance of forces at present requires that a wide variety of
organisations become more involved and in detail, regarding controversies
surrounding the infrastructure and services debate. I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, our nation has made incredible progress in the
issue of participatory democracy. The majority of our people are well
informed, and they know that democracy in South Africa means more than
making a cross once every five years. Most of our citizens desire an active
and meaningful involvement in our democracy on a day-to-day basis.

In order to encourage regular democratic participation, national government
has devolved much of its political, fiscal and administrative powers to
local authorities as the sphere of government closest to the people. Not
only must local authorities ensure the sustainable provision of basic
services such as water, electricity, sanitation and housing, but the modern
municipality must also play a leading role in economic development, job
creation and sustainable development for all our communities.

Our legislative framework on local government has done much to encourage
participatory democracy. Our country’s Constitution recognises the
importance of democratic participation in ensuring sustainable, democratic
and developmental local authorities.

The Local Government: Municipal Structures Act requires that all municipal
councils must develop mechanisms to consult and involve the community and
community organisations. The same Act provides that a municipality must
develop a culture of municipal governance that complements formal
representative government by encouraging the local community to participate
in the affairs of the municipality.

I do not know whether the mass action and the demonstrations by the people
at local level should be regarded as a healthy sign of their involvement at
local level. What I do know and what I have seen in the reports and also on
TV is that the people are angry. It is time that our local councillors
regard this anger and address the basic needs of all our people. I thank
you.

Mr I D MOGASE: Madam Chair, hon members, I just want to say that during the
first decade, and in line the Freedom Charter, the ANC laid a solid
foundation for democratic governance and the transformation of the
apartheid state into one that is developmental and people-orientated.
Attention is also shifting towards monitoring and evaluating the situation.
The performance of municipalities in the last decade has been satisfactory
and we believe that there is enough room for improvement. Consequently the
important role that has been played and continues to be played by local
government in South Africa cannot be overemphasised. This is so because
local government has not only brought about participatory democracy, but
has also been at the coalface of service delivery and economic development.

Clearly, local government is without a doubt the face of government closest
to the people. Municipalities therefore are deliberately placed as agents
for progressive change in economic development and building of a common
national identity.

While this has not happened in all municipalities, we in the ANC feel that
the municipalities must be supported and strengthened in fulfilling their
developmental duties, and creating conditions for the building of a nation
that stands to enjoy equal economic opportunities.

Metros have a key role to play in making new advances in improving the
quality of people’s lives. While we appreciate the development work that
they have undertaken so far, we nonetheless want to see them signing
agreements with other cities of the world that have economic muscle to
bring investment into this country.

We also want to see them making efforts in entering into public-private
partnerships with big business in their areas. We further want to see
feasible economic activities in our local areas through viable local
economic development strategies and through the Expanded Public Works
Programme.

We are aware that the big metros are hard-pressed due to the movement of
people from rural areas in search of better lives. This burdens the already
limited resources. However, rural municipalities should prepare themselves
for this pool of resources and find ways of dealing with it, with the
assistance of the South African Local Government Association and the
Department of Local and Provincial Government.

Municipalities must make better use of ward committees. The ANC feels that
ward committees need to work and deal with people’s problems and take up
the people’s inputs to the centre of municipal agendas. This would give
practical meaning to the notion of people-driven development. Ward
committees need to function well in order to sustain the process of
engaging with communities. We wanted to see ward committees creating space
for the community to play a role in determining the future of areas in
which their people live.
When dealing with issues of poverty alleviation, municipalities need to
work closely with ward committees and encourage participation in
identifying the indigent and implementing the indigency policy. Setting up
independent development plans is important, but IDPs must show how a
municipality will address the needs of people living in its area, and the
development needs of those most in need must be prioritised.

Municipalities must find innovative ways of linking IDPs with local
economic development strategies, and connecting economic growth with
poverty alleviation. Municipalities need to consider and encourage
strategies that have the potential to intensify investment in training and
skills development in order to upgrade economically viable communities.

The system of local government is certainly advancing our national
democratic development objective, but even more, it has the significant
potential to deepen our democracy and to substantially continue to meet our
challenges.

As the ANC, we take local government very seriously and see Project
Consolidate as one project that proposes engagement between national and
provincial spheres, together with key partners and stakeholders to find a
new creative, practical and impact-orientated mode of supporting working
with local government. Our strategic approach should be to create an
environment conducive to investment. Crime prevention and skills
development must be addressed, and economic activities accelerated as an
intention to trigger associated projects that will support a new economic
growth.

Many formerly disadvantaged communities do not have the skills and the
education that business needs. This must be addressed. We have developed
and support black economic empowerment strategies and have a good
relationship with business.

I also want to say that some people just make a lot of noise about the
Deputy President. In 1985 and 1986 their man, Eschel Roodie, stole R64
million and nothing happened to that man. The next thing is that he was
seen dancing in Japan, and enjoying the R64 million that he took from the
coffers of the South African government.

Mr M J ELLIS: He was not the deputy president.

Mr I D MOGASE: We have had bad times as blacks. We have lived with the
passes. I just want to tell the DA that as soon as black people in the DA
want to take over the leadership, they are going to run away and no more
investment will come to the DA. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, die onderwerp vir bespreking vanmiddag
behels drie aspekte: eerstens, die bevordering van deelnemende demokrasie;
tweedens, die ekonomiese ontwikkeling; en dan derdens, nasiebou. Die VF
Plus is egter van mening dat nie een van dié aspekte nagekom word nie.

Die munisipale-stelselwet het ‘n bepaalde hoofstuk te make met deelnemende
demokrasie, wat bepaal dat gemeenskappe geraadpleeg moet word oor sekere
raadsbesluite wat geneem moet word. Dit is egter die teorie; in die praktyk
gebeur dit nie. En ‘n goeie voorbeeld is nou met die naamverandering van
Pretoria, waar die gemeenskap net eenvoudig geïgnoreer is en die stelselwet
nie nagekom is nie.

Sommige stadsrade gaan ook uit hul pad uit om veral Afrikanergemeenskappe
te boelie wanneer dit kom by naamveranderings en die verandering van
straatname. Dít bevorder nie nasiebou nie, maar dit skep eerder
polarisasie.

Ekonomiese ontwikkeling word egter gestrem op plaaslike regeringsvlak. Hoe
kan ekonomiese ontwikkeling plaasvind as die debiteure of uitstaande skuld
byna R30 miljard beloop op landswye basis?

Geen ekonomiese ontwikkeling kan plaasvind met sulke debiteure nie. Dié
slegte skuld word weerspieël in die gebrek aan dienslewering, die
agteruitgang van strate, die gebrekkige behuising, en alles wat daarmee
gepaardgaan, en dit manifesteer dan ook in die opstande wat tans plaasvind.

Die agb lede, van veral die ANC, kan allerlei redes wil aanvoer oor waarom
die opstande plaasvind, maar ek wil vandag vir u sê, u het daardie kultuur
geskep dat wanneer mense nie tevrede is op plaaslike regeringsvlak nie,
moet hulle mobiliseer en in opstand kom. U pluk nou die vrugte daarvan.

Die ander aspek is die gebrek aan kundigheid. Die Minister kom en kondig sy
Projek Konsolideer aan, waar hy 136 kundiges nou wil versprei om kundige
dienste te gaan lewer aan plaaslike regerings. Dit is ‘n bewys dat daar ‘n
uittog van kundigheid was as gevolg van regstellende aksie en omvorming.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, the subject under discussion this afternoon comprises
three aspects: firstly, the promotion of participatory democracy; secondly,
economic development; and then thirdly, nation-building. The FF Plus is of
the opinion, however, that not one of these aspects is being fulfilled.

The municipal systems legislation has a specific chapter dealing with
participatory democracy, which specifically states that communities have to
be consulted on certain issues prior to councils taking decisions on them.
However, this is the theory; in practice this does not happen. A good
example of this is the recent renaming of Pretoria, where the community was
simply ignored and the systems legislation was not complied with.

Some city councils also go out of their way to bully specifically the
Afrikaans communities when it comes to the process of name changes and the
changing of street names. This does not promote nation-building, but rather
creates polarisation.

Economic development at the local government level is being hampered,
however. How can economic development take place when the debtors or
outstanding debt at the national level amounts to R30 billion?

No economic development can take place with such debt. This bad debt is
reflected in the poor service delivery, the deterioration of streets, the
defective housing, and everything that goes with it, and manifests in the
protests currently taking place.

The hon members, especially of the ANC, can put forward all sorts of
reasons for why this revolt is taking place, but I want to state today that
you have created the culture whereby, if people are dissatisfied at local
government level, they should mobilise and revolt. You are now reaping the
fruits thereof.

The other aspect is the lack of expertise. The Minister now comes and
announces his Project Consolidate whereby he intends sending out 136
experts to render expert service to local government structures. This is
proof that there was a skills flight as a result of affirmative action and
transformation.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon House, the advent of the wall-to-wall
system of municipalities may have been thought of as a panacea to a nation
that never knew much about democracy. Unfortunately, the system was
introduced with government and the public unprepared. The result of this
unpreparedness was the apathy and outright rejection in some quarters by
traditional leaders; the abuse of the system by activists in SANCO,
disguised as agents of government; and ineptitude on the part of
municipalities, most of whom are fraught with nepotism and corruption.

The accumulation of the failures over the last decades are in the form of
unfulfilled promises and the inability of the powers that be to put the
message across; the results are marches and havoc in six of the nine
provinces. Of significance, five of the provinces so affected have been
under ANC rule since 1994.

This is a clear message that the proverbial worm has started to turn.
People are tired of being bombarded with promises that remain unfulfilled
and, instead of addressing issues at hand, the ANC government reverts to
propaganda - which they are second to none at - and say all the uprisings
are the work of the third force. [Interjections.]

People who were mobilised way back in 1994 on political promises such as
job opportunities, democratic governance, service delivery and a higher
quality of life have seen mayors imposed upon them in the face of
democracy. They have seen people being retrenched from jobs they were
promised. Most of them have become poorer than before as opposed to
achieving promised better life.

To the average person the local government has not been of any help,
whatsoever. A man like Mkhize of Mvoti, will not sing the praises of local
government since he saw his life earnings go up in smoke when local
government officials connived to sell his property. This may be a sole
example, but more that goes unsaid is experienced by the day.

The disestablishment of cross-boundary municipalities is further proof and
concession by government that, for the past five years, people who lived in
those areas did not receive the best of services and have nothing to write
home about. In so far as local government in the past five years is
concerned, let alone in the decade ... [Time expired.] Thank you.

Mr N T GODI: Madam Chairperson, comrades and hon members, the sphere of
local government was the last to be fully and truly democratised after
1994. Since then, much has been done to consolidate and capacitate it. It
is the most important level of government as it is the sphere closest to
the people and their service delivery point. It is the sphere where the
revolutionary concept of participatory democracy is made manifest through
ward committees.

There is however unevenness in terms of the capacity resource base and the
developmental challenges inherited from white rule. This has led to varying
levels of success and failures in it executing its mandate of improving the
material conditions of our people.

There are countless men and women, politicians and administrators, who have
poured heart and soul into the gigantic work of providing excellent service
to our people despite the various constraints they are encountering. These
cadres need to be recognised, commended and supported; their hard and
conscientious work has made a substantive difference in the lives of our
people.

However, challenges remain. A significant number of our local councils do
not have sufficient capacity to adequately discharge their
responsibilities; that is, a lack of skill and capacity to operate within
legislated frameworks.

The kind of backlogs in some instances inherited from white rule is so
enormous that the resources are simply not there to wipe them out all at
once. The ideological degeneration of some of our people who use their
position of trust to enrich themselves at the expense of service delivery
has been a factor, but most certainly not the only factor.

For the urban and peri-urban councils, the continued influx of our people
from the rural areas makes proper planning very difficult. It is a
challenge that can only be addressed through a massive process of rural
economic upliftment.

The recent sporadic incidents of protests about services are a wake-up call
to all, especially the corrupt element, the inefficient and the rich. The
poor in this country, who are a massive portion around isolated spots of
opulence, have been extremely patient. Theirs has been a protest not only
about service delivery, but their socio-economic circumstances; why they
are poor and have nothing, whilst others are rich and have everything.

The message to the rich is that if the poor cannot eat, the rich won’t
sleep. The PAC therefore calls on private capital to come to the party and
invest resources to alleviate the plight of the poor. After all, it is in
their long-term social interest. The long march to economic and social
emancipation continues. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Chairperson, last week, we debated a Bill to enhance
relations between the three spheres of government, namely, national,
provincial and local government.

Our supreme law, the Constitution of 1996, clearly states that the
independence of operations in each sphere is authorised under the values,
purport and spirit of our democracy enshrined in our Bill of Rights.

The MF views the three spheres through a zoom lens, with the national
government having the widest view. Provincial government zooms in on
individual provinces, and there is a closer zooming in on local
governments. The MF sees local government as our eyes on the ground,
ensuring service delivery in areas, being able to address community needs,
problems and maintenance more effectively. It is able to address individual
area needs.

However, problems do exist since, in our constituencies, with minimal
resources and manpower, delivery is seriously hampered. It is ok for us as
national government to take more note of problems on the ground and make
plans, policies and legislation to correct the loopholes, but local
government, to assert its true potential and deliver to our people, needs
greater help.

The MF won’t deny that some municipalities have made a great success of
their areas, but many need assistance to ensure delivery. They need an
efficient and effective staff and resources to deliver on the ground. Thank
you.

Mr M G PHADAGI: Chairperson, it is very interesting to come to Parliament
and listen to people from the TBVC states telling us that we are not
delivering. Those who failed our country for the past 300 years are talking
about corruption and nepotism whereas, all along, they were working for
their brothers and sisters. Now that the ANC has brought them to
Parliament, they have started to tell a lot of stories. [Applause.]

The democratic dispensation of local government has as its main focus the
involvement of the communities that it was established to govern. This then
becomes the distinguishing variable or factor between the dispensation of
the past and the present era. Before 1995, everything was done differently.
We have now established the sort of municipalities that can and are
delivering. [Interjections.]

I come from very far. On my way to Parliament I pass townships and
villages, which, within 10 years, are now getting service delivery. This is
more than the white government gave them in the past 300 years. In fact,
they were not delivering but destroying. Now that we are delivering, they
say there is no delivery. [Applause.]

Even the few who had the right to select the then local councillors concede
that their involvement was only limited to the day of election, after which
the rest was run by those who were not even elected. The elected
representatives of that era had a very limited role in determining the
agenda of the councils. The town clerks and their heads of departments had
what you could call “absolute power”.

In effect, local government was not elected and even the few who had the
political right of choosing public representatives played a very minimal
role. The new order has ushered in an effective way of community
participation, which makes ours the best the world has ever seen. It is a
matter of common knowledge that some developing democracies are taking
notes from us.

In terms of legislation, a municipality is described in terms of its
constituent components, which are the elected representatives,
administrators and, most importantly, the community. The implication of
this description is that the council’s decisions and programme must have
the support of the community it serves before they can see the light of
day. The ward committee system creates an unprecedented favourable
environment that affords communities the freedom to make their input
concerning the integrated development programme of the municipality.

The integrated development programme, IDP, is the sum total of the
submissions from all stakeholders of all municipality forum areas. The
public representatives from the forum must adopt this strategy document
before it serves on the agenda of the municipality council. Once it is
adopted, the IDP then becomes the only programme of the municipality. The
public uses this strategic tool to monitor the performance of
municipalities. Government departments, parastatals and the private sector
are required to respect this legislated requirement.
The fact that government departments have resources does not give them the
licence to implement programmes without the due process of consulting the
affected communities. The consent of the community can only be proved by
inclusion of the department’s proposal in the IDP. The involvement of the
public in the affairs of the municipality is not a matter of choice, but a
legislated one.

Ten months before the adoption of the new budget, the mayor of a
municipality is required to table before the council sitting the process of
the new budget for public information. Added to this is the manner in which
the public will be involved. Unlike in the past, where the town treasurer
would be expected to present the draft budget, with councillors expected to
adopt what was the product of technocrats, the democratic dispensation
requires that the budget be led by public representatives, in consultation
with the electorate. This is achieved through public participation in the
drafting of the budget before it is adopted by the council.

What becomes a critical core challenge is to ensure that institutional
arrangements are put in place to deliver on this important political
development of our time. We should assist all our municipalities to develop
effective ward committees that will be a proper vehicle for delivery and
participation. It is of equal importance to educate our people to
understand the value inherent in taking part in the forums that are led by
the municipalities.

There are municipalities that are doing well in the area of implementation.
The Department of Provincial and Local Government, DPLG, has positively
reinforced that performance through the Vuna Awards. We must congratulate
the department for the good work.

Local government is an important player in nation-building and management
of people in localities. In actual fact, a nation is nothing but a
conglomerate of all municipalities in the sovereign territory of that
nation. South Africa is lucky to have a national framework to determine the
local government structures system. These structures are formed through the
Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, and the Local Government:
Municipal Systems Act.

Local government is a national project created for national development.
The contribution to infrastructure development by any city, especially the
big ones, is geared towards national economic development. It is for this
reason that the national development plan cannot be developed in isolation
but in conjunction with provincial development strategies and IDPs.

People of different communities see themselves, firstly, as residents of
specific communities and their livelihood is intrinsically linked to that
locality. For this reason, national fulfilment is sourced from local
geographic space rather than high-flying concepts of sovereignty,
patriotism and nationalism.

Our movement and the country have repeatedly called for the establishment
of a nonracial community which will, once again, serve as a basis for the
creation of a nation and society, as envisaged in the Freedom Charter.

Ndi khou livhuwa ndo kona u wana tshifhinga tsha u amba. Musi ndo dzula
hafha, ndo wana zwauri vhanwe vhathu vhane vha khou takuwa vha tshi amba .
. . (Translation of Venda paragraph follows.)
[Thank you for granting me this opportunity to speak. When seated here, I
have realised that some people who are rising to speak . . . ]

It reminds me of the era of Mr Mphephu, Mr Mangope, KwaZulu-Natal and so
many others. [Laughter.]

Ndi khou livhuwa uri vho mpha tshifhinga tsha uri ndi kone u talutshedza
vhathu vha shango lino. Nndaa. [Zwiseo.] [U vhanda zwanda.] [I am grateful
that I have been granted an opportunity to be able to explain to the people
of this country. Thank you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES -
         VISIT TO PRISONS IN THE NORTH WEST AND MPUMALANGA PROVINCES

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, it’s twenty five past four and I think that
everybody here wants to go home.

Minister and members, the purpose of our visits to the ten correctional
centres in Mpumalanga and North West province, Potchefstroom, Mogwase,
Losperdfontein, Rustenburg, Witbank, Barberton, Nelspruit, Ermelo,
Barberton town unit, and Bethal, was to interact with correctional
officials and management at the local level on the ground.

Other purposes were to investigate the overcrowding situation, assess the
status of children and youth in prisons, address the concerns of staff on
overtime and the movement from a five-day establishment to a seven-day
establishment, and to assess the lack of discipline and respect in the
department.

Let me point out, from the outset, that these visits were only undertaken
by ANC members of the portfolio committee. Not a single member of the other
parties was part of the group. All of them submitted their apologies. You
see, when we say that the opposition does not know what is going on in our
prisons, then it is for you to decide whether it is true or not. Really, I
wish that the opposition could have been part of these visits, for the
simple reason of just needing to face the reality in our prisons.

It is a pity that when it comes to actual oversight, we lack a collective
approach. Last week, during the announcement of special remission on
sentences, some of the opposition parties opposed and criticised this
remission. Had these parties joined us on these visits, they would have had
no need to voice any opposition.

South African prisons are extremely overcrowded. In June 2004 there were
187 000 offenders in prisons, which only had the capacity to hold 113 000
offenders. That is why, as the ANC, we welcome the special remission on
sentences. During our visits to these prisons in February 2005, we called
on the Minister to use his power and release all those inmates who had
already appeared before the parole board, and had their release dates.

The fact that the offender was given a release date indicated that the
parole board no longer sees him/her as a danger or a threat to society, and
in their view, the inmate has been rehabilitated.

Our observation is that there are too many youth and children in our
prisons. Children don’t belong in prison. It is a priority issue for the
committee to see to it that these children are placed in places of safety.

For the first time in the Department of Correctional Services and the
portfolio committee, the staff in these correctional centres was able to
interact and communicate with members of Parliament and the portfolio
committee. Officials and management were free to raise questions, concerns,
and recommendations to the committee. We spent two hours with staff in each
of these prisons, responding to all questions and concerns.

We explained the concern of overtime and answered questions on moving from
a five-day to a seven-day workweek. After each and every meeting, the
officials were very happy and positive about the explanations. The
committee clearly stated, with regard to the breakdown in discipline and
respect that we can and will negotiate anything in the department, but when
it comes to discipline and respect, no negotiations would take place.

Officials complained that it is not only they who need rehabilitation in
discipline and respect, but managers also require lessons in discipline and
respect. Some managers are poor examples of proper conduct, and don’t
display any leadership qualities at all. Some managers are themselves
without discipline and respect.

Let me also raise the concern regarding promotions mentioned by officials
in the department. As the committee, we want to strongly urge the Minister
to do something about this. We believe it is one way to motivate our
officials. Staff morale appears to be bordering on the negative, and we
would need to encourage and guide the staff in carrying out the daily
duties.

In conclusion, the committee presents this report to the House, with the
hope that the House will accept our report. We will follow up and monitor
each and every recommendation contained in this report. I thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Mr J SELFE: Madam Chair, at the beginning of June I went to the Embongweni
CMax prison and the Voorberg Medium B prison, on a prison visit.
Unfortunately it was not possible for the hon Bloem to be at that visit,
and I assume for that reason that he is not interested in oversight of
those particular prisons. [Interjections.]

It was unfortunately not possible for me to be part of this particular
tour, and indeed there were several members of the ANC who were not part of
that tour either, and I assume they are not interested in prison oversight
either. [Applause.]

The report was debated and interrogated at length by the portfolio
committee, and I would like to congratulate the chairperson for taking the
initiative of arranging the visits, and for compiling the detailed report.

I have been involved in this committee on and off since 1994. This is the
first time that the committee has visited prisons on a systematic basis. In
fact, this report discloses a depressingly familiar pattern of overcrowded
facilities, overworked staff, and underresourced management structures.
These conditions exist in virtually all the facilities I have visited, and
the Minister is all too aware of them from his own visits.

In the short time at our disposal today I want to highlight one aspect of
this report. This aspect goes to the heart of the solution to overcrowding.
The committee makes a number of recommendations about, amongst other
things, alternative sentencing and the reluctance of magistrates to impose
alternative sentences, particularly for petty offences.

Secondly, they recommend providing resources to the community corrections
programme to enable alternative sentencing to work; speeding up parole
processes and the release of those qualifying for parole; releasing
awaiting-trial detainees with nominal bail, and those in prison because
they cannot pay nominal fines, into the community correction system.

We support these steps, and indeed they should already have been taken. Had
they been taken, it would not have been necessary for the Minister to
resort to a remission policy or a prison burst, as he did last week, to
relieve the very real problem of prison overcrowding. I accept that to do
what the committee is proposing will require the active co-operation of
other departments, notably Justice.

To state it bluntly, if magistrates and judges remain reluctant to impose
alternative sentences to that of imprisonment, it may be necessary to
regulate this by legislation. Other proposals such as increasing the scope
and capacity of community corrections can be achieved by the Department of
Correctional Services, and should be done.
If the government does not take these steps we will sit with perpetually
overcrowded prisons, which can only be ameliorated by prison bursts. In
overcrowded prisons rehabilitation becomes a pipe dream, and control over
inmates passes to the gangs and to corrupt officials.

Only very recently the Minister had to settle a court case with an inmate
who had contracted HIV/Aids after having been sodomised in an overcrowded
and poorly controlled facility. This case opens the possibility of a class
action with huge legal and financial consequences to the state. We need to
deal with the problem of overcrowding and with proper management of the
prisons in order to avoid this.

I really hope the Cabinet reads this report. More than that, I hope that it
acts on it. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, hon members, the hon Dennis Bloem is perfectly
correct. The opposition parties weren’t present. As Mr Selfe said, many of
their members weren’t present. It’s a pity that Mr Bloem doesn’t
understand, perhaps, that the opposition parties have many other
parliamentary obligations, and it was for this reason that I was unable to
participate. [Interjections.]

But I would also commend the chairperson. He is very enthusiastic. He is
very active and we thank him for that. Perhaps his members should also take
note that many of us do visit other prisons, and are actively involved in
Correctional Services all along the way.

There were, as has been mentioned, several objectives for the visit. The
report deals with them all, and makes findings and recommendations in
respect of each of those. Unfortunately, my time does not permit me to deal
with all these issues.

I would like to deal with two of the issues. One of them is overcrowding,
which is a serious problem throughout our prisons in South Africa. It has
become the norm. The vast majority of the prisons visited were, in fact,
overcrowded. Only two of them were not. The most overcrowded were
Potchefstroom and Barberton. Potchefstroom is 222% overcrowded. That
creates major problems and obviously has a tremendous effect on the
conditions for staff as well.

The report acknowledges that the Department of Correctional Services cannot
be held solely responsible for the issues revolving around overcrowding. We
again appeal to the justice delivery system, the department of the SA
Police Service, the Department of Justice and the Department of Social
Development, to do their bit in their sectors to ensure that the
overcrowding becomes something of the past.

Secondly, I would like just very briefly to deal with an issue of major
concern to me, and that is the issue of juveniles in prison. This is
something that we all find intolerable. It is something that we do not feel
should be happening. We believe that youth should be transferred to prisons
within the areas in which they live so that they can communicate with their
own families and their chances of rehabilitation will be greater.

The department should explore the feasibility of establishing a youth
correctional service centre in the Northern Cape to ensure that these young
offenders can be closer to their families. Of course, both the Correctional
Services Act and the South African Schools Act provide for compulsory
schooling for all juveniles of school-going age. Sadly, this is something
that really needs far more attention. I would ask the Minister to really
come in on this one and see to it that our youngsters today, especially the
awaiting-trial detainees, do get the education they should have and
deserve. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP believes that severe prison
overcrowding and deplorable health conditions must continually be
addressed. It is therefore correct and fitting that members visit prisons
to ascertain for themselves what conditions are like in prisons. I also
wish to commend the chairperson, hon Bloem, for his unceasing interest,
care and compassion for those in prison.

It is significant that the report states that inadequate intersectoral
communication exists between various departments in the criminal justice
sector, which results in various problems highlighted in the report. The
most noteworthy of those, of course, is overcrowding.

Certain recommendations are made in order to ensure adequate intersectoral
communication, and the ACDP supports that. Additionally, the ACDP supports
an integrated approach whereby the four key government departments, namely,
Safety and Security, Justice, Correctional Services and Social Development
take responsibility for the success of the system by means of binding
interdepartmental protocols. Such protocols would serve to enhance and
strengthen the existing integrated justice system court centres.

These departments should be required to sign binding protocols that
incorporate possible financial sanctions to reduce delays, and in so doing,
reduce overcrowding in prisons. [Time expired.] I thank you.
Ms M W MAKGATE: Chairperson, to the majority of those who follow debates on
correctional services, members of Parliament serving in this portfolio
committee may sometimes sound like a broken record player. Time and again,
they state and argue about the issue of overcrowding whereas the actual
improvement of the situation in the prison is of lesser impact. We will not
stop until a workable solution has been found.

The committee’s visit to prisons in the North West and Mpumalanga provinces
has yet again highlighted the growing and highly problematic issues. Of the
10 prisons visited, Potchefstroom correctional centre had the highest
inmate percentage at 222,3%. Other prisons’ intake capacity varied between
191% and 124%.

Minister, the strategy of creating uneven inmate occupation levels across
prisons by transferring inmates from overcrowded centres to less
overcrowded ones is commendable. However, this strategy has its own
shortcomings. The overwhelming evidence points to the fact that, as our
country’s population grows, so too does our prison population. This
condition is a stark reminder of the fact that we need to be much more
innovative in addressing overcrowding in prisons.

 . . . mme re ntse re tsaa-tsia gore bothata jwa go tlalaphetelela ga
dikgolegelo, ke maikarabelo a Lefapha la Dikgopololommogo le mafapha a
mangwe go tshwana le Lefapha la Bosiamisi. Re ikuela go mafapha a go tsaa
karolo e e bonagalang gore re kgone go fedisa bothata jo. (Translation of
Tswana paragraph follows.)

[ . . . and we still take into account that the overflowing prison problem
is the responsibility of the Department of Correctional Services and other
departments like the Department of Justice. We are appealing to these
departments to play a meaningful role in dealing with this problem.]

Communication around the amendment of the Criminal Procedure Act of 1977,
particularly section 63A which allows for the amendment of bail conditions
of certain prisoners, and some circumstances which may lead to the deletion
of the requirement of bail and substitutions for the provision that they be
placed under correctional supervision, in terms of section 62F of the
Criminal Procedure Act of 1977, seems to have fallen by the wayside.

Effective rehabilitation programmes can be ensured under the conditions of
an improved staff-inmates ratio. An improved staff-inmates ratio has the
potential to improve the health and security situation of both inmates and
staff.

At this point, let me remind the House of the main objective of the
rehabilitation programme. Its main objective is to increase the knowledge
and skills of prisoners, and make them productive and law-abiding citizens.
If we can rehabilitate prisoners, it means they will be less inclined to
fall back into a life of crime. This will also enable us to reduce the rate
of re-offending. A reduction in re-offending rates will in turn lead to
lower levels of crime and, hence, a lower prison population.

At this point, an urgent request is made to the department for
clarification around the progress that has been made as to the status of
its changeover from a five-day to a seven-day establishment. However, we
acknowledge the collective decision undertaken by all stakeholders in
implementing the shift from a five to seven-day establishment.

Re le komiti, re tshwenyegile thata ka dipalopalo tse di kwa godimo tsa
baša mo dikgolegelong. Re dumela fa baša ba sa tshwanela go nna mo
dikgolegelong jaaka re lebeletse go le gontsi go tswa mo go bona. Re batla
go dira boikuelo go baagi jwa Aforika Borwa go re ema nokeng jaaka Motswana
a bua a re: Kgetse ya tsie e kgonwa ke go tshwaraganelwa. (Translation of
Tswana paragraph follows.)

[As the committee, we are very concerned about youth statistics in prisons.
We believe that youths are not supposed to be in prisons, because we are
expecting a lot from them. We would like to appeal to the South African
community to support us, for as the Motswana say: Unity is strength.]

The portfolio committee has committed itself to remain focused on juveniles
in our prisons. Our programme will ensure that we are briefed regularly by
the department on the status of youth and children in our prisons.

We regret the statement made by the apartheid beneficiary, hon Selfe, last
week when he said that they applauded the ANC for tearing down the trade
unions. We want him to note that our alliance with Popcru in particular and
Cosatu in general is steeped in the blood of martyrs.

Our visit to these prisons has afforded all of us an opportunity to
understand and appreciate the workings of our correctional services. It is
a mammoth task to ensure that the daily wheels of justice grind
effectively, but we recognise the enormous challenges. The department is
committed to working with stakeholders to resolve issues of correctional
concern. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, in view of this report, the MF upholds the
constitutional rights awarded to prisoners in our democracy. The MF grieves
and feels for all those who fell victim to these offences.

We further acknowledge the imbalances caused to society by these offenders
and salute the long arm of our law for returning the balance to society
through justice. We all want justice but, more so, we want to stamp out
crime. We want to feel safe in the country we call home. Our brothers and
sisters who have been tempted into committing crime: Be deterred, reform
and prevent crime, and do not create it.

The MF calls on South African citizens to take responsibility for our
nation and assist government in preventing, deterring and rehabilitating
crime and criminals. The MF supports the recommendations in this report,
but more importantly, we would like to see empty prisons.

At this point, I would also like to take this opportunity to  thank the
chairperson, the hon Bloem, and the Minister for their interest in this
matter. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M S MOATSHE: Chairperson, Minister, members of the opposition serving on
this portfolio committee need rehabilitation. They seem not to know their
work. They are truant and do not attend to their oversight work. Perhaps
they should be rehabilitated and reminded of what is important. These
people enjoyed the privileges that apartheid had to offer them prior to
1994. They said nothing about overcrowding. We have taught them about
overcrowding and human rights. They never knew that people had to have
human rights.

Our visit from 26 January to 4 February 2005 to the North West and
Mpumalanga provinces left us with a much deeper sense of appreciation of
the officials of correctional centres, a deeper concern about the living
conditions of inmates and a sense of urgency about the challenges we face
in correctional services.

In line with the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice, the Department of
Correctional Services has embraced the restorative justice approach aimed
at reducing crime and promoting healing between victims of crime and
offenders with the aim of bringing about restitution and reparation.

The Freedom Charter says that, ``All shall enjoy equal human rights’’. It
further states that, ``There shall be peace and friendship’’. The
opposition said that the Freedom Charter was an old document yet you forget
that the certificate of your date of birth is also an old document!

In fact, this party changes its name every time it loses an election. First
it was the Progressive Party, and when it got a new leadership it became
the Progressive Reform Party. When it lost the elections, it became the
Democratic Party. When it lost the elections again, it became the
Democratic Alliance. Last year it nearly changed to become the Democratic
Coalition but there was no leadership to take over there! [Laughter.]

Our findings have been that overcrowding is a major challenge to
rehabilitation. This also creates fertile grounds for corruption among
inmates, inmates and ill-disciplined, greedy officials, and inmates and
disloyal members of the community.

It is clear that no inmate has access to drugs and weapons except through
Correctional Services Officials and members of the community. However, the
department with its strategy on security is making progress in controlling
these criminal activities. Rehabilitation programmes are being implemented,
irrespective of the difficult conditions caused by overcrowding, staff
shortages and a lack of proper classrooms.

Some of the services delivered are adult basic education, mainstream
education and arts and culture programmes. In Mogwasi, inmates manufacture
tracksuits tops that are distributed throughout various correctional
centres. In Witbank, inmates manufacture shoes and these are distributed
throughout the country’s correctional centres. There are other products
from various centres around the country that are manufactured by inmates.
Women in Ermelo produce a variety of clothing including men’s suits and
wedding dresses. This is part of rehabilitation.

The Minister said that he is driving a big truck. I want to challenge
everyone to climb onto this big truck. The problem of overcrowding should
not only be the Minister’s or the department’s problem, but should be the
community’s problem as well. The challenge for all of us and the community
at large, including those on my left-hand side, should be to ask: What do
we do with all this talent after the inmates have been released? What do we
do to ensure that inmates will be integrated into the free world without
any frustrations? How will we ensure that the skills acquired are properly
and profitably utilised, and ensure that released inmates do not once again
find themselves in conflict with the law? Some people enjoy to see people
in jail. But those people will have to climb this truck, which is for
everybody.

There are good choirs that can compete anywhere in the world, and are found
in almost all correctional centres. These cultural groups are an indication
that rehabilitation is progressing well and that warm reconciliatory hearts
can embrace them.
We urge the cluster of safety and security to seriously look into the
incarceration of minors who committed crimes such as stealing chocolates in
a supermarket and were fined R1 000, which they cannot afford. One minor in
Nelspruit was sentenced to six months for stealing a reed of sugar cane and
fined R500. It is also alleged that the magistrate in Witbank sentences
only black children. These allegations need to be investigated as, on
arrival in Witbank, we personally saw white officials sitting separately,
away from blacks. We raised this matter as we were addressing staff, but we
cannot guarantee whether there was a change after we left.

Mathata a mangwe a Kgoro ya Dikgolegelo e rakanang le ona ke batshwarwa ba
ba emetseng go sekiswa. Badula se baka se setelele ba emetse go tlhagelela
fa pele ga kgotla. Bangwe ba bona ba nna sebaka go feta dingwaga tse tlhano
ba sa sekisiwe. Re kopane le bona kwa Potchestroom, Mogwase le dikgolegelo
tsotlhe tse di nang le batshwarwa ba ba emetseng go tlhagelela kwa kgotla.

Re kopa gore go potlakiswe tshekiso le dipatlisiso go batshwarwa botlhe.
Bangwe ba batshwarwa ba, ba kotsi e bile ga go kgonagale gore ba ka rutwa
tsela ya go ikoba. Bangwe ba nna sebaka se setelele ka ntlha ya go tlhoka
madi a beili gonne a gagamatswa gore ba se kgone go a fitlhelela.

Kwa bofelong, ke tlotlomatsa le go kgotatsa badiredi ba kgolego bao ba
tsayang matsapa a go tlisa diphetogo mo matshelong a bagolegwa. Ke lebisa
ditebogo go rre Nnalebotse Rolly Tshilwane, yo o diretseng Lefapha la
Dikgolego dingwaga di le 38 kwa ntle ga go tsaya matsatsi a boikhutso go
akaretsa le malatsi a bolwetse (Sick leave). Go utlwagala gore mo
dingwageng di le 38, ga a ise a fitlhe thari kwa tirong. Maikhutso a gagwe
e nnile a a tlwaelegileng a ngwaga le ngwaga le a selegae. (Family
responsibility leave)

Rre Tshilwane o diretse lefapha ka manontlhotlho. Jaanong ke mongwe wa
bagolo ba kgolegelo ya Witbank. Rare go ena, rre Tshilwane, tshwara thata.
O motlhala go badirammogo. Nko mogala tshwara thata e sere o utlwa sebodu
wa kgaoga.

Ke fetsa ka go leboga Tona Ngconde Balfour le Lefapha la Dikgopololo  ka
kutlwelobotlhoko eo a e bontshitseng ka go fokatsa dikgwedi tsa batshwarwa,
segolo bana, bagodi, balwetse le bomme. [Nako e Fedile.] [Legofi.]
(Translation of Tswana paragraphs follows.)

[The other problem facing the Department of Correctional Services is that
of inmates awaiting trial. They wait for long periods before they appear in
court. Some of them stay in prison for longer than five years without
trial. We met them in Potchefstroom, Mogwase and in all other prisons that
have inmates who are to appear in court.

We are making an appeal that the investigations and prosecutions of all
inmates be sped up. Some of these inmates are dangerous and it will not be
easy to rehabilitate them. Some of them stay on for longer periods awaiting
trial because they cannot afford bail.

In conclusion, I would like to praise and encourage prison warders who make
efforts to bring about changes in the lives of inmates. I would like to
convey my thanks to Mr Nnalebotse Rolly Tshilwane, who served the
Department of Correctional Services for 38 years without taking vacation or
sick leave. I learned that during the 38 years of his service, he never
arrived late. He took leave like anybody does during normal holiday
seasons.

Mr Tshilwane served the department with diligence. He is now one of the
senior warders at Witbank prison. We would like to encourage him to keep up
the good work he is doing, as he is an example to his colleagues. I would
also like to thank the Minister of Correctional Services, Ngconde Balfour,
for being sympathetic towards inmates and reducing their sentence periods
by months; especially those of children, pensioners, patients and
women.[Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Another problem that the Department of Correctional Services is faced with
is awaiting trial prisoners. They wait for long periods to appear before
courts. Others remain in prison for up to five years without getting a
chance to appear in court. We met these prisoners at Mogwasi, Potchestroom
and other prisons, which have awaiting trial prisoners. Others remain in
prison because they do not have bail money.

In conclusion, I would like to honour and encourage prison warders who take
every effort to change people’s lives.

We make an appeal that the investigations and prosecutions should take
place soon. Some of these prisoners are dangerous and they cannot be
rehabilitated.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, first of all, I want to
thank the chairperson of the portfolio committee. The report that the
portfolio committee is tabling today is a report of their visits to these
different centres, and I really appreciate the oversight responsibility
that’s being done by the portfolio committee, with the chairperson leading
them. Staff members in all the correctional centres are really appreciative
of the visit, and the offenders that I met appreciate those kinds of visit
because they are able to have an outlet to raise some of the issues that
are challenges to them.

I also want to emphasise the point that I have read the report, Mr Selfe. I
will make sure that departmental managers all over the country, in all the
243 centres, clearly read this. I will also submit this report to the JCPS
cluster of Ministers, because that is where we meet as a cluster and they
will definitely take note of this report.

A number of concerns have been raised, particularly around this report, on
the issue of overcrowding. Those are concerns which we are addressing.

We are dealing with them every day. I keep on pushing my managers to deal
with these issues, particularly when we deal with awaiting-trial detainees,
those who have been there for a long time because of delays within the
justice system, investigating teams and the police investigators, as well
as courts and magistrate’s courts which do not sit as regularly as they
should. The provisions of 62F and 63 of the Criminal Procedures Act are
constantly being utilised by my managers in all these centres to try and
deal with those people who have bail set at less than R1 000.

There are quite a number of them, and with chairperson of the Justice and
Constitutional Development Portfolio Committee being here with us, I do
hope that a joint session of those committees will get together and try to
help us. We need help. So, Mr Selfe, we are dealing with those things.

On the issue of gangs and corrupt officials, we are dealing with that every
day in our department. All I can say to you is that when you live in a
glasshouse, don’t throw stones. When you live in a glasshouse, don’t throw
stones; they may hurt you!

Mama Sybil Seaton, thank you very much for the humane approach that you
always take. It is the approach where we say correction and rehabilitation
is a societal responsibility. It is not a responsibility only for us.
Families of these people have got to assist us. Societies and communities
where they live have got to assist us. But also, the approach of looking at
the minors and the juveniles within our centres is a very humane approach.
I do hope that the families and the parents of those juveniles and minors
listen to some of these debates and take care.

The approach is integrated and there will be protocols signed between
ourselves - that is Correctional Services, Safety and Security as well as
Justice on these issues. We will have a protocol that we will look at.

We do transfer prisoners time and again, from one prison to the other so
that we can alleviate the overcrowding in some of our correctional centres.

On the issue of restorative justice, yes, we deal with that all the time.
As a rehabilitating tool, we use all kinds of programme as Ntate Moatshe
has said very clearly. On the arts and culture front, we’ve got choirs and
bands. We’ve got groups that do isichathamia within our centres. We are
trying our best to make sure that the youngsters are kept busy doing
something. Education is part of that, but we’ve also introduced sport as
part of rehabilitation, and it’s doing very well. Woodwork, agriculture as
well as a lot of steel works within correctional services are all part of
what we are doing.

Let me very quickly now just address myself to one thing. Again, I want to
thank the portfolio committee for the support, Chairperson, on the
remissions that we are dealing with. The remissions that we are dealing
with are not about overcrowding. I’m saying it for the second time, and I’m
praying that Mr Selfe understands this. It’s a humane approach that this
government is taking. It’s not about overcrowding, but it will definitely
impact on the overcrowding. As long as you can understand it in that sense,
Mr. Selfe, you can understand it better. But for now, you don’t seem to
understand it.

I want to thank the portfolio committee for the encouragement and for the
support. I also want to welcome the voices of Archbishop Njongonkulu
Ndungane and the SA Council of Churches that have come out in support of
this humane approach to our prisoners in the country. We are talking here
about statutory issues: little, little things that people have done,
stealing mangoes, theft and everything, but not high-risk offenders. We
also thank the NGOs who work with us in correctional services, who have
come out also in support and who are helping the department in dealing with
the integration of these offenders.

To the victims of crime, because that’s what has been asked, all I want to
say to them, particularly to those offenders who will be released, there
will be those people that they have offended. All I’m saying to them is:
Please, from us as a government, please understand it and please forgive
them for the offences that they have committed. Do not forget those
offences, and the people they have offended, but please understand that
it’s part of the rehabilitation process that we want to integrate them into
society. Also, don’t push them to the limit. Allow them space to be able to
regain their humanity, so that they can rejoin human communities all over
the place. That is all that we are saying to them.

The last thing is that the remissions will definitely assist us. Let me
touch on this promotion policy that you have spoken about. We will deal
with assessment of our members. We’ve got good members in Correctional
Services, not all our members are bad. There are those who are bad, but the
bulk of our members are good members. I visited close to 201 prisons around
the country since my appointment. I’m left with about 40 and I’ll be
finishing those 40 in June and July, because I want to actually know what
is going on. I do unannounced visits in prisons on weekends, Ntate
Mlangeni. Happy birthday, Sithwala Ndwe! On weekends, mostly, I drive
myself to these centres, because I want to see unannounced what is going on
and be able to assist the members, not to catch them. That’s not my style.
It’s not to catch them but to try and assist them in the work that they do.

I take my hat off to all of them around the country, those that I have
visited. They really are doing a good job. There will be those who fall
foul of the law and we deal with those. But the bulk of them are good men
and good women.

We’ve got young stars coming out of the two colleges, Kroonstad and
Zonderwater. They come from two detachments. I gave the names - one is a
detachment in Kroonstad and one is a detachment in Zonderwater. And every
time I go to correctional centres to meet with them, I find that most of
them are young ladies of 18, 19 and 20, because we are trying to balance
the gender issue within correctional services. And I really appreciate
seeing them wearing that uniform that the head of my Ministry, Mr Vusi
Nhlapo, is wearing sitting over there. It’s a lovely uniform when you look
at it. We really appreciate the work that they do, and we hope that they
will be able to learn a lot of things from what we do.

Again, I’m saying, lastly, to those who are going to get released, please
do not let yourselves down. Do not let yourselves down. This is the second
chance you are being given, use it, and use it productively. Thank you very
much [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Mr L J MODISENYANE: I move on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party that the report be adopted subject to the following amendment, namely
that all recommendations in the Report that require either the Minister,
Department or an official to report directly to the committee should be
amended to read ``that the reports concerned should be submitted to the
House, the timeframes indicated in the Report to apply from the date of its
adoption.’’

Motion agreed to.

Report, as amended, accordingly adopted.


  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES —
        OVERSIGHT VISIT TO LINDELANI PLACE OF SAFETY IN STELLENBOSCH

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES —
                             VISIT TO BONNYTOUN

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES —
                VISIT TO POLLSMOOR JUVENILE DETENTION CENTRES

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES —
            SOLUTIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO PRISON OVERCROWDING

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES —
 TWO FIRE INCIDENTS AT POLLSMOOR MANAGEMENT AREA, WHICH LED TO THE DEATH OF
                                 SIX INMATES

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES —
   VISIT TO PRETORIA FOLLOWING A BREACH AT PRETORIA CLOSE MAXIMUM SECURITY
                                (CMAX) CENTRE

Mr D V BLOEM: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, let me  tell  you  the  good
news.  The  Chairperson  of  the  Portfolio  Committees   on   Justice   and
Constitutional Affairs is fully on board. She is also very worried.  She  is
busy with all the other matters that are going on.

This  will  take  two  minutes.  Mr  Selfe,  the  Portfolio   Committee   on
Correctional Services, ...

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Selfe.

Mr D V BLOEM: ... after having visited many prisons and places of safety  in
the  country,  would  like  to  introduce  the  following  reports  for  its
consideration.

The problem of overcrowding is a man-made one. Last  week  the  DA  and  the
ACDP criticized the announcement of  special  remissions,  saying  that  the
Minister is releasing sentenced inmates, thereby undermining  the  decisions
and hard work of magistrates. They said that the problem of overcrowding  is
not caused by the sentenced inmates, but by the awaiting-trial prisoners.
I want to take this opportunity to explain to the DA and the ACDP and  other
people who have problems with this ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, on a point of order ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Bloem, will you  take  your  seat,
please?

Mr M J ELLIS: As far as I am aware, we are addressing a  series  of  reports
from the portfolio committee, and the point that Mr Bloem is making now  has
got nothing to do with those reports at all. It is  a  gross  abuse  of  the
occasion, quite frankly. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Bloem,  will  you  please  confine
yourself to the report.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, we are dealing with  a  report  that  deals  with
overcrowding in prisons. That is  why  I  am  raising  these  issues  in  my
report. I will come . . . [Interjections]. . . . and then you can object.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, there is a kind of convention, certainly  amongst
the Whips, that if a chairperson is going to make a speech that is  actually
contrary to the report itself, other parties will have the right to reply.

What Mr Bloem is doing now is abusing the occasion  completely,  because  no
other party is going to have the opportunity to  reply  to  this  debate.  I
urge you to make sure that he sticks to the topic.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Bloem, will you please  take  that
into consideration.

Mr D V BLOEM: We as the ANC are clear on  awaiting-trial  prisoners  in  our
prisons. Everybody knows our standpoint is that people are sitting  for  too
long in prisons, awaiting trial.

We are not mixing issues. The reason for me saying that  overcrowding  is  a
man-made issue is that there are people in prison who are  not  supposed  to
be there. On our prison visits, we found people sentenced for petty  crimes.
For example, one woman in Thohoyandou Prison is sitting there  for  stealing
perfume to the value of R16. She has been in prison for four months  because
she could not pay a R2 000 fine.

One person is there for calling somebody a lizard. Another person  is  there
because they called somebody a witch. I spoke to a  woman  sentenced  to  30
days in prison or a R500 fine for stealing a bar of  Sunlight  Soap  to  the
value of R3,50.
We want to commend the President on the granting of the  special  remission,
especially with regard to children, youth, women,  women  with  babies,  the
aged and the disabled.

However, I feel that the security cluster must review  all  cases  of  women
who are in prison for murdering their abusive  husbands.  Innocent  children
are suffering due to the incarceration of their mothers, many of  whom  were
driven to this violent act.

I want to make it very clear that the  ANC  will  never  support  crime.  We
condemn it very strongly. What I am saying is that it is not  necessary  for
petty offenders to be sent to prison . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Bloem, hon Bloem!

Mr M J ELLIS: I wonder if the hon Bloem would . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): One moment, please. Please  take  your
seat, hon Bloem.

Mr M J ELLIS: I wonder if the hon Bloem would explain to us which report  he
is talking about now, because none of the reports before  us  actually  deal
with any of the matters that he  is  raising  now.  [Interjections.]  He  is
going on in a long, lengthy debate about nothing at all that is  related  to
these matters.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Bloem, I am not able to  judge  on
the content of the reports before you, but  you  are  able  to  do  so.  So,
please, if the request is reasonable, will you please  confine  yourself  to
the reports at hand?

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, on another point of order:  I  do  believe  the
chairperson, here, is representing the portfolio committee and not the ANC.

Mr D V BLOEM: Thank you very much. I am a member  of  the  ANC  and  I  will
speak here on behalf of the ANC. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Bloem, please take your seat.

Mr M J ELLIS: The Rules make it absolutely clear that  the  chairperson  can
report on behalf of the committee. It does not say anything about  reporting
on behalf of a political party. Hon Seaton is 100% correct: He  has  got  to
report purely as the chairperson of the committee. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms  C-S  Botha):  Hon  Bloem,  before  you  continue,
please, we’ve had several sustainable objections. I have requested you  very
kindly to please return to the subject matter of the reports before us,  and
to act on them in your role as chairperson of  the  committee,  and  not  on
behalf of the party. Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I see that they took some of my time. In  tabling
these  reports,  the  committee  has  identified  all  problems   at   these
facilities, and makes strong recommendations in this regard.

However, we want to stress that, as a committee, we strongly feel that no
children should be kept in prison, and that there need to be more
alternative facilities such as Lindelani and Bonnytoun for children who are
in conflict with the law.

One of the reports before this House deals with two incidents of fire in
the Pollsmoor Management Area, which led to the death of six inmates.
During the committee investigation, it became clear that the role of prison
gangs played a major role in these two incidents. The portfolio committee
has recommended that the Department of Correctional Services should take
strong action to address the problem of prison gangs.

The report on the Pretoria  Close  Maximum  Security  Centre  deals  with  a
tragic incident at the CMAX centre in which four people died, including  two
senior correctional officials. It is  quite  clear  that  corrupt  officials
were involved in this incident. In  this  report  the  committee  recommends
that the department  take  strong  disciplinary  action  against  all  those
implicated, including prosecution if necessary.

The committee was informed today in a briefing by the Special  Investigating
Unit and the Department of Correctional Services, on the measures  that  are
being taken to stamp out corruption, and commends them on these actions.

In conclusion, the portfolio committee presents these reports to the  House,
and encourages all members of Parliament  to  read  and  engage  with  these
reports. Every report contains clear timeframes for  implementation  of  the
recommendations by the department. The  committee  will  follow  up  on  the
implementation of the recommendations made within these reports.  Thank  you
very much, Chairperson.

Chairperson, I have a note here. This note was sent to me by Mr Mike  Ellis,
who said that I am the third force here in Parliament. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order!

Mr D V BLOEM: I don’t know whether I am the third force ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, ...

Mr D V BLOEM: ... but if I am the third force, he is  the  tsunami  of  this
Parliament!

Mr M J ELLIS: Thank you very much. I will take that as a compliment!

Mr D V BLOEM: Thank you very much.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha):  Thank  you,  thank  you,  thank  you!
[Laughter.]

There was no debate.

Mr L J MODISENYANE: Madam Chair, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, I move that the reports be adopted, but that the report
under Order No 7 on the Order Paper - relating to the two fire incidents at
Pollsmoor Management Area, which led to the death of six inmates - be
adopted subject to the following amendment, namely that all recommendations
in the report that require certain steps to be taken in favour of or
against certain officials should be amended to reflect that the department
is being requested to consider taking the indicated steps.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Oversight Visit to Lindelani Place of Safety in Stellenbosch
accordingly adopted.


Report on Visit to Bonnytoun accordingly adopted.


Report  on  Visit  to  Pollsmoor  Juvenile  Detention  Centres  accordingly
adopted.


Report on Solutions and Recommendations to Prison Overcrowding  accordingly
adopted.


Report on Two Fire Incidents at Pollsmoor Management Area, which led to the
death of six inmates, as amended, accordingly adopted.


Report on Visit to Pretoria following a breach at  Pretoria  Close  Maximum
Security (CMAX) Centre accordingly adopted.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
             CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT – MAGISTRATE P P MKALIPI

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
              CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT – MAGISTRATE P W PHIRI

Ms F I CHOHAN-KOTA: Hon Bloem, I am told that we are supposed to address
people as ``hon tsunami’’ in this House, and not just ``tsunami’’.

It is important to note that this is the first time that Parliament has
sought to implement the removal proceedings contained in the Magistrates
Act of 1993, not that there has never been cause to do so previously, but
that the procedures required by the Magistrates Act were simply too
cumbersome and complicated, and have consistently been incorrectly applied.

The portfolio committee, in 2003, amended some of the provisions of that
Act in order to ensure that, at the very least, the principles of natural
justice found in our Constitution were incorporated into this pre-democracy
Act.

This having been done, it has made it possible for Parliament to play its
rightful role in regard to errant behaviour on the part of certain
magistrates. We hope that by so doing, we shall serve to restore dignity
and respect to the institution of our lower court judiciary.

It must be reiterated that the provisions of the Act remain impractical and
in need of simplification and streamlining. This we hope to do in the near
future through inter alia the Judicial Conduct Tribunal Bills that the
committee has sponsored.

I believe it is important to outline in some measure of detail, since this
is the first occasion that Parliament has had to deal with these
procedures, the procedures adopted by the committee in arriving at its
recommendations today.

In terms of section 13(4)(c) of the Magistrates Act of 1993, Parliament
must, as soon as reasonably possible, pass the resolution as to whether or
not the restoration to his or her office of a magistrate who has been
suspended from office is recommended.

We opted, in the interest of promoting respect for the judiciary as a
whole, to invoke rule 152(1)(b), which allowed proceedings and committees
to be closed to the public. This was an unusual experience for the
committee. As you are aware, Chairperson, the committee very seldom has
resorted to invoking this rule, but we are of the view that this
extraordinary step was necessary to protect the image of the institution of
the magistracy.

The majority of our magistrates remain very hardworking, diligent,
professional people, and I want to emphasis this. Since the Act stipulates
that Parliament must pass a resolution of this nature, the Portfolio
Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, and the Select
Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs took joint briefings on
the two reports tabled by the Minister.

The magistrates implicated were afforded the opportunity to present written
representations to the committees sitting jointly, and where such
representations were made, these were considered. The two committees
however proceeded to pass the resolutions sitting separately.

The process in Parliament was not meant to overshadow or duplicate the
investigation and inquiry held at the level of the Magistrates Commission.
While regard was had to the relevant law and regulations, an assessment was
made of the adherence to procedural correctness. The parliamentary process
cannot be said to be a simple review procedure.
We have also considered the merits on which the recommendations of the
Magistrates Commission were based. This was done without endeavouring, in
any way, to detract from the integrity accorded to a hearing of oral
evidence, as was embarked on in each case separately by the Magistrates
Commission.

In neither of these cases before us today was there any evidence or factor
that indicated that Mr P W Phiri or Mr P Mkhalipi should be restored to the
office of magistrate. In both these matters, having considered the
procedures followed by both the Magistrates Commission and the Minister for
Justice and Constitutional Development as well as the substantive factors
on which the Magistrates Commission’s recommendations were based, the
committee found as follows: In the case of Mr P W Phiri, the committee
noted that the report and the documents submitted in terms of the relevant
regulations bear ample evidence that Mr Phiri is incapable of carrying out
the duties of his office efficiently. Mr Phiri repeatedly failed to send
reviewable cases to the High Court timeously; repeatedly failed to respond
to various queries by reviewing judges, resulting in failures of justice
and causing severe prejudice to the accused persons concerned.

He pleaded guilty to three charges of misconduct in this respect. His
performance on the bench revealed numerous serious and profound
irregularities. Numerous cases over which Mr Phiri presided had to be sent
on special review, and serious procedural irregularities were detected.

Individual and formal training guidance and counselling failed to achieve
the desired effect, and Mr Phiri repeatedly made the same mistakes, and
failed to adhere to time limits. The portfolio committee is of the opinion
that there is no reason why the recommendation of the Magistrates
Commission, namely that Mr Phiri should be removed from the office of
magistrate should not be followed, and accordingly recommends that the
House resolve that Mr Phiri not be restored to the office of magistrate.

In the case of Mr P Mkalipi, the portfolio committee noted that the report
and documents submitted in terms of the relevant regulations bear ample
evidence that Mr Mkalipi is incapable of carrying out the duties of his
office efficiently. There are numerous instances where case records kept by
Mr Mkalipi were incomplete and/or reflect gross irregularities.

Uncontested evidence exists that he committed gross procedural
irregularities on numerous occasions, and that he failed to furnish reasons
for convictions and sentences on review or appeal, in certain instances.
Other uncontested evidence relates to nonobservance of official hours; lack
of discipline; inadequate knowledge of civil adjudication, and being
inebriated while on official duty.

The portfolio committee feels that there is no reason why the
recommendation by the Magistrates Commission, namely, that Mr Mkalipi
should be removed from the office of magistrate should not be followed, and
accordingly, recommends that the House resolves that Mr Mkalipi not be
restored to the office of magistrate. Chairperson, I present the report.
Thank you.

There was no debate.

Question put: That the recommendations of the Committee be adopted, namely
that the magistrates in question not be restored to the office of
magistrate.


Agreed to.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES –
                     VOTE NO 20 – CORRECTIONAL SERVICES




There was no debate.


Mr L J MODISENYANE: Chair, I move on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party that the report be adopted.

Mr M J ELLIS: On behalf of the Chief Whip of the Opposition, I am prepared
to second that motion.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (C-S Botha): Thank you very much for your kind
indulgence, hon Deputy Whip.

Motion agreed to.

   CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                          - UNSIGNED AUDIT REPORTS


   CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                           - CORRECTIONAL SERVICES


   CONSIDERATION OF THIRD REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                              - APAC CONFERENCE


   CONSIDERATION OF FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                          - COMPETITION COMMISSION


   CONSIDERATION OF FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                        - SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK


   CONSIDERATION OF SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                       - INDEPENDENT DEVELOPMENT TRUST

       CONSIDERATION OF SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                     ACCOUNTS - NATIONAL LOTTERIES BOARD


           CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
                PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS

Mr V G SMITH: Chairperson, comrades, hon members, in presenting the
Standing Committee on Public Accounts’ reports to the House for
consideration and adoption, we thought it might be important to highlight a
few shortcomings in so far as management of resources within departments
are concerned.

The Department of Correctional Services and the Department of Public Works
have had qualified reports for the past three financial years. In the audit
of Correctional Services, the Auditor-General could not verify the validity
and accuracy of expenditure totalling R630 million, and R681 million last
year. Internal controls related to areas of leave application and
information technology controls were not at an acceptable level of
implementation.

In the case of Public Works, a figure of R35 million could not be verified
due to lack of supporting documents. Debtors control, asset management and
fixed property management are some of the areas that the committee feels
are of serious concern.

The Auditor-General’s report on the Competition Commission, South African
Reserve Bank, the National Lotteries Board and the Independent Development
Trust were all unqualified. Scopa is satisfied with the management of
public resources in these institutions.

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts’ resolution on unsigned audit
reports raised a concern that annual reports of certain parastatals and
other state institutions contained unsigned audit reports. We are of the
view that, in future, such reports should be rejected.

Finally, we submit the report on the Association of Public Accounts
Committee Conference for the consideration of this House. Thank you.
[Applause.]

There was no debate.

Mr L J MODISENYANE: Madam Chair, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, I move that the reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.
Reports accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 17:26.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                             FRIDAY, 3 JUNE 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

      (a)   Government Notice No 323 published in Government Gazette No
         27434 dated 8 April 2005: Establishment of the Spruit River Water
         User Association, Division of Wellington, Province of the Western
         Cape, Water Management Area Number 19 in terms of the National
         Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

      (b)   Government Notice No 324 published in Government Gazette No
         27434 dated 8 April 2005: Establishment of the uPhongolo Dam Water
         User Association, Magisterial Districts of Ingwavuma, Ubombo,
         Ngotshe and Piet Retief, KwaZulu-Natal Province, Water Management
         Area Number 6 in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36
         of 1998)

      (c)   Government Notice No 458 published in Government Gazette No
         27579 dated 20 May 2005: Establishment of the Houdenbeks River
         Water User Association, Division of Ceres, Province of the Western
         Cape, Water Management Area Number 17 in terms of the National
         Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

      (d)        Government Notice No 482 published in Government Gazette
         No 27459 dated 20 May 2005: Proposal for the Establishment of the
         Thukela Catchment Management Agency in terms of section 78(3) of
         the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

      (e)   Government Notice No 483 published in Government Gazette No
         27604 dated 20 May 2005: Proposal for the Establishment of the
         Usutu to Mhlathuze Catchment Management Agency in terms of section
         78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

      (f)   Government Notice No 484 published in Government Gazette No
         27604 dated 20 May 2005: Establishment of the Mvoti to Mzimkulu
         Catchment Management Agency (Water Management Area Number 11) in
         the Province of KwaZulu-Natal in terms of the National Water Act,
         1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      The Acting President of the Republic submitted the following letter
    dated 1 June 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing
    Members of the National Assembly of the employment of the South African
    National Defence Force in Botswana:

      EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN BOTSWANA IN
    FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH
    AFRICA

      This serves to inform the National Assembly that I authorised the
    employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
    personnel to Botswana, for service in fulfillment of the international
    obligations of the Republic of South Africa, to participate in a
    Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) Joint Peacekeeping
    Training Exercise.

      This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
    section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
    1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 93 of the Defence Act,
    2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

      A total of 326 members of the SANDF will be employed from 02 June
    2005 to 28 June 2005.

      The total estimated cost to be borne by South Africa for the
    deployment of personnel will be R5 781 420,00.

      I will communicate this report to the members of the National Council
    of Provinces and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
    the notice of the National Assembly.

      signed
      T A MANUEL
      ACTING PRESIDENT




COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the Close
    Corporations Amendment Bill [B 6 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75),
    dated 1 June 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered the
        subject of the Close Corporations Amendment Bill [B 6 - 2005]
        (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
        Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B 6A - 2005].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
    Administration on the Reports of the Public Service Commission, dated 3
    June 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration, having
        considered the Reports of the Public Service Commission on:

        1. The Investigation into the Management of Discipline in the
           Public Service, October 2003;
        2. Remunerative Work Outside the Public Service: An Investigation
           Undertaken in the Gauteng Provincial Health Sector, 2004; and
        3. The Management of the Subsidised Motor Transport Scheme, July
           2004.


      Reports as follows:

        1. On the Report on the Investigation into the Management of
           Discipline in the Public Service, the Portfolio Committee on the
           Public Service and Administration recommends that the
           recommendations contained in the report should be acceded to and
           that their implementation should be monitored and evaluated.
        2. On Remunerative Work outside the Public Service; An
           investigation Undertaken in the Gauteng Provincial Health
           Sector, the Portfolio Committee on the Public Service and
           Administration notes the recommendations made by the Public
           Service Commission and recommends that the recommendations
           should be acceded to.
        3. On the Report on the Management of the Subsidised Motor
           Transport Scheme, the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
           Administration recommends that the recommendations contained in
           the Report should be acceded to and that compliance with the
           recommendations be monitored rigorously.

      Furthermore, the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
        Administration notes that the Public Service Commission has done
        sterling work and discharged its mandate in terms of the law.


                            TUESDAY, 7 JUNE 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


         (i)     National Credit Bill [B 18 – 2005] (National Assembly –
             sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 27529 of 26
             April 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
         Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 8 June 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      (1)   Genetically Modified Organisms Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted
         by the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs on 1 May 2005.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs
         and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

      (2)   Patents Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of
         Trade and Industry on 31 May 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Education

      (a)   Government Notice No 488 published in Government Gazette No
         27607 dated 24 May 2005: The development of a policy for the
         Further Education and Training Certificate (FETC) Grade 10 –12
         (General) – Call for written submissions from stakeholder bodies
         and members of the public in terms of the National Education Policy
         Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and the South African Schools Act,
         1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

      (b)   Government Notice No 469 published in Government Gazette No
         27594 dated 17 May 2005: National policy regarding further
         education and training programmes: Approval of additional subjects
         to be listed in the National Curriculum Statement, Grades 10 – 12
         (General) in terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act
         No 27 of 1996) and the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84
         of 1996).

      (c)   Government Notice No 468 published in Government Gazette No
         27593 dated 17 May 2005: National Policy regarding further
         education and training programmes: Approval for the offering of the
         Associated Board of Royal Schools of Music (ABRSM): Music
         programmes, Grades 6 and 7 as senior certificate subjects in terms
         of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1998) and
         the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      Report of Delegation to 9th Session of African, Caribbean, Pacific-
     European Union Joint Parliamentary Assembly, Bamako, Mali, 16-21 April
     2005.

      The 9th Session of the African, Caribbean, Pacific-European Union
     Joint Parliamentary Assembly (ACP-EU JPA) met in Bamako, Mali from 16
     to 21 April 2005. As usual, the joint plenary was preceded by meetings
     of the ACP and Joint Bureaus (of which South Africa is now a member),
     of the ACP plenary and also of the three Standing Committees – on
     Political Affairs, on Economic Development, Finance and Trade and on
     Social Affairs and the Environment. A highlight on this occasion was
     the launching of the ACP Parliamentary Assembly at a ceremony on April
     15th  following the signing on by a little more than the requisite one
     third of eligible ACP parliaments. The Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP,
     Mrs Peggy Hollander, signed on behalf of the South African Parliament.

      The delegation consisted of NCOP Deputy Chairperson, Mrs Peggy
     Hollander, Dr Rob Davies and Ms Dumisile Nhlengethwa (of the ANC) and
     Mr Les Labuschagne (DA). We were accompanied by Ambassador Jerry
     Matjila and Mr Saul Pelle of the South African Embassy to the EU in
     Brussels, Ambassador Pandelani Mathoma of the South African Embassy to
     Mali, Ms Nonthato Skolo of the Department of Foreign Affairs, Ms Grace
     Constable of Parliament’s International Relations Unit and Ms Georgina
     Smith, personal assistant to Mrs Hollander.

      The 9th Session operated according to the established rules of
     procedure providing for resolutions to be tabled via the Standing
     Committees with the possibility of only two “urgent resolutions” being
     tabled independently on topics agreed by the Joint Bureau. It was
     agreed at the Joint Bureau meeting held in Brussels in January that the
     “urgent resolutions” at the 9th session would be on “The Situation in
     the Sudan” and “The Situation in the African Great Lakes Region”. The
     Joint Bureau agreed on two other debates without resolution on “The
     impact of the December 2004 tsunami” and “The Situation in Togo”. The
     ACP plenary was informed of an invitation to include ACP
     parliamentarians in an ACP mission to observe the Togolese elections on
     April 24th. Due to an absence of funding this invitation could not,
     however, be taken up.

      The plenary agenda also included the customary statements by, and
     questions to, the EU Commission (represented by both the Development
     Commissioner, Louis Michel, and the Trade Commissioner, Peter
     Mandelson), the ACP Council (represented by the Minister of Foreign
     affairs of Cape Verde, Mr Victor Borges) and the EU Council
     (represented by the Luxembourg Minister for Cooperation and
     Humanitarian Action, Mr Jean-Louis Schiltz). In addition there was a
     statement followed by exchanges of views with Ms Evelyne Herfkens,
     Executive Coordinator of the United Nations Millenium Development Goals
     Campaign.

      As usual, there was a formal opening ceremony with speeches from the
     Co-Presidents, the Mayor of Bamako, Mr Moussa Traore, and the President
     of the National Assembly of Mali, Mr Ibrahim Keita. The President of
     the Republic of Mali, Mr Amadou Toumani Toure, formally declared
     proceedings open in a speech that noted that political development was
     far outpacing economic development in ACP countries and referred to the
     acute challenges facing Mali in the areas of cotton production, food
     security and the management of the Niger river among others. President
     Toure also explicitly commended President Thabo Mbeki for his efforts
     in the Ivory Coast peace process.

      Launching of ACP Parliamentary Assembly and Formation of Working
     Group on EPAs

      As indicated above, the ACP plenary concluded on April 15th with a
     formal signing ceremony to launch the ACP Parliamentary Assembly. The
     ceremony took place in the presence of both the Prime Minister and
     Speaker of the National Assembly of Mali. Representatives of 27 of the
     79 eligible ACP Parliaments signed the Charter of the Assembly. They
     included ourselves, with Mrs Hollander signing on behalf of the South
     African Parliament. As one third of the total was the minimum required
     to launch the Assembly it was declared officially launched. Its real
     business will, however, not begin until the time of the next JPA, at
     which time it is expected more ACP parliaments will have signed on. A
     decision taken in the ACP plenary of potential significance for the
     future work of the ACP Parliamentary Assembly was to establish a
     Working Group on the Economic Partnership Agreement negotiations. Rob
     Davies at the request of the Co-President convened an initial meeting
     which brain stormed potential parameters of a work programme. A
     document is being prepared for presentation to the ACP Bureau.

      One of the three Workshops forming part of the JPA agenda dealt with
     progress in EPA negotiations in three of the 6 EPA negotiating
     configurations- West Africa, the Pacific and Caribbean. For the moment
     discussions are mostly focusing on identifying development issues and
     addressing non-tariff barriers. However, the work programmes envisage
     formal Free Trade Area (FTA) negotiations beginning by September. In
     the exchange with Commissioner Mandelson, it became clear that while he
     continues to insist that these will not be conventional FTA
     negotiations driven by EU commercial interests, the Commission is not
     yet ready to commit even to positions championed by the British
     government (which include renunciation of all offensive interests and
     an upfront offer of full duty free access to the EU market). The
     timetable for implementation, proposals for additional resource
     allocations and the shape of the promised alternatives to EPAs,
     meanwhile, appear to remain as vague as ever.

      Committee Programmes and Resolutions

      Although we are full voting members of the Committee on Economic
     Development, Finance and Trade, the delegation divided itself to cover
     discussions in all three Committees. Mrs Hollander and Ms Nhlengethwa
     also attended a meeting of the Women’s Forum, which seeks to promote
     dialogue among women participants in the JPA.

      The resolutions emerging from Committees were on “Post-conflict
     rehabilitation in ACP countries” (Political Affairs Committee),
     “Budgetisation of the European Development Fund” (Committee on Economic
     Development, Finance and Trade) and “Progress made in achieving
     universal primary education and gender equality in the ACP countries in
     the context of the Millenium Development Goals” (Social Affairs
     Committee). The first resolution called for flexible, coordinated
     programmes of support that sought to link relief, rehabilitation and
     development. The second resolution, which was the product of lengthy
     compromises between MEPs favouring including ACP development financing
     in the European budget and ACP countries wary of such a move, called
     for a joint study on the implications of budgetisation. The third
     resolution noted progress but also called for additional efforts to
     reach MDGs on education and gender equality. The next topic to be dealt
     with by the Economic Development, Finance and Trade Committee is on
     “Agricultural and Mining Commodities”. In the Committee meeting we
     tabled amendments seeking to strengthen references to EU Registration,
     Evaluation and Authorisation of Chemicals (REACH) legislation not
     becoming a non-tariff barrier to developing country exports. These
     amendments will be discussed, together with any others tabled, at the
     next Committee meeting in September – see also lunch meeting on REACH
     below.

      Resolutions on Urgent Topics, the Bamako Declaration on MDGs and
     other Matters

      The main draft resolution tabled on the “urgent topic” of Sudan was
     drafted by the two participants in the joint mission agreed at the last
     bureau meeting – ACP Co-President Sharon Hay-Webster of Jamaica and
     Luisa Morgantini of the GUE/NGL group. Several of the European
     Parliamentary groups had tabled amendments generally strongly critical
     of the Government of Sudan. We were again asked by the ACP Co-President
     to work with Professor Ephraim Kamuntu, the delegate from Uganda, to
     participate in the conciliation process, which eventually resulted in
     the passage of a resolution supported by all sides.

      The draft resolutions on the “Situation in the African Great Lakes
     Region” were less contentious and were composited into a single
     resolution that commanded widespread support. It was, however, noted in
     the ACP plenary that no ACP draft resolution on this important issue
     had been tabled.

      In addition to the resolutions, the JPA also adopted by acclamation
     “The Bamako Declaration on the Millenium Development Goals”. This was
     based on a text drafted by ourselves after discussion in the Bureau in
     January. It essentially supported a renewed “big push” to attain the
     MDGs focusing on debt cancellation, fair trade and increasing resource
     flows and the setting of clear deadlines for the EU to meet commitments
     in this regard. The Co-Presidents were also mandated to find an
     appropriate way for the JPA to participate in parliamentary processes
     linked to the UN General Assembly’s review of the MDGs later this year.

      In the plenary, we took the floor in the debates on the MDGs and on
     “exchanges of views” with the Commission and ACP council. An unexpected
     feature of the interaction with Commissioner Michel was strong
     opposition from conservative MEPs from “new” member states to the
     Commissioner’s meeting with President Fidel Castro of Cuba. This drew a
     strong response from several ACP speakers (including ourselves) in
     favour of continued dialogue with Cuba (which is a full ACP member) on
     the contribution it can make to development programmes in ACP
     countries, particularly in the health sector.
      We had previously tabled questions to the ACP and EU councils (on the
     implications of the REACH legislation and on MDGs). The ACP Council’s
     answer to the question on the REACH indicated that the ACP was
     concerned, was looking into the matter and was looking to the South
     African embassy to the EU to provide a lead in this regard.

      The Joint Bureau received a report on follow up letters sent by the
     Co-Presidents in response to matters raised in the Human Rights report
     tabled at the last meeting and other matters raised by Bureau members.
     This indicated no substantial reply had been received on the matters
     concerning human rights issues in the EU. A letter sent to the
     Zimbabwean Speaker on the issue of the detention of Roy Bennet, on the
     suggestion of MEPs, however, provoked a sharp retort from the
     Zimbabwean Ambassador to the effect that the Bureau had no business
     dealing with this matter and that Bennet was being detained in
     accordance with Zimbabwean law.

      As usual Workshops were held on issues pertinent to the host country
     – “The Cotton Sector in Mali” and “Desertification and saving the River
     Niger”. The third workshop was on EPAs (see above). In addition, the
     hosts organized an excursion to Timbouktou on April 17th Mrs Hollander,
     Ambassador Matjila and Mr Labuschagne participated in this. Members of
     the delegation as usual participated in lunches with political groups
     associated with their political parties. These lunches, that have now
     become an established part of the programme, offer an opportunity for
     an exchange of views across the ACP-EU divide with “like minded”
     political groupings.

      REACH Lunch Time Meeting

      Given the importance of the impending EU REACH legislation, its
     potential impact on ACP countries, and the unique opportunity offered
     by the JPA to interact with a range of opinion formers in the European
     Parliament that will ultimately be responsible for the passage of the
     REACH legislation, the delegation organized a working lunch on the
     REACH on April 20th. Practical arrangements were handled by the two
     embassies and the meeting took the form of inputs from Rob Davies and a
     representative of the Malian Ministry of Mines followed by inter-active
     discussion. Dumisile Nhlengethwa chaired the meeting, which was
     attended by representatives of all major parties in the European
     Parliament, and particularly those with a special interest in the
     REACH, a number of ACP parliamentarians and officials and both Co-
     Presidents. We made it clear that we were not opposed, in principle, to
     legislation designed to protect consumers and the environment against
     potentially harmful chemical substances, but were concerned that the
     potential impact in terms of creating a non-tariff barrier to ACP
     exports, including but not only of mineral products. We called for
     exemptions, simplification of procedures and assistance to ACP
     countries to comply. Several of the EU political groups are strongly in
     support of REACH and up to now have seen opposition as special pleading
     by chemical companies seeking to avoid raising safety standards. They
     acknowledge, however, that concerns from developing countries have had
     little impact on the debate in the EU thus far and several participants
     in the lunch meeting indicated a willingness to consider amendments
     that would accommodate at least some ACP concerns.

      The next Bureau and Committee meetings have been scheduled for 12th –
     15th September in Brussels, and the 10th  Joint Parliamentary Assembly
     will take place from 19th to 24th November. The venue for the 10th JPA
     has, however, not been settled. The EU Presidency at the time will be
     Britain, but the Secretariat has not yet been able to secure an
     appropriate venue in Britain. If they do not manage to find one, the
     JPA will be either in Luxembourg or Strasbourg. The provisional
     programme for 2006 was also agreed by the Joint Bureau. Committees  and
     the Bureau will meet in the week of January 23rd; the 11th JPA will be
     in the EU in the week of June 19th; Committees and the Bureau will meet
     again in the week of 11th September and the 12th JPA will be in an ACP
     country in the week of November 20th.

2.    The Speaker

      Letter from the Minister of Education dated 3 June 2005 to the
     Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the
     Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the
     delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of Council on Higher
     Education for 2003-2004:

      Late tabling of Council on Higher Education Annual Report for 2003/04

      I wish to apologise for the fact that the annual report for the
     2003/04 financial year of the Council on Higher Education (CHE) was not
     tabled on time, as required in terms of section 65 of the Public
     Finance Management Act, 1999 (PFMA). The delay in submitting the Annual
     Report was due to corrections that had to be effected in the financial
     statements of the CHE in order to align them with Generally Accepted
     Accounting Practice (GAAP) in terms of the PFMA. I have communicated
     this to the CHE in order to ensure that the same thing will not happen
     again.

      When the Annual Report of the CHE was submitted in October 2004 I did
     not table an explanation, since Parliament was in recess. The Annual
     Report was tabled on the first day after the recess. However, the
     Office of the Auditor-General advised me it was still necessary to
     table an apology.

      I trust that my sincere apology will be accepted.

      Yours sincerely

      signed
      G N M Pandor, MP
      Minister of Education



