---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 18 March 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-03-18
---

WEDNESDAY, 18 MARCH 2005
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 10:00 in the KwaMhlanga Government Complex, Nkangala,
Mpumalanga.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, I have been told that
there will not be any motions today. We now come to the subject for
discussion as printed on the Order Paper. Before we proceed, I would like
to take this opportunity to thank the Deputy President of the Republic of
South Africa, Dr Jacob Zuma, for taking the time to come and address us.
[Applause.]

   ENGAGING OUR PEOPLE IN BUILDING A BETTER SOCIETY, FOUNDED ON RECOGNISED
               HUMAN RIGHTS AND COMMITTED TO SERVICE DELIVERY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces,
hon Premiers, hon members of the National Council of Provinces, hon
Chairperson of Salga, mayors and councillors, traditional leaders, ladies
and gentlemen, I would like to thank you for inviting me to address this
session of the National Council of Provinces taking place in this beautiful
province of Mpumalanga. We must on this day, while recalling the things
that have happened in our history and interaction, recognise the importance
of our being here, part of the process of the NCOP taking Parliament to the
people. I would like to commend the initiative of the NCOP in this regard
in taking Parliament to the people by holding sessions in the provinces. In
doing so, you are truly giving content to the provisions of the
Constitution to ensure that provincial interests are taken into account.

I’ve said before in this very House that our system of government, with its
national, provincial and local spheres, is the best. It might appear at
times cumbersome and difficult to run but the reality is that if you
concentrate power in one point, it can lead to a situation where people far
from the centre feel left out and do not have their issues and concerns
properly addressed.

Democracy is time-consuming, costly and difficult but it is the best way of
governing. The mobility of the National Council of Provinces indicates that
our Parliament and government are serious about the development of a
democracy that is founded on the principles of the participation of the
people. I’m sure, as you have been here, all of you have been able to offer
that opportunity to the people of Mpumalanga, to participate and ask
questions from the Ministers and to talk about their own situation.

As government we are serious about ensuring that government leadership
becomes accessible to the people. As elected representatives of the NCOP,
members also need to be accessible to the public. Our unique democracy is
therefore being consolidated daily, ensuring a wonderful legacy for future
generations. Our democracy is rooted in the traditions of our founding
document, the Freedom Charter, which still remains relevant today almost 50
years after it was adopted at the Congress of the People in Kliptown on 26
June 1955. It is always important to recall that the Congress of the People
was the first of its kind in the history of our country, both in size and
representativity as well as in content, because it encapsulated the type of
government and country the people wanted. It was at this congress that the
people said, and I quote:

      We, the people of South Africa, declare for all our country and world
      to know:


           that South Africa belongs to all who live in it,
           black and white, and that no government can
           justly claim authority unless it is based on
           the will of all the people . . .]

This statement signifies the heart and soul and the very being of what we
were striving to achieve in our country. When you interact with the people
in this manner, you are indeed providing once more an indication that our
country is a model of stable and prospering participatory democracy where
the people do indeed govern.

We have had a week of fruitful, enlightening and, indeed, helpful
deliberations which are going to assist us to improve the delivery of our
programmes to the people. We have considered key topics that directly
affect the lives of our people such as poverty, poverty alleviation, job
creation, provision of water and trade and industrial zone development
issues. I particularly want to commend you for the examination of the
implementability of recently passed local government legislation. It is
vital that Parliament monitors and examines whether the laws that are
passed are implemented successfully. There is no better place to do this
than on the ground in one of the provinces. Going to the provinces, giving
people the opportunity to participate in the process of your monitoring is
one of the best ways this government has introduced for doing so. This
process will sharpen our thinking and deepen our understanding of the
people’s concerns and problems as members of Parliament.

In your provincial sittings you would have discovered many issues that
require the urgent attention of government in each of the three spheres. I
know that you will highlight these issues in your report on these visits
and the debate you will conduct when you adopt the report. What is,
however, crucial is that you continue to monitor the progress being made in
addressing the concerns raised so that the problems are solved and that you
further intervene if it appears necessary.

When the President addressed the NCOP late November last year, he focused
on local government and mentioned challenges that affect local government.
Chief among those was the lack of capacity in local government to deliver
basic services to the people even when resources are available. I would
like hon members to take note of this point because it is one of our
critical challenges facing us in the current period. The challenges that
the President spoke about still remain with us today, as he also indicated
in his state of the nation address. One of the major challenges in our
country is that of capacity in government which impacts on the pace of
government delivery, in other words beyond the local government level. It
is a general problem in all spheres of government.

We await the report to Cabinet due in May by the Forum of SA Directors-
General (Fosad) on the review of the functioning of government system as a
whole and proposals, particularly on the capacity, skills and competence
within the public sector. However, this does not mean that we can sit idle
and wait for that report. Where we see gaps in terms of capacity, we have
to address them now. The issue of capacity confirms the fact that no matter
how correct our policies and vision may be, if we do not have the proper
personnel with the necessary skills and commitment to implement our
policies, all our efforts will be futile. It therefore becomes incumbent
upon us to make sure that we deal with this matter as a key priority. We
need to strengthen partnerships with other stakeholders in our society,
like institutions of higher learning, to check what role they can play in
partnership with our government to resolve this matter of capacity-
building.

We have also realised the need to improve internal communication within the
Public Service to ensure that the public servants understand the mission
and vision and programme of action of our government. Unless public
servants understand the objectives and direction of this government, it
will be difficult to achieve a customer service ethos and people-oriented
Public Service. Our presence here today is an indication of the importance
and high regard in which we hold the citizens of our country. We expect
public servants to treat citizens in the same way as the most important
people in their day-to-day responsibilities. [Applause.]

This need to regard citizens as invaluable clients of the Public Service
applies even more so at the local government level, to which people go
daily for their assistance. There is a common story I always tell when it
comes to this behaviour of the public servants who at times, because they
are given these responsibilities, feel they are bigger than the people and
also develop stiff necks. The neck doesn’t turn like this, but like this,
because they think they are big. [Applause.] That is the challenge that
faces all of us because at the end of the day whatever laws, policies and
programmes, they have to be implemented with the people. It is critical.

I always recall a story when I was young boy and I went to get my reference
book . . .

. . . kwandabazabantu. Ngifica umabhalane uhlezi laphaya, eziqhenya kuhleli
intombi yakhe eduze kwakhe kanti futhi wayesezoshayisa ngehora lesine.
Uyangibuza, ‘Mfana ungubani igama lakho’. Ngithi, ‘NginguGedleyihlekisa’.
Awu, wahleka umuntu. [Uhleko.] Wabiza abanye omabhalane wathi, ‘Ake nizozwa
igama lale nsizwa, ithi iwuGedleyihlekisa’. Uyazi, igama lami leli
engaliqanjwa ubaba alifuni kuhlekisa muntu kodwa yena ulenza ihlaya.
Kwalokhu kuhlekwa nje ngisahlezi ngilindele udompasi wami. Ngaze ngasizwa
yiyo intombi yakhe lena eyathi, ‘Nidlala ngengane’. Yaqonda ebhokisini
yaphenya yalithola igama lami yanginika. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[. . . at Home Affairs. I found the clerk sitting there, displaying his
pride, and his girlfriend was sitting next to him. He was about to knock
off at four o’clock. He asked me: “What is your name, boy?” I said: “I am
Gedleyihlekisa.” The person laughed. [Laughter.] He called the other clerks
and said: “Come and listen to this young man’s name. He says his name is
Gedleyihlekisa.” You know, this is the name given to me by my father. It
does not amuse anybody, but he turned it into a joke. They kept laughing
while I was waiting for my identity document. I was then assisted by his
girlfriend, who said: “You are playing with the kid.” She went straight to
the box to check, found my name and gave it to me.]

We do not want such civil servants . . . [Applause.] . . . because people
come from different areas and backgrounds. The reason why they all come to
that particular office is to get service and it is an important point
because, as I say, whatever good policies we have, if we can’t provide good
service, then they are as good as useless.

I wish to emphasise that the NCOP has a unique role to play with regard to
local government, particularly when the provincial executive needs to
intervene in a particular municipality. In terms of the Constitution such
an intervention must be reported to the NCOP, which also has the power to
end the intervention by failing to approving it. The NCOP also has the
responsibility of reviewing the intervention regularly, thus it is
important that it is reported timeously. However, we need to ensure that
such interventions do not become necessary as-far as the manner is
concerned in which we run our administration. We can do this by assisting
and strengthening local government before the problem reaches a crisis
point. It is imperative that we focus on building capacity, especially in
smaller municipalities, to ensure that basic services such as water and
electricity do reach the poorest of the poor. We believe that the NCOP can
play a critical role in monitoring service delivery in local government
structures.

All the provinces have opened their legislatures and what is running
through all the state of the province addresses by the Premiers is the
commitment to boost provincial economies to ensure sustainable development,
job creation and poverty eradication. The Premiers are also in agreement
about the need to strengthen close co-operation between local government
and the provincial governments as well as building capacity for local
government to deliver. These objectives need to be commended. At the same
time the provinces need to ensure that they develop their capacity to
monitor the programmes that they have adopted. I must warn Premiers that
members of the NCOP will keep track of progress on all the programmes
announced in the provincial action plans unveiled by the Premiers in the
past few weeks. Your monitoring will ensure that provincial government
remains true to the wishes of citizens.

However, Chairperson, I must just say one thing.  The only Premier here is
the Premier of this province and I don’t know where the other Premiers are.
[Applause.] If we do not come to this body that ensures corporate
governance as leaders of provinces, where else do we go? In my view this is
a serious omission by the Premiers of our provinces. I hope that all of us
will take the NCOP seriously and be here when the NCOP is meeting. I am
making this point because I have warned them that what they have announced
in the state of the province addresses and action plans have to be
monitored and they need to know that.

However, we are pleased with the progress made in the provinces, especially
where backlogs were severe. One can mention the Eastern Cape, where
ensuring adequate health services have been a serious challenge. In the
current financial year, government has managed to build five new clinics
and renovated 38 existing ones, while two clinics have been upgraded to
health centres. Forty-four clinics have been given the necessary equipment
to ensure they function more effectively. The province has indicated that
the shortages of doctors and medicines in some clinics and hospitals need
urgent attention. The province will also continue with these programmes to
ensure socio-economic development and better service delivery.

Mpumalanga has reviewed its provincial growth and development strategy and
wants to ensure an alignment of development plans by provincial departments
and local government structures. Gauteng’s five-year plan commits the
government to work tirelessly with the people of Gauteng to achieve the
following objectives: to stimulate faster economic growth and drastically
reduce unemployment; fight poverty and build sustainable and secure
communities; develop healthy, appropriately skilled and productive people;
deepen democracy and nation-building and realise the constitutional rights
of all the people and build an effective and caring government.

North West has scored a number of achievements in the past year, including
successful interventions in municipalities. This has entailed strengthening
institutional matters such as staff placements, performance management and
financial management systems. This is critical, especially if we shift our
focus to improve local government. The province intervened in the Mafikeng
and Mamusa municipalities and continues to administer provincial
interventions in another three municipalities. The province reports that
the financial distress of Lekwa - Teemane has been addressed and the
municipality operates on a positive, equal balance. Equally, Mafikeng’s
cash flow has improved and the municipality is no longer running on an
overdraft. [Applause.]

Limpopo wants to use its strategic location as the heartland of SADC and
gateway to the rest of Africa profitably, in addition to focusing on
building infrastructure, sustainable economic development and boosting
agriculture to capture even the SADC market. I have also noticed a
determination by Limpopo to ensure that prominence is given to Moria City
and the annual ZCC pilgrimage, as is the case in places such as Mecca in
Saudi Arabia and the Vatican City in Rome. [Applause.]

The Western Cape has faced the challenge of healing past divisions and
building a home for all. The province also seeks to build human capital,
particularly amongst our youth, and to accelerate economic growth. There is
also the need to build social capital, with emphasis on the youth and by
intensifying the fight against crime and gang activity and arresting the
proliferation of guns, domestic violence and sexual assault, high-risk
driving as a result of alcohol and drug dependency.

KwaZulu-Natal is also focusing on the healing and normalisation of the
political situation in the province across party-political lines and, to
achieve closure, impact of past political violence, the focus is on
sustainable development, including the use of agriculture, as starting
leverage to fight poverty in rural areas, as well as build infrastructure
to fast-track economic development. As part of redress the province is also
looking at creating a gender representative administration, especially at
senior management level.

All provinces are also expected to highlight the promotion of healthy
styles among all our people and to improve public education around diseases
such as HIV and Aids and diabetes and TB. Our provincial governments are
therefore geared up for a year of intensified activity. Chairperson, I
however want to emphasise that we need always to strive to ensure that the
provincial programmes build on and enhance the programme of action
announced by the President in his state of the nation address. We also
cannot emphasise enough the need to focus energies on local government. We
are convinced that this message has been heard and that we will see a
difference in all provinces.

Chairperson, colleagues, on Monday, 21 March we will be celebrating
International Human Rights Day. Let us on this day honour the memory of
those who laid down their lives fighting for freedom. We will unveil a
monument to the seven young men who were killed mercilessly in Gugulethu in
Cape Town in 1986. [Applause.] We must, on this day, while recalling the
gross human rights violations in Sharpeville, Langa, Soweto, Shobashobane
and many other areas, also celebrate the road we have travelled in
entrenching a human rights culture in our country to ensure that never
again a state uses its resources to kill its own people. [Applause.]

Once again, Chairperson and hon members, I wish to congratulate you on
bringing Parliament to the people of Mpumalanga. Together we can continue
to lay the foundations for a prosperous, united, caring South Africa for
all our diverse but united people. I believe that our action adds value to
what we are doing in this country in nation-building by engaging with the
people, by listening to the people and explaining to the people what their
work and responsibilities and their responsibilities to our government are.
Indeed, ours is to account to them. I thank you.

SIHLALO WE NCOP: Sekela likaMgcini Sihlalo we-NCOP, Sekela likaMongameli
welizwe loke laseSewula Afrika uMnu Jacob Zuma, uPremier wethu
ohloniphekile kakhulu eMpumalanga uThabang Makwetla abekho ke abanye
aboPremier angekhe ngibabize, ngibiza lo oqakathekile okhona phakathi
kwethu ophethe iMpumalanga. [Iwahlo.]

Useselisokana mutjha ngimbonile nanyana akhambako uyabonakala bonyana
unamandla wokusebenza wokudosa adosele phambili. Wabona umuntu athi
nakakhambako arhorhe iinyawo wazi bona uzafika kade lapho ayakhona
akazufika msinya. Lo uyakhambisa ngimbonile ngibe naye nangoMvulo
nangoLwesithathu. Amakhansela woke nabo Executive Mayor abakhona, amaMPLs,
Ingwenyama uMakhosoke 11 kanye noMayisha 111 bayede! Amakhosi woke akhona
ngiyanilotjhisa sitjha ninoke nihlezi ngaphakathi kwaleNdlu namhlanje
nivakatjhelwe yiNCOP. [Iwahlo.]

Mina ke namhlanje Sekela likaMongameli ngithanda ukukhuluma ngezinto
ezimbalwa engizizwile nangifika lapha eMpumalanga khulu khulu kile ndawo
yaKwaMhlanga. Ngizokhuluma izinto ekade zikhulunywa babantu, ngizizwele
ngezindlebe zami bonyana abantu balila ngani. Okhunye nangikukhulumako
ningatjho bonyana ngiyathukana ngoba ngizabe ngikhuluma izinto ezikhulunye
babantu angithi nani nibezwile bonyana bebathini.  Manje ngoba uPremier
kade angekho angasinathi isikhathi soke kunye noSekela Mongameli ngifuna
bezwe bonyana besikhuluma ngani, nasisuka lapha ngoba soke siyosebenza
sinilungiselele izinto enilila ngazo. [Iwahlo.]
Uthe uSekela likaMongameli nakakhulumako wathi the people shall govern.
Ngesikhethu abantu bazabusa, akuzuku busa thina, thina sithunywe ngini
bonyana siyobusa, nanisithumileko kufanele sibuye sizothatha lezizinto
esinibusa ngazo sizohlola bonyana sinibusa ngefanelo na. Namhlanje size
phakathi kwenu, sizokhulumisana nani ukuze sizwe bonyana sinibusa ngefanelo
na the people shall govern, niyabusa namhlanje akubusi thina, kubusa nina.
Nangathana bekubusa thina sisodwa ngasizihlalele le eCape Town sitshwenywa
yini? Nangathana bekubusa thina ngasizihlalele ePretoria ngoba ayikho into
esitshwenyako. Kodwana ngoba kunento esitshwenyako ukuthi kubusa nina size
lapha namhlanje ukuzokhuluma nani nokuzobonisana nani.

This is the Parliament of the people. Yi-Palamende yabantu lapho abantu
kufuneka bakhulume khona. Embusweni otjhaphulukile, lo owalwelwa ngabantu
badela imizimba yabo, bathulula iingazi zabo, bafa, bafela bonyana
sitjhaphuluke, lo mbuso wenu otjhaphulukileko its your own Parliament.
[Iwahlo.] Namhlanje silethe iPalamende ebantwini bekhethu, ngikutjho lokho
futhi ngesibindi ngingakhathezeki nehliziweni.

USekela Mongameli usikhuthazile bonyana siragele phambili ngalomsebenzi
ngoba kufanele sizokhuluma nani, ngini abasikhethileko, singanibalekela.
Nibuzile imibuzo siniphendulile, nivezile iinkhalo zenu, sazilalela,
nisitjelile bonyana nifunani, sizwile izinto ezintathu lezo ningizwile
bonyana ngithini angithi? Embusweni wekululeko sifuna kube nje. Sifuna
ukuthi abantu bakhulume batjhaphulukile, nginizwile benitjhaphulukile
akakho omunye okade akhuluma athuthumele lapha ni. Ngathana bekusikhathi
lesa sakade beningazowuvula umlomo, ngabe banijamele ngeensamboko
ngaphandle lapha balalele bonyana nithini. [Iwahlo.] Abanye benu ngathana
selebalele ejele bathi nidelela aboMahlanga, nidelela aboPrem ier hlalani
phasi nikhuluma njani. Nikhulumile nasitjela, nasibetha nina ngokwenu
sihlezi lapha etafuleni salalela sathi ya! Abantu bekhekhethu
batjhaphulukile namhlanje. Bekwajabula nehliziyo yami ingathi yezeswe
ngamafutha. [Iwahlo.] Ngoba naningakhulumiko asazi bonyana nifunani,
umntwana ongaliliko ufela embelekweni, thina size lapha ukuzokuzwa bonyana
nilila ngani. Nasisuka lapha sibopha amabrugu, ibhande siyaliqinisa
sikhuphule amakowusi sikhambe siyothatha izinto enizifunako sizilethe
ebantwini. [Iwahlo.]

Niyatjhagala namhlanje, nitjhagala kamnandi ephasini leSewula Afrika loke
nawuthatha ikoloyi uye la ufuna khona ngeengazi zabanye abasilwelwako
akusimnandi nakunjalo? Awukabotjhelelwa lapha kwaNdebele bonyana uhlale
lapha, utjhaphulukile bonyana ukhambe inarha yoke. Nabo musi ubumnandi
okhunye kanti sifunani? Usebenze njengobanyana kade basebenza ekade
basiphethe, usukhambe uyofuna umsebenzi lapho ufuna khona. Nabakuqatjhako
eWestern Cape bakuqatjhe usebenze, nabakuqatjhako le eNorthern Cape ukhambe
uyosebenza, nabakuqatjhako eLimpopo ukhambe uyosebenza, nabakuqatjhako
ngaphetjheya ukhambe uyosebenza akusimnandi nakunjalo? Solo sakokorana
lapha sibekiwe bathi kheje nijame lapho, solo sajamako sikokorene njalo.
Namhlanje umbuso wekhethu usitjhaphululile. [Iwahlo.]

Nanzi izinto ezikhulunywe babantu, ngithanda ukuzibeka bonyana nizizwe
kuhle nalabo ekade bangeko abanye benilovile phakathi kweveke khange nize.
Abantu balile ngokuthi bayatjhoda ngezinye izinto. Into engijabulisileko
noma kade balila ngezinto engizozibala lezi, bajabule khulu abantu ukuthi
umbuso uyasebenza, basiwa ukuthi sigijime godu ngamandla basipha namandla
wokuthi sigijime silungise okuseleko. Nilile ngeendlwana zokuthi
nisaphumela ngaphandle abanye nakutlhogeka bazithume basithela ngemithi
bazisule ngamatje nangotjani. [Ihleko.] [Iwahlo.] Balile ngalokho. Abanye
balile ngokuthi sirhorha iinyawo iindlu zabo azakhiwa kuhle ezinye
ziyakhiwa azipheli. Yinto abantu abalile ngayo bengihlezi la ngithe du
ngibalalele. Abanye balile ngamanzi khulu khulu amanzi nilile ngawo
nginizwile. [Iwahlo.] Abantu balile ngeendlela bathi iindlela azikhambeki.
[Iwahlo.] Zizinto engizizwileko lezi.

Lalelanike, izolo bengino Trevor Manuel ophethe iimali zeSewula Afrika
zoke, kade ala KwaMhlanga izolo entambama angithi nginitjelile, uzile
wazosipha imali. [Iwahlo.] Imali ekade siyiphasisa izolo besiyiphasisela
amaphrovinsi woke hayi iMpumalanga. [Iwahlo.] Woke amaphrovinsi ukuthi
azothola imali engaka, iinhlangano zepolitiki woke weNCOP ahlangane
iwuphasisile umthetho loyo izolo. Nanzi izinto ezivele lapho lokha uTrevor
Manuel nakakhulumako, udade uMEC Coleman ukhona la kade akhona sinaye.
UTrevor Manuel uthe imadlana ezabakhona umnyaka lo yokuthi laba abasithela
ngemithi bayo khupha ubulongwe lapha emangweni izakuphela. [Iwahlo.] U-MEC
ukhulumile nokuthi nemali yokunikela uMEC weZindlu encanyana izabakhona
ukuthi arhabe arhelebhe labo abanganazindlu ukuthi baqhubekele phambili.
[Iwahlo.]

UTrevor Manuel usiphile imali yokuthi kutlhogonyelwe leziindawo ezisatlhoga
amanzi usiphile nayo imali yamanzi. [Iwahlo.] UTrevor Manuel usiphile godu
imali yokuthi amakhansela la ekade nilila ngawo izolo bakwazi ukukhamba
balungise iindlela. Lalelani ke nikwazi ke lokhu ukuthi amaMEC wala
eMpumalanga asayohlala phasi aqale bona baphiwe malini lokhu
engikukhulumako ukuthi imadlana ikhona okulungisekako unyaka lo
bazokulingisa msinya nginethemba elipheleleko kilokho. [Iwahlo.]
Okutlhayelako godu sizokuqala emnyakeni ozako, bazakuthi nabahlanganeko
baqale bona kutlhayela lokhu nalokha bakubambe msinya.

Abazikuzikghona zoke izinto lezi ngelanga linye ngifuna nizwisise kulikho,
imadlana yona siyitholile ingesikhwameni sabo yaziwa ngibo bonyana
iyosebenza kuphi, namapriority aphethe ngibo banizwile nanikhulumako.

Nangingena endabeni yamakhansela msinyana. Makhansela nizwile abantu balile
ngani khulukhulu kodwana angikholwa bonyana noke ningcolile, lokho khona
angikukholwa. Bathe nivilapha khulu anisebenzi abanye bebathi
akunamakhensela lapha ni. Angikholwa bonyana kunjalo. Kodwana nginethemba
bonyana babili bathathu mhlombe bakhona abavilaphako, abavilaphako ke
siyanibawa bonyana umbuso ophetheko namhlanje uthi boke abarholi kufuneka
nihlangane nabantu nikhulumisane nabo. Noma kubudisi noma kumnandi sikhambe
sibatjele bonyana la akukalungi sizolungisa kuyeza ningababalekela.
[Iwahlo.]

Kodwana nani Bantu ningathathi amatje amakhansela nakathi amanzi awakafiki
nibarhandlhe ngamatje, asisebenzi njalo, sibaphe umsebenzi sibathume ukuthi
bayosebenza. Abomenenjara bamakhansela sizwile bonyana kukhona abanye
abazibhadela imali enengi edlula nekaMongameli, sikuzwile lokho. Manje
siyanibawa bona imali ethuliweko izolo nethulwe ngumama uColeman
eMpumalanga lezo mmali ezinikelwa abantu asizisebenziseni zikhambe ziye
ebantwini singazifaki ngeenkhwameni zethu. [Iwahlo.] Abantu balile khulu
ngendaba yobukhohlakali, kakhulukazi balila ngale uSekela Mongameli akade
akhuluma ngayo iPublic Service.

Siyanibawa boke abakhona lapha abasebenzako ukuthi imali leyo nayifika
lapha izele ukuthi izorhelebha umphakathi ayikezi ukuthi izongena
eenkhwameni zenu, ayikezi ukuthi nenze ubukhohlakali kubantu ukuthi
nawuzothola ikontraka mdele sikunikele ilitho utho le ikontraka ayikazeli
lokho. Izele ukuzosegbenza. Elinye igama engifuna ukuliphakamisa mngibonile
uMEC weZindlu lapha kuTelevision amaveke aphelileko, akhamba aqala izindlu
ezimaratha ezingakapheli, abanye bathela esilebhe babaleke nemali leyo,
abanye bathathe imali leyo bayifake eenkhwameni. Hayi mani masani ukwenza
njalo ni. Imali leyo akusiyo yenu ngeyo kwakha izindlu yakhele abantu,
ayikwenzela bona niyothenga amaMercedes Benz abantu batlhoge izindlu
ayikenzelwa lokho ni. [Iwahlo.]

Ngiyajabula MEC ngoba uthe uzobalandelela, uzobabetha, futhi uzobafuna
babuye bazoqedela izindlu lezo. Ngikareke khulu emoyeni wami ngakareka,
balandelele. Namhlanjesi sikhona lapha sikupha amandla nawukgona ukubabopha
ubabophe bakhambe baye ejele. [Iwahlo.] Ngoba badle imali yabantu,
ayikalungi into leyo ayikalungi. Umbuso awakwazi bona nawukhuphe imali
bonyana imali izorhelebha abantu nina niyisebenzise budlabha. Silapha nje
sizoqala izinto ezinengi. Nanisuka la nithuka umbuso nithi umbuso awenzi
litho kanti umbuso imali uyilethile iphelele endleleni. Leyo mali ngeya
Bantu akusiyo yenu, boke abanza izinto ezingcolileko ezifana nalezo
siyowuqinisa umthetho, sizasiqinisa isandla. Noma ungabaleka sizakuthola
ngeMercedes yakho leyo. [Iwahlo.]

Abantu balile ngokobanyana kusenezikolo ezingathathi abantwana ngoba
abantwana abanazo iimali zesikolo. Kanti matitjhere iindlebe zenu lezi
ziyephi [Ihleko.] Kubayini nasikhulumako simubuso nithathe ivadi nivale
iindlebe zenu lezi, nizivalelani? UNgqonqgotjhe weZefundo unitjelile bona
every child has got a right to education. Akunamntwana ozohlala ekhaya
batjho akanamali akanamali yokubhadala imali yesikolo nakanganamali mvulele
umnyango azofunda. [Iwahlo.] Unina bano yise bazakwenza isibawo
sokulibalelwa batjho bonyana abanamali, vulelani umntwana loyo akhambe aye
esikolweni. [Kuphele isikhathi.] Batjho isikhathi sami siphelile,
ngiyajabula abantu baKwaMhlanga sithe nasikhuluma nani nathi namanzi
nizowabhadela, neensizakalo nizozibhadela, naso into esiyifunako nedi
baninikele izinto enizifunako umbuso sizakwenza ngamandla. Ngiyathokoza
salani kuhle. [Iwahlo.] (Translation of isiNdebele speech follows.)

[The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy
President of the Republic of South Africa, Mr Jacob Zuma, and our hon
Premier of Mpumalanga, Thabang  Makwetla, other Premiers are not present,
therefore I will not mention them. I am only mentioning the important one,
who is in our midst, who is heading Mpumalanga. [Applause.]

He is still a young man. I noticed by the way he walks that he has the
courage to work, the courage to pull ahead. If you see a person walking
reluctantly, you must know that he will reach his destination very late.
But this one walks very fast. I noticed this when I was with him on Monday
and Wednesday. All councillors and executive mayors present, MPLs, your
Majesty, Makhosoke II as well as Mayisha III, bayede! All kings present, I
greet you all, and also the members of the community seated in this House
whom the NCOP is visiting today. [Applause.]

Deputy President, I would like to speak about a few issues today that I
heard about on my arrival here in Mpumalanga, more especially here in
KwaMhlanga. I will talk about what is being said by people. I personally
heard what people are complaining about. When I speak about some of the
issues, you must not say I am insulting, because I will be saying what
people are saying. You also heard what they said. Since the Premier and the
Deputy President were not present throughout, I would like them to know
what we were talking about, because when we leave here we are going to work
and prepare things concerning the complaints. [Applause.]

When the Deputy President speaks, he says “the people shall govern”. The
people shall govern and not us, we have been sent by you to go and govern.
If you sent us, we must come back and take up the matters that we are
governing for you and check whether we are governing correctly. Today we
are amongst you; we came to talk to you and check whether we are governing
for you correctly. You are governing today; not us, but you. If we were
still the only people governing, we would have been in Cape Town by now,
because what could be bothering us? If we were still governing alone, we
would have been in Pretoria by now, because there would be nothing
bothering us. Since something is bothering us, and the fact is that you are
the ones who are governing, we came here today to speak to you and share
ideas with you.

This is the Parliament of the people, where people are supposed to speak. A
democratic government, for which people devoted their being and fought,
shed their blood and died so that we could be free - this free government
is your Parliament. [Applause.] Today we brought the Parliament to our
people. I say that with from deep within, without any qualms.

The Deputy President encourages us to continue with this work, because we
must come and talk to you, you are the ones who elected us; we must not run
away from you. You have asked questions and we answered you, you have
raised your concerns, and we listened, you told us what you wanted, and we
heard the issues. You heard what I said. Is this not so? That is what we
want in a democratic government. We want people to speak freely. I heard,
when you spoke, that you were free and no one here was trembling. If it
were still the previous era you would not have opened your mouths; they
would have stood outside with shamboks and listened to what you were
saying. [Applause.] Some of you would already have been incarcerated on
allegations that you were despised Mahlangus. We would have heard: “You
despised Premiers, sit down. What are you saying?” You have spoken, you
told us; you criticised us while we were seated around the table here, we
listened and said: Yes! Our people are free today! My heart felt warm.
[Applause.] If you do not talk, we do not know what you need. If one does
not seek assistance, he will not be assisted. We came here to hear what
your complaints are. When we leave here, we will tighten our belts and pull
up our socks and go and fetch the things that you want and bring them to
you. [Applause.]

Today you go around throughout the Republic of South Africa when you take a
car and drive wherever you want to through the blood of the people who
fought for us. Is that not good? You are not obliged to stay here in
KwaNdebele only, you are free to move throughout the Republic. That is
having a good time. What else do we want? You must work, because those who
are governing us are working. You may go and look for employment wherever
you want to. If you are employed in the Western Cape, you must go and work
there; if you are employed in the Northern Cape, you must go and work
there; if you are employed in Limpopo, you must go and work there; if you
are employed overseas, you must go and work there. Is that not wonderful?
We waited as we were told to. Today our government is free. [Applause.]

Here are some concerns raised by people that I would like to mention so
that you can hear them well, even those who were not present at the time.
Some of you were absent during the week. You did not come. People
complained that they experienced a shortage of certain services. What
excited me, although they were complaining about services - which I am
about to mention – was that people were so happy that the government was
working. They requested us once again to move faster and finalise what is
outstanding and they gave us the power to move. Concerns were raised about
sanitation, telling us that when some of them have to relieve themselves
they have to hide behind trees and wipe themselves with stones and grass.
[Laughter.] [Applause.] That was their complaint. There were some
complaints about our being reluctant to build houses and that some of the
houses were not properly built. That is what people complained about while
I was sitting here listening to them. I heard some serious complaints about
water. [Applause.] People complained that roads were very bad. [Applause.]
This is what I heard.

Then listen to this. Yesterday I was with Trevor Manuel, the Finance
Minister in South Africa, who was here at KwaMhlanga yesterday evening - I
told you, haven’t I – and he had come to give us money. [Applause.]
Yesterday`s Budget Vote was for all the provinces, not only Mpumalanga.
[Applause.] All the provinces will receive certain amounts. Political
parties and the NCOP together passed that law yesterday. These are issues
that came to light when Trevor Manuel delivered his speech, MEC Coleman is
present now, and she was present then. Trevor Manuel said the money that
would be made available in this financial year is for assisting those who
hide behind trees when they want to relieve themselves, as this must come
to an end. [Applause.] The MEC said funds would be allocated for housing to
the MEC so that he could come to the aid of those who have no houses.
[Applause.]

Trevor Manuel gave us money to take care of the places where there is still
a shortage of water and money to supply water. [Applause.] Trevor Manuel
also gave us money that - councillors, you were complaining about this
yesterday - could go towards the repair of roads. Listen, then you would
know that the MECs of Mpumalanga are still going to sit down and check how
much they have received, but what I am saying is that with that little
amount they will be able to do what is possible, I am quite sure about
that. [Applause.] We will see what shortages there are in the next
financial year. When they come together, they will see what has fallen
short and soon cover it. They cannot afford to do all these things in one
day, and I want you to understand that.

We at least received a little bit of money. It is in their pockets, and
they know where they are going to use it. They also have priorities, as
they heard you when you were speaking.

I shall talk about the issue of the councillors quickly. Councillors, you
have heard the concerns of people, but I do not believe that all of you are
corrupt; I just do not believe that. They said you were very lazy, that you
did not want to work, while others said there were no councillors here. I
do not believe it is so. But I believe that two or three may be lazy, and
to those who are lazy, we say that the government of today wants leaders to
meet people and speak to them. In difficult times and in good times, we
must inform them. We must tell people when we run into difficulties, but
reassure them we will rectify matters; you must not run away from them.
[Applause.]

But you, the community, must not throw stones at councillors when they tell
you that water has not yet arrived. We do not work like that; we must give
them work and tell them to do it. We heard that town managers paid
themselves more than the President’s salary; we heard that. Now we request
you to use those moneys given to us yesterday and those given by Coleman
from Mpumalanga - those monies which have been given to the community -
appropriately and not put them into our pockets. [Applause.] People
complained a great deal about corruption, they complained a great deal
about the Public Service, which has been mentioned by the Deputy President.

We request all of you officials present here; when that money arrives it
must help the community - it must not be put into your pockets. It has not
been given to perpetuate corruption; if someone is supposed to get a
contract and must pay something in order to get that contract, it is not
for that. It has been given to be used appropriately. Another issue I want
to raise the fact that I saw the housing MEC on television few weeks ago,
walking around, checking unfinished houses, where people have just laid the
foundation and run away with the money, and others have put that money into
their pockets. No, you must not do that. That money is not yours, it is for
building houses for people, it is not for you to buy a Mercedes Benz, while
people are without houses. [Applause.]

I am happy, MEC, because you said you were going to follow up on them,
punish them and that you would want them to finish those houses. I am happy
in my soul; follow up on them. Today we here are giving you the authority,
if that is possible, to arrest them; let them go to prison ... [Applause.]
. . . because they misappropriated people`s  money, and that is not right.
Government cannot pay out money to assist people and let you misappropriate
it. We are here to inspect many things. You will be insulting government if
you say that government is doing nothing when government had paid the money
out, but it disappeared on the way. That money belongs to the people and
not to you, all those who are committing dirty deeds. We are going to amend
the law to be strict on such issues. Even though you may run away in your
Mercedes, we will find you. [Applause.]

People are complaining about schools that still do not take in children
because they do not have the school fees. Teachers, where are your ears?
[Laughter.] Why do you close your ears when the government is speaking, why
do you close them? The Minister of Education told you that every child has
the right to education. No child will stay at home because he has no school
fees. If he does not have money, open the door for him to come in and
learn. [Applause.] His parents will apply for exemption, because they do
not have the money. Open the door for that child to go to school.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Hon Chair, your time
has expired.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: They say my time has expired. I am happy for
you, people of KwaMhlanga. When we spoke to you, you said you would also
pay for water and services, which is what we want if you are given what you
need. The government will also work hard. I thank you. Goodbye.
[Applause.]]

Mr T S P MAKWETLA (Premier of Mpumalanga): Chairperson, it is clear that
the Chairperson - who is the Deputy Chairperson - was not informed that
there was an arrangement between me and the last speaker that he would use
some of my time. He shouldn’t have been stopped from continuing with his
speech. [Laughter.]

Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, hon M J Mahlangu, hon
Deputy President, hon members and delegates of the NCOP, representatives of
Salga, colleagues and comrades, today’s sitting is a culmination of a week-
long programme of hard work by the NCOP in what is undoubtedly becoming a
colourful component of the legacy we have established for ourselves as a
country of taking government to the people.

Our province wants you to know that we indeed consider ourselves privileged
to have been accorded the opportunity to play host to today’s outing of the
NCOP, away from its regular seat. Your commitment to the spirit of our
Constitution of the Republic to build a people-centred democracy will
remain an inspiration to the public representatives and the people of
Mpumalanga. As we round off the NCOP programme in Mpumalanga through this
sitting, allow me to take this opportunity to put the spotlight briefly on
some of the challenges of the day that we face as provinces.

I believe the visit of the NCOP to our province was made even more exiting
for members of the NCOP, because on the eve of the visit and during the
course of this week, the province witnessed the first violent mass protest
in two of our municipalities. Barricades were mounted in the Emalahleni
Municipality last week, and at Secunda in Govan Mbeki Municipality on
Tuesday this week. Limited as these actions were, they are ironic because
as we work increasingly to take government to the people through numerous
initiatives such as this one, there are people out there who do things that
suggest that they have not been heard.

This development begs a whole host of questions we must ask ourselves. And
the question we must ask ourselves is: Is our democracy actually working?
What is wrong with our municipalities? Are we breeding political
opportunism and struggle copycats within our communities, and if it is so;
why is it the case?

Indeed there can be no denying that a lot must still be done in many of our
communities. As the President said in his state of the nation address, we
must intensify our work to provide clean and running water to all our
households by 2008. We must provide decent and safe sanitation for all. We
must ensure that free basic electricity is provided to all with minimum
delay. We must battle to ensure that all citizens have access to affordable
medicines in refurbished hospitals with sufficient professionals,
especially in the rural areas.

As we roll out these programmes, it is important that we should distinguish
objective from subjective weaknesses in our work. Again, as the President
said, and I quote:

      We must also make a determined effort to educate our people that our
      country does not have the resources immediately to meet simultaneously
      all the admittedly urgent needs of the people, especially the poor.

A lot must be done. We all agree together with our municipalities to
realise the ideal situation regarding our machinery of government. Indeed
we must expand the community development workers’ programme. We must roll
out multi-purpose community centres. We must sustain the institution of
imbizos and root the spirit of Batho Pele within our Public Service.


The biggest challenge we agree confronting our country in its second decade
of freedom is the implementation of our policies and visions for our
country. The capacities of our municipalities must be viewed in that
context. Among the things we believe we must do in our province, and the
same I would imagine applies in other provinces as well, is to take stock
of the capacities of our municipalities, including how many of these
municipalities actually do have full-time councillors.

As our communities are stressed and distraught about the lack of services
and what is perceived to be failures on the part of municipalities. Many of
us may not know that some of these municipalities don’t even have full-time
councillors, not even their mayors. [Applause.]


It is important that, as we tackle the next decade, as we address the
capacities of implementing our programmes, we must review some of the
decisions we started with, rightfully so, but on the basis of the
experience we have gained over the last 10 years. [Applause.]


It is clear that much more has to be done in order to bring government
closer to people. However, as we are gathered in this sitting of the NCOP
today, we would all agree that the snowballing, violent and mass protests
within our communities as a result of a whole range of grievances,
accompanied by demands that some councillors must resign presents a
difficult phenomenon to understand because our country is actually on the
eve of local government elections.
We have fought so hard for our democracy. We have fought so hard for the
right and space as South Africans to handle our business in a manner that
respects one another, in the manner that respects the feelings and the
needs of the people that it does not make sense, when that system is in
place, and especially with the pressures that are on the local government
municipalities on the eve of elections, we should have violent protests
seeking the immediate resignation of councillors.


The natural thing to happen; what we should do in our communities where we
are not satisfied with the performance of those who have been councillors
is to make sure that they are not given a second chance through democratic
procedures that we have established, through elections, for which many of
our brothers, many of our sisters, or our parents have made the supreme
sacrifice so that we could have a democratically run country. [Applause.]


Those councillors who have done things that disappointed us, those who have
actually in some instances committed criminal offences; we must make sure
that we use the democratic process to unseat them. [Applause.] It cannot
be, as the President said in the state of the nation address:


    It cannot be accepted that we should use methods that borders on
    criminality to resolve our public problems.


Indeed, we are a country that is still in its early stages of democracy.
Our democracy is still in the process of solidifying. We should not do
things that erode our democratic dispensation, because indeed it is very
easy for that to happen.


Once we, as communities, believe that the culture of using violence to
impose our point of view on others works, we should realise that we are
actually standing on a slippery slope, because in principle there is no
difference from any other person who has acceptable channels available in
order to redress their problems but seek to resort to violence to impose
their views on others. That is what terrorism is all about.

The challenges that we confront as provinces are to make sure that our
municipalities meet the demands of our community. We take them very
seriously. As the Deputy President has said, programmes that provinces
announced a few weeks ago are not documents to gather dust on our shelves.
And we accept the responsibility the NCOP carries to make sure that
pressure is mounted continuously on us so that we indeed deliver on our
promises. With those limited remarks, thank you very much, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN (Free State): Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon
Premier and MECs, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, today I would like to
confirm a number of truths, and at the same time dispel a few myths about
our economic performance as a country. The ANC-led government has put in
place an economic system that has benefited everyone in this country.

As stated by the President, and confirmed by the Minister of Finance:

      Our country has never in its entire history enjoyed such confluence of
      encouraging possibilities.


In plain language, for the very first time in our history, the possibility
of sharing in the wealth of this country and in the fruits of our
liberation is open and available to all our people to enjoy. To this end
this government has put in place macroeconomic policies that have allowed
our economy to grow at an average of 3,2% per annum over the past four
years.

These policies have also contributed to the longest growth period in the
post-Second World War period, and all indications are that this increase in
growth should be sustainable and even improved well into the future. The
improvement in South Africa’s overall economic performance has allowed for
greater investor and consumer confidence, as well as an increase in real
income per person. It further also allowed the state to spend more on
fighting poverty and inequality, and it particularly allowed for more
social spending on projects to bring about equality and ensure
redistribution.

Over the past five years, government has increased spending on social
security programmes by 9,5% to almost 14% of consolidated noninterest
expenditure. Whilst we have managed to reach a significant portion of the
poor, it is a well-known fact that there are many of our poor and
vulnerable people, especially in the deep rural areas, who do not yet
benefit from their constitutionally guaranteed rights to access social
grants and other forms of social assistance.

However, this situation is bound to change, with increased allocation for
the administration of social grants, and with the eradication of corruption
in the Public Service. An undeniable truth is that many South Africans are
still trapped in the second economy, a mainly informal, marginalised,
unskilled economy, populated by unemployment and those unemployable in the
formal sector. These people more often than not do not benefit from the
consistent growth and prosperity present in the South African first
economy.

Government is committed to empower all South Africans and to create an
environment where all people can reap the benefits of the fruits of
liberation. In this regard our ANC-led government has spent over R1,5
billion to create 76 000 job opportunities through the Expanded Public
Works Programme. It was reported in December 2004 that the Expanded Public
Works Programme created 3 309 jobs in Mpumalanga, and 1 374 jobs in the
Free State.

Let me reiterate, since the Expanded Public Works Programme was launched in
Mpumalanga in September 2004, it created nearly 3 300 jobs in just three
months. [Applause.] We should bear in mind that the MEC promised in June
2004 that 10 000 jobs would be created through the Expanded Public Works
Programme by the end of March 2005. We believe that we are on course to
meet this target.

Allow me to now turn to the question of Black Economic Empowerment. We all
agree with the President that this programme of opening up the economic
opportunities to black people should not benefit only a few.

Aan die ander kant raak ’n mens ook nou moeg van die opposisie wat elke
tweede dag dieselfde deuntjie sing: “Black Economic Empowerment only
benefits the elite few.”


Dit is eenvoudig net nie waar nie. Honderde, selfs duisende, klein en
medium ondernemings het alreeds baat gevind by regeringsprojekte en
–kontrakte, veral in die boubedryf, met die verskaffing van dienste en
verwante industrieë in al die provinsies.
Dit is verstaanbaar dat die DA nie daarvan bewus sal wees nie, aangesien
hulle nie in voeling is met die gemeenskap van die tweede ekonomie nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Die Vryheidsmanifes stel dit duidelik: “Almal sal deel in die rykdom van
die land.” Die ANC is verbind hiertoe in die ekonomiese plan vir Suid-
Afrika en binne die bepalings van die Grondwet. Vir té lank is die
meerderheid Suid-Afrikaners ontneem van geleenthede om sinvol betrokke te
wees by die ekonomie. Armoede kan slegs effektief aangespreek word indien
geleenthede geskep word vir meer Suid-Afrikaners om ekonomies aktief te
wees, en om werkskeppers te word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[On the other hand we are also now getting tired of the opposition party
who sings the same old tune every second day: “Black economic empowerment
only benefits the elite few.”


This is simply not true. Hundreds, even thousands, of small and medium
enterprises have already benefited from government projects and contracts,
especially in the building industry, with the provision of services and
related industries in all the provinces.

It is understandable that the DA will not be aware of this; they are not in
touch with the community of the second economy. [Interjections.]

The Freedom Charter clearly states: “Everyone shall share in the riches of
the country.” The ANC is committed to this in the economic plan for South
Africa and in terms of the provisions of the Constitution. For too long the
majority of South Africans were denied opportunities to be meaningfully
involved in the economy. Poverty can be effectively addressed only if the
opportunities are created for more South Africans to be economically
active, and to become job creators.]

The Aveng Black Economic Empowerment deal in September 2004, where Aveng
sold 25% of Grinaker-LTA and Trident Steel to Qakazana Investment Holdings,
is an example of how Black Economic Empowerment can be used to enrich
people across the broad spectrum of South Africa. Seventy-one per cent of
the consortium that owns Qakazana is broad-based. Broad-based in this
instance refers to a community trust, a women’s empowerment trust and a
trust for employees. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Order! Can I just make two
announcements? Those people outside are making noise. I want the police to
do their job. We are not in a rally here. We are in Parliament. Secondly,
all speakers, you have the speakers’ list. There is a waiting seat right
here on my right-hand side, please take your cue accordingly so that we can
save time.

Mr M MABUYAKHULU (KwaZulu-Natal): Thank you Chairperson, Deputy President,
hon delegates of the NCOP, all the distinguished guests, the Premier of
Mpumalanga and our colleagues who are MECs, let me start by conveying my
apologies on behalf of my Premier, S’bu Ndebele. The Premier is unable to
be here today because of a bereavement in the family. Tomorrow, he will be
laying to rest his sister and it is for this reason that he was unable to
join this very august, important meeting today. I also want to stand before
you to convey our condolences to the late Inkosi Wellington Hlengwa, who
was our Deputy Speaker, who actually passed away under very tragic
circumstances during the course of this week.

The topic that we are debating today is engaging our people in building a
better society founded on recognised human rights and committed to service
delivery. Yesterday, on behalf of my Premier, I had the privilege of
participating in the Men’s Summit held in Durban from 15 March. This Men’s
Summit is the first national Men’s Summit that has ever been held, and
brought together government, civil society organisations, the religious
sector and other indigenous committee formations, including especially the
!Xu and Kweh from the San community. It is important that I convey to this
very important august House, the NCOP, a declaration that was adopted at
that Men’s Summit, which I was then requested to pass on to you,
Chairperson, so that therefore, in return, you can pass it on to all the
provinces in our country.

The Men’s Summit focused on issues of gender equality. It grappled with
matters that are very critical in which men can make a difference. It is
indeed a subject that is very critical in our country, particularly at this
stage of transition. We in KwaZulu-Natal say that indeed all of us must
take a leaf out of this declaration’s book. We must read it and actually
begin to implement some of the most important principles that are embodied
in this declaration. When we deal with issues of delivery, it is imperative
we ensure that all our people are given an opportunity to turn their lives
around.

Sithi-ke kubalulekile kule Ndlu yakho ehloniphekile Sihlalo ukuba uma
sikhuluma sithi sifuna kubonakale umehluko kubantu bakithi kulesi sikhathi
sikahulumeni wentando yeningi, asiqinisekise ukuthi umehluko uyenzeka.
KwaZulu-Natali kulo nyaka esikuwona ngasohlangothini lokwakhiwa kwezindlu
sesingasho ukuthi, noma unyaka ungakapheli, sesikwazile kumanje ukwakhela
abantu baKwaZulu-Natali izindlu eziyi-32 000. [Ihlombe.] Sithi-ke, lokhu
kunesidingo sokuthi kuqhubeke futhi kube kuningi esikwenzayo ukuqinisekisa
ukuthi ngempela izimpilo zabantu bakithi ziba ngcono.

KwaZulu-Natali, siyazi ukuthi sinemikhandlu yomasipala enga-51. Kule
mikhandlu enga-51, enye yezinto esesiyenzile ngohlelo lolu lukazwelonke
sibambisene nohulumeni bezifunda esilubiza ngokuthi uhlelo lukazibambele
ngokwethu “Hands on Approach Programme Project Consolidate” komasipala
abanga-29 sibenza ngokubambisana nemikhandlu ukuyelekelela ukuthi ixazulule
ezinye izinkinga ebhekene nazo.
Sesibeke-ke isamba semali kuhulumeni wesifundazwe esingaphezulu kwekhulu
lezigidi zamaRandi ukuba sibambisane nemikhandlu njengoba kuzobe kuqala nje
unyaka wezimali. Lokhu-ke kuzokwenza ukuthi ukulethwa kwezidingo
ezibalulekile emphakathini nakubantu zisheshe zifinyelele. KwaZulu-Natali
sibona kunomehluko esiwenzayo ekuphuculeni izimpilo zabantu bakithi
abahlala ezindaweni zasemakhaya. Manje sesinezinhlelo ezifana nezolimo,
ikakhulukazi uhlelo esilubiza ngokuthi Siyavuna. Yilo lolu hlelo olwenza
ukuthi abantu bakithi bakwazi ukuthi basebenzise umhlaba ngoba siyazi
ukuthi umhlaba ukhona kodwa kwesinye isikhathi abantu abakwazi
ukuwusebenzisa ngendlela efanelekileyo.

Lolu hlelo-ke selenze ukuthi sibone kwanda indlela abantu abakwazi
ukuziphilisa ngayo engathi phecelezi “food security”. Sithola futhi ngalolu
hlelo kwanda ukubuyisa ukuzethemba kwabantu bakithi ngokuthi bakwazi
ukuzithuthukisa ngokwabo. Yilolu hlelo-ke esesilunikeze imali eningi
KwaZulu-Natali oluphethe umnyango wethu wezolimo olwenza umehluko
ezimpilweni zabantu.

KwaZulu-Natali sinohlelo esiluphuthumisayo okuwuhlelo lokuthi ezikoleni
ezinga-331 ezisemakhaya silethe uhlelo lokuhanjiswa kokungcola, ukuletha
amanzi kanye nogesi kuzo zonke lezi zikole. Njengoba sikhuluma nje
sizibekele ukuthi akuthi kushaya uSepthemba kulo nyaka, zonke lezi zikole
esikhuluma ngazo zibe sezinazo lezi zidingongqangi ngoba isikole akube
yisikole ngoba sinazo zonke izidingo ezisifanele. [Ihlombe.] Sithi lapha
KwaZulu-Natali sibona futhi siba nomehluko omkhulu ekubuyisweni kwesiko
lobuholi bendabuko nokwenza ukuthi kube khona ukuzigqaja ngokuthi ubuholi
bendabuko bungakwazi ukusimama futhi buphile ngokubambisana nohulumeni
wentando yeningi. Esikwenzayo lapha ukuqinisekisa ukuthi izinhlaka zobuholi
bendabuko zisebenza ngokubambisana nemikhandu yomasipala futhi kube khona
ukwabelana nokuhloniphana phakathi kwalezi zinhlaka zonke ngoba ubuholi
bendabuko phela ngokoMthethosisekelo bukhona budinga ukuba buvikelwe futhi
bukhuthazwe.

Yilokho esikwenza mihla namalanga ukuba sibuyisele futhi siphinde sibeke
ngokusemthethweni amakhosi oselwa esinawo nesiziqhenya ngawo kakhulu.
KwaZulu-Natali futhi sibona kuba khona uguquko lokuthi abantu abahlala
ezindaweni ezisemakhaya babonakale bekuthakasela lokhu bebe futhi yingxenye
yentando yeningi.

Siphinda futhi siqinisekise ukuthi owethu umsebenzi awushiyi ngaphandle
izinhlelo zikahulumeni ezizolethela abantu bakithi amathuba okusebenza,
ikakhulukazi izinhlelo ezifana nokuthi abantu bakwazi ukuziqambela ezabo
izinto zokusebenza njengezinhlangano zomsebenzi. KwaZulu-Natali-ke sibeke
imali engaphezu kwekhulu neshumi lezigidi zamaRandi. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson of this august House, we think it is important to see definite
changes in this democratic government, and we should do so by taking it
upon ourselves to make those changes. In KwaZulu-Natal, for instance, with
regard to housing projects, we can safely say that this year, although the
year has not ended, we have managed to build 32 000 houses for the people
of KwaZulu-Natal. [Applause.] We therefore view this as a matter of
urgency, which should be continued, but we should also take a number of
initiatives to ensure that the quality of life of our people is improved.

In KwaZulu-Natal we have 51 municipalities. Of the 51 municipalities, 29
municipalities have joined hands with the provincial sphere of government
on the national project, called the “hands-on approach” programme, Project
Consolidate, which enables municipalities to solve certain problems on
their own.

We are expecting the provincial government to give us more than R100
million in the forthcoming financial year so that we can work together with
the municipalities. This will speed up service delivery. We can see the
changes we have made in improving the quality of life of the people who
stay in the rural areas in KwaZulu-Natal. At present we have projects such
as the agricultural one called Siyavuna. Through this project our people
are enabled to use the land and as we all know the land is indeed
available. However, people do not know how to work the land properly.

Through this project, we have seen people increasing their means of
providing food security. We have also noted that our people have regained
their strength for self-development. In KwaZulu-Natal we have allocated a
lot of money to this project, as it is the central project in our
department of agriculture and environmental affairs, through which we
provide a better life for our people.

In KwaZulu-Natal we are finalising another project that seeks to provide
sanitation services to approximately 331 rural schools and electricity and
water to all schools. As we speak, we plan, at least by September this
year, to have provided all these resources to all the schools we have
targeted, because any school is worthy when it meets all the requirements.
[Applause.] In KwaZulu-Natal we have made a paradigm shift in reviving
traditional leadership by affording it its deserved morale, so that they
can develop and keep on working with the national government. What we are
doing is to make sure that the structures of traditional leadership work
with the municipalities, in terms of sharing and having mutual respect,
because the traditional leadership authority is constitutionally recognised
and needs to be enshrined and encouraged.

What we are doing on a daily basis is to reinstate and officially
inaugurate indigenous chiefs, whom we regard with pride. Another thing we
have noted in KwaZulu-Natal is the change of attitude of the people from
the rural areas who have shown appreciation for this move, and have become
participants in the programmes of our democracy.

We also make sure that our operations do not leave out government projects
that would create job opportunities, particularly the creation of
programmes that would give people the capacity to establish close
corporations. In KwaZulu-Natal we have set aside more than R110 million.]

With this money we are aiming to ensure that we are able to release the
energies of rural people so they are able to form their own co-operatives.
In so doing they can play a decisive role in ensuring that they are shaping
their own destiny and their own lives. [Applause.]

KwaZulu-Natali sakha imigwaqo emakhaya. Ngalolu hlelo lokwakha imigwaqo
emakhaya esesilubekele isamba esingasilinganisela emakhulwini ayisihlanu
ezigidi zamaRandi, lwenza ukuthi zonke izindawo ezisemakhaya sifune ukuthi
zifinyeleleke ukuze abantu bakithi bakwazi ukuthi, noma ngabe isimo sezulu
simi kanjani, bahambe bafike lapho beya khona.

KwaZulu-Natali siphezu kokuthi izinhlelo lezi zezempilo ezibhekene nesifo
segciwane lengculazi nesandulela ngculazi kube yisifo esisibeke phezulu
kangangokuthi kuzo zonke izindawo nezibhedlela zikahulumeni zifuna
ukuqinisekisa ukuthi abantu bakithi bayakwazi ukuthola ukusizakala.
Okukhulu kakhulu ukuba sibuke umkhankaso wethu wokulwa nesifo sengculazi
nesandulela ngculazi ngokubheka lonke uhlelo lokulwa lwayo okuthiwa yi
“comprehensive programme” singathathi nje kuphela imishanguzo bese sishiya
okunye. Ngibonge Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.][Kuphele isikhathi.] (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

We are establishing a road infrastructure in rural areas in KwaZulu-Natal.
We have set aside R500 million for this project of facilitating the
building roads in the rural areas, which is going to provide access to all
rural areas and allow people to reach their destinations with ease,
regardless of the weather conditions.

In KwaZulu-Natal we are prioritising HIV/Aids programmes so that public
hospitals in all areas could make it a priority to enable the public to
access these services. Our main task is to campaign against HIV/Aids by
promoting the so-called comprehensive programme, and not concentrate on
antiretrovirals only. Thank you. [Applause.] [Time expired.]]

Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, Premier, dignitaries,
colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to take this
opportunity to thank you all for the hospitality we received from the
wonderful, friendly people of Mpumalanga. [Applause.] I think it is fair to
say that our visit to Mpumalanga has been interesting, but it is clear that
service delivery is not up to standard. Governments all over the world have
many responsibilities, but three functions of government are universal.
Government must protect its citizens, boundaries and currency.
Unfortunately, I only have three minutes so I will only stick to the first
one, that government must service the people.

We all realise that many of the problems we face today are as a result of
discriminatory and apartheid policies of the past. Yet, we have now had 10
years of democracy and the ANC must take responsibility for their actions.
I would like to say to Premier Makwetla, it is clear that in the Free
State, as well as now in Secunda, people are tired of excuses and will
demand service delivery. [Applause.]

Government has failed to protect our citizens. I do not only refer to
physical protection, but in this regard government definitely failed. Our
crime statistics speak for themselves. It is a disgrace that the people of
South Africa must live in fear.

In this regard, the DA proposes a municipal police force, or SAPS, in all
municipalities. It is clear that with the state of events as they are at
the moment the criminals have the upper hand. As far as protecting the
population against poverty is concerned, it is sad that the few are getting
richer and the many are getting poorer. “Voorsitter, die waarheid maak
seer.” [Tussenwerpsels.]
[Chairperson, the truth hurts.][Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Order hon members!
Continue hon member. Continue.

Statistics prove that the poverty gap is widening and that unemployment
queues are getting longer. The DA has stated over and over that labour laws
must be more flexible and deregulation and privatisation are essential.
Government alone cannot solve the unemployment crisis, and at best
government intervention must kickstart the real economy.
As far as our health services are concerned, we have lost the fight against
the Aids disease. When we visited KwaMhlanga Hospital, we were told that
between 60% and 70% of patients admitted to this hospital have Aids-related
diseases. Thank you. [Time Expired.]

Ms Q D MAHLANGU (Gauteng): The Deputy President of our country, Mr Jacob
Zuma, the Chairperson of Salga, Mayor Masondo, the Premier of Mpumalanga,
Mr Thabang Makwetla, my colleagues, MECs present here, distinguished hon
members, ladies and gentlemen, “ngiyanilotjhisa noke”. [I greet you all.]

It is good to see old friends and it is good to be back in the NCOP after a
long time. Yes, it was my home for six years, so I have fond memories of
the NCOP. I remember the first Taking Parliament to the People we held in
Umtata. Looking back to then and being here now, I think there is a big
difference and I would like to congratulate the NCOP on that. [Applause.] I
am what I am today because of the work I have done in the NCOP and I will
forever cherish those moments.

Today’s topic is very relevant to the agenda of our government and its
people. Fifty years ago on 26 June men and women gathered in Kliptown in
Soweto to adopt the Freedom Charter. I will quote several clauses on what I
am going to say today will mainly be based.

The first clause is: ``The people shall govern.’’ My clauses are not in the
order in which they appear in the Freedom Charter. The second one is: ``All
national groups shall have equal rights’’; and the third one is: ``All
doors of learning and culture shall be open.’’ The last clause I am going
to talk about is: ``There shall be houses, security and comfort.’’ To give
meaning to the clauses of the Freedom Charter, Gauteng has begun with its
imbizos programme in building on the work we have done for the past 10
years. One of the things we do every second Wednesday of the month is have
11 imbizos, with 10 MECs  plus the Premier going to different communities
of our province where we have identified that serious difficulties in our
communities.

First of all, we brief them on the five-year programme that the Deputy
President talked to you about earlier on, which is based the ANC Manifesto,
and that the people’s contract to create work and fight poverty is going to
be at the centre of what we do in the province. Secondly, we talk to people
to get feedback from them as communities of Gauteng on issues that affect
them on a daily basis, whether positive or negative.

Thirdly, we focus on issues of the second generation of rights enshrined in
the Constitution under the Bill of Rights, Chapter 2. We look at issues
relating to housing, education, social development and health and to a very
great extent the big chunk of our budget that goes to these functions.
First of all, relating to education, the Freedom Charter goes: ``The doors
of learning and culture shall be opened.’’

In the province we focus largely on increasing and focusing on the quality
of education. But, because of the positive things that we have been able to
register over the past 10 years, currently we are focusing on school
infrastructure because we have many learners who are enrolling beyond
primary school education. In order to cope with this challenge, we are
therefore increasing the expenditure in this regard, in order to make sure
that we do not have learners who want to continue with their studies beyond
primary school who are stranded.

We continue to merge farm schools and rural schools. If you probably
thought that Gauteng does not have rural and farm schools, we do. We are
merging those because they have continued to have their curriculum, which
was not aligned with the rest of the province.  We have begun to align that
and in addition, and relating to schools and in giving meaning to the
Freedom Charter, we are making sure that there is scholar transport which
is provided to learners who are supposed to travel more than 5km to go to
school. That is what is happening in our province.

In terms of housing, we have identified 20 old townships that have been
neglected during the previous regime. Some of these 20 townships are
Katlehong, Vosloorus, Thokoza, Kagiso and others where most of the
population of our province come from. We are going to focus on the
following: building houses for people who have been renting in back yards,
because the previous regime did not allow our people to live wherever they
wanted to. We are giving housing subsidies to those people who have lived
in the back yards for a very long time.

Secondly, we are tarring all the streets in these top 20 townships in the
province to make sure that the road infrastructure is adequate. [Applause.]
Thirdly, we are putting water and storm water drainage in the very same
areas. We are using the municipal infrastructure grant to focus on these.
Mind you, in the old apartheid system the quality of infrastructure that
was put in townships was not as good as that which has been put in the
suburbs where we live today.

We are going to continue to make sure that we put service stands in the
areas of informal settlements that have been identified to be formalised.
Even if we do not build houses immediately, those stands are going to be
serviced and people are going to receive water and electricity in the
shacks where the informal settlements have been formalised. We are
continuing to put up shelters at the bus ranks because we understand that
our people continue to be subjected to harsh conditions when they are
waiting for transport to take them to work.

In this regard, our integrated transport system between municipalities in
the province and the provincial government is being worked on and soon we
should be in a position to provide an integrated transport system in our
province.

In terms of health, we are strengthening our health care system in order to
make sure that we deal with situations where there are still those people
that the Deputy President referred to, those who have stiff necks and, when
people come to a clinic on a particular day, tell them: “It is not your day
today. Today we are treating only the people who have TB. Come back
tomorrow!”

We are continuing to make sure that issues relating to improving the
quality of health services that our people receive are receiving serious
attention. This includes making sure that people understand the Patient’s
Charter and know what their rights are within that charter. In addition to
that, we are going to increase the number of community health workers who
are supposed to be deployed and work with the communities in all the
clinics and make sure that when people have difficulties around issues
related to health services they can be assisted by the community health
workers.

One of the things we are focusing on as a province is strengthening the
ward committees beyond the establishment rate. It is pivotal in giving real
meaning to the Freedom Charter’s statement that all people shall be
entitled to take part in the administration of our country. If we have ward
committees that are not functional and that do not give true meaning to the
inputs of the IDPs and the budgets of municipalities, it is may be as well
that we do not have ward committees. The main purpose and sole reason for
the existence of ward committees is to make sure that our communities,
through them, are enabled to make inputs into these processes. It is
important and we are going to focus on providing resources and investing in
capacitating communities, including improving the work of the ward
councillors together with the committee. At the centre of it all, ward
committees must be more important and relevant in all that we do as
government and communities.

Gauteng has embraced Project Consolidate and we have identified the five
municipalities which must be assisted with different challenges that they
face and in doing so we are soon to finalise a business plan which is not
only properly funded by the provincial government, but also by the
different partners that we are working with.
In continuing to support municipalities and communities in strengthening
the partnership with communities, 200 community development workers, CDWs,
will be deployed at the beginning of the financial year starting from 1
April. These CDWs will be focusing their work on ensuring that our people
receive the services that they are supposed to be receiving and we will
make sure that we work hard as department and as province to make sure that
CDWs indeed are there on the ground on a daily basis helping our people to
make sure that the bottlenecks that they face from time to time when going
to offices become things of the past.

In preparation for local government elections we must strive to increase
the number of registered voters and make sure that the voter turnout
increases. We should not take it as a principle that because
internationally people do not go out in their numbers to vote for local
government, we do the same. In our country we must make sure that we strive
to increase the number of voters. Because, one of the notions of having
ward committee systems and ward councillors is to make sure that people
have direct representation. If we were to increase the direct participation
of people at this level, we should as a consequence have a number of people
participating in the election of people who are supposed to be directly
representing them.

Last week I think a DA person spoke about the crime statistics. On Tuesday
I was at a function hosted by Westbank, at which they announced the car of
the year. One of the top corporates in South Africa announced that it is
good . . .

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, I am afraid your time has expired.

Ms Q D MAHLANGU: Thank you very much, Chair, and let the NCOP continue with
its endeavour of making sure that the bond between government and the
people is strengthened. Thank you, very much. [Applause.]

Nkk J N VILAKAZI: Mphathisihlalo ohloniphekileyo, mhlonishwa Sekela
likaMongameli wezwe, nabo bonke abahlonishwa abakhona phakathi kwethu,
amakhosi esizwe aphakathi kwethu, izihambeli ezibalulekile kanye nabo bonke
abakhona, egameni leqembu lami i-IFP ngifisa nje ukubalula lokhu kule
ngxoxompikiswano: Okokuqala, angisho nje ngingahlonizi ukuthi ingozi
esayigqenywa umbuso owedlulayo wobandlululo yasishiya nezibazi okuyothatha
isikhathi ukuthi zivaleke. Kubantu abahlala ezindaweni zasemakhaya impilo
kakhulu. Ukungabibikho kwezidingo zomphakathi akukhululi muntu.

Amanzi aseyinkinga. Umphakathi usaphuza amanzi nemfuyo kwezinye izindawo,
angiphathi-ke uma kunesomiso. Uhulumeni uyazama ukuletha izidingo kubantu
ukuthi nje kuhamba kancane emakhaya. Uhulumeni sengathi angayibuka ngelinye
iso le ndaba. Kusenezinkinga impela kulo mkhakha.

Kuhamba kancane ukwakhiwa kwemigwaqo kulezi zindawo zasemakhaya. Uma izulu
lina amabhasi awahambi bese kuhlukumezeka umphakathi yilesi simo
njengokuthi nje uma kugula umuntu edinga usizo. Kunenkinga kule ndawo.
Umame othile uyabeletha kodwa akakwazi ukufinyelela emtholampilo oseduze
kanye nokunye ukugula okuningi okudinga usizo oluphuthumayo kuseyinkinga.

Okwesibili, mkhulu kakhulu umehluko owenzeka ezikoleni. Abantwana bethu
bafunda ngosizi kodwa umhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe womnyango uyisukumele le
ndaba. Nokho inkinga isenkulu kakhulu ezikoleni. NoMongameli wezwe
enkulumeni yakhe yesizwe waphawula ayethula ngomhlaka-11 Febhuwari wathi:
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President, and all hon
members amongst us, the amakhosi present here amongst us, important guests
and all present, in the name of my party, the IFP, I just wish to state the
following in this debate: Firstly, let me say without fear that the wounds
inflicted by the former apartheid regime on us left us with scars which
will take time to heal completely. To people living in the rural areas life
is extremely difficult. The fact that people’s needs have not been met does
not make any person free.

Water is still a problem. In some places communities still drink from the
same ponds as the livestock, and I am not even talking about when there is
drought. The government is trying to provide in the needs of people, but
the process is a bit slow in the rural areas. If the government could have
another look at this issue; there are indeed still problems in this area.

The building of roads in the rural areas is slow. If it rains the buses do
not run and then the public is concerned when there is someone who is sick,
for example. There is a problem in this area. You may find that a certain
woman is due to give birth, but she can’t reach the nearest clinic, or
someone has another illness that needs urgent attention.

Secondly, there is still a huge discrepancy in schools. Our children are
still in distress at schools, but the hon minister of the department
concerned has taken steps in this regard. And the President, in his
national address on 11 February said:]

      The backlog of classrooms still runs into several
      thousand nationwide. We believe that addressing the
      crisis in education is perhaps the most urgent
      priority. The March deadline will not be meet.
      Government must work out a plan that will ensure the
      speedy delivery of classrooms to all.

Kusho uMongameli wezwe egcizelela ngalesi sidingo nangalesi simo
engikhuluma ngaso. UMongameli wayihlaba esikhonkosini le ndaba. Iyaziwa
futhi  kuyazanywa kodwa abantu abasemakhaya kubonakala kusenzima kakhulu
ukwenza ngcono isimo kubo.

Okwesithathu, yigciwane lesandulela ngculazi. Siwazi sonke umonakala
osuwenziwe yilesi sifo. Abanye abantu bale emakhaya abazi lutho ngalesi
sifo. Nemizamo kahulumeni iphelela obala ngoba abanamaphepha abawafundayo
abanye abanamsakazo nomabonakude kanti abanye abasebenzi. Kuselukhuni
bakithi. Abanye-ke abafundile nhlobo. Siyabadinga onompilo. Useke washo
lapha uNgqongqoshe oqhamuka KwaZulu-Natali. Sidinga onompilo abaningi ukuze
basize imiphakathi abahlezi kuyo.

Okwesine, kunenkohlakalo nobugebengu obenza abantu bangakhululeki neze
kahle. Kusiphatha kabi ukuzwa ukuthi ogogo nomkhulu bayahlaselwa, kuthathwe
imali yabo.

Kubuhlungu kakhulu ukuzwa ngokudlwengulwa kwabantwana abancane, nogogo
imbala. Kusasibhedela ngempela kulo mkhakha. Iseningi inkohlakalo ekhona
esilethela ukuba singakhululeki, kodwa sihlalele ovalweni. Asazi noma le
nkohlakalo yenziwa ukusweleka kwemisebenzi, okudala ubuphofu nenkohlakalo.
Sidinga asibheke ngenye indlela lesi simo uhulumeni wethu.

Siyalibonga igxathu elithathwe uhulumeni wethu ngokuletha iPhalamende
kubantu. Kuliqhaza elibalulekileyo kakhulu, elidinga ukubongwa. Siyethemba
ukuthi wonke umuntu obekwe esikhundleni esithile uzosebenza ngokuzinikela
nokwethembeka kuhulumeni nakubantu abambeke kuleso sikhundla asiphethe.
Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The President emphasised the need and the conditions that I am talking
about. The President hit the nail precisely on the head in making this
point. It is well known and we are trying, but it seems as if it is still
difficult to improve the lives of the people in the rural areas.

Thirdly, I come to the HIV/Aids issue. We all know the damage caused by
this disease. Some people from the rural areas know nothing about this
disease. Even the efforts of the government are in vain, because they have
no newspapers to read; some do not have even radios and TVs and some are
not even working. It is indeed still difficult. Some are completely
illiterate. We need caregivers. The KwaZulu-Natal MEC has spoken about
this. We need many caregivers so that they can help the communities in
which they live.

Fourthly, there is corruption and crime, which cause people to feel not
free at all. It saddens us to hear that senior citizens are attacked, and
their money taken from them.

It is awfully painful to hear about the rape of young children, and also
even grandmothers. There is still a lot to be done in this area. There is
still a great deal of crime, which makes us feel restrained, constantly
living in fear. We do not know whether all this crime is because of
unemployment, which creates poverty and criminality. Our government needs
to look at this situation from another angle.

We are grateful for the step taken by our government, of bringing
Parliament to the people. It is indeed an important step, which needs to be
commended. We hope that each person entrusted with a certain position will
work with conviction, and be trustworthy to the government and the people
who put them in the positions they hold. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr S MOHAI (Free State): Chairperson, the hon Deputy President of the
Republic, Mr Jacob Zuma, the Premier of Mpumalanga, Mr Thabang Makwetla,
distinguished special delegates, leaders of the organised local government,
our traditional leaders, hon members, colleagues and comrades, joining
hands with colleagues in this very important debate, some 50 years ago the
freedom-loving South Africans met in the dusty open veld of Kliptown to
formulate and adopt the Freedom Charter.

In its opening clause, the Freedom Charter declared: The People Shall
Govern! It further went on to declare that South Africa belongs to all who
live in it. This declaration was based on the philosophy that people are
masters of their own destiny; that national liberation cannot be delivered
to the people on a silver plate without their effective and meaningful
participation but essentially a popular process of self-emancipation.

It is within this context that for more than nine decades of its existence,
our movement - the African National Congress - has always regarded the
masses of the people as the final arbiters in the resolution of their
national grievances. The Reconstruction and Development Programme, adopted
in 1994, took this philosophic tenet further by placing central to its
principle a people-driven development and transformation process. Our
people, with their aspirations and collective resolve, are the most
important resource in our country.

The defeat of the monstrous apartheid colonial regime is a clear testimony
of the centrality of the masses of our people in their own liberation.
Accordingly, the development and transformation project in our country must
meet the needs of the people and, at the same time, rely on their energies
to drive it. The workers, the rural poor and the womenfolk of our country
must therefore feel and see that South Africa belongs to them too, hence
they must contribute to shaping our country’s future.

Development is not the mere delivery of goods and services to a passive
citizenry; it is about active involvement and growing empowerment of those
historically disempowered by centuries of colonial domination. Over the
past 10 years we have developed a number of forums and platforms to give
practical effect to the principle of popular participation. These include,
but are not limited to, ward committees, local development forums, school
governing bodies, project steering committees and community policing
forums.

The programme of the NCOP of Taking Parliament to the People is a living
expression of popular and mass participation as envisaged in the Freedom
Charter. It is the people’s government in action, which is unprecedented in
the whole world, where the elected representatives listen and draw a
mandate from the ordinary masses. The government has implemented the
practice of imbizos. The legislature has also implemented such outreach
programmes as public hearings, and generally conducted its business in a
manner that enhances public participation. Our challenge is therefore to
strengthen and consolidate the principle and practice of popular
participation in the ongoing process of transformation and development.

Our main goal for the second decade of freedom is that of eradicating
poverty and unemployment. Our main targets are therefore about employment
creation, poverty reduction, skills development, infrastructural
development and fighting infectious diseases such as HIV/Aids. Popular
participation is key to the success of this programme. As a government, we
must address the plight of our people. Only, our people come first because
without them we could not have been where we are at this point in time,
debating issues of national importance in our diversity. This we do because
we want to advance toward people sharing in the country’s wealth and thus
creating work, social security and eradicating poverty.

In the recent state of the province address, we recommitted ourselves to
our ongoing work with regard to accelerating service delivery,
strengthening the capacity of both provincial and local government and
growing the provincial economy. We are pleased to note the progress we are
making in improving the lives of the people for the better.

The 95 committee development workers will go a long way in championing the
Batho Pele principle of service delivery and improving our capacity as
government to interact with the people; a further 225 committee development
workers will be appointed and registered no later than the end of March of
the current year. We continue to make progress with regards to protecting
women and children against abuse, uprooting corrupt practices, particularly
within the civil service, improving access to quality health care,
transforming and improving the school education system.

We believe that infrastructural development can help to provide communities
with access to facilities such as schools, hospitals, roads, water and
housing. In this way it will help with the challenge of basic needs. It
will also create employment, skills development and SMMEs development
opportunities as the policy and practice of the Expanded Public Works
Programme enjoins us. The development of infrastructure also helps to
attract investors into our local economy since it will reduce the input
cost of doing business in our country. The recent demonstration by certain
sections of some communities in the Free State has once more highlighted
the multiplicity of challenges facing our province which, inter alia,
includes the lack of capacity by municipalities, the huge disparities
between the developed and the underdeveloped sections of our communities
and, lastly, the lack of sufficient resources to meet the developmental
goals of our government. However, we must remember that despite these
challenges, our local governments are still adjusting to the new statutory
environment, and therefore these challenges indeed exist. Some of these
demonstrations were marked by violence and damage to property.

The occurrence of these demonstrations, however, necessitates a serious
discussion on the state of local government and community participation in
the process of governance.  We have a vigorous implementation of Project
Consolidate, particularly at those 12 identified municipalities in our
province, and together with other measures we are implementing aimed at
building the requisite capacity within local government for the basic
services to be rendered and developmental programme to be pursued. Our
government has put in place the necessary measures to build the capacity of
local government to accelerate delivery of services to our communities.

Central to these programmes is the intensification of consultation between
the elected representatives and the masses of our people. We are at the
same time strengthening the organs of popular participation such as ward
committees, which are aimed at ensuring public involvement in governance.
The success in this regard is manifested through successful formulation of
integrated development plans. We have also started work in strengthening
other multiple channels of communication with our people, both at
provincial and local government level.

The ANC government believes firmly that when government is in touch with
the people, all our people will appreciate objective limitation of
resources as far as immediately meeting all their needs is concerned. This
will limit the scope for reckless engagement and violent illegal
demonstrations and instead they will help government creatively to find
solutions to these problems. These, we believe, are tenets that shall
ensure that our people govern and take charge of their own lives.

The coming enactment of the Intergovernmental Relation Framework Bill
should be welcomed as a positive development in the relations in all
spheres of government. It will help regulate relations and bring more
clarity and certainty instead of leaving matters wide open to the chance of
a political understanding.

This legislation will also help to strengthen capacity within government as
a whole. I am saying as a whole because we always conceptualise the free
South Africa as a unitary state - from the Freedom Charter, the Ready to
Govern, the Reconstruction and Development Programme and other policy
documents of the ANC. Our Constitution does not depart from this basic
position either, in fact, it reaffirms it. This is despite the fact that we
have provincial governments. Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr K SINCLAIR: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President, Dr Wilmot James,
director of the Africa Genome Education Institute, yesterday published an
article on the topic, “Let’s appreciate our successes” in The Star. James
argues that very few South Africans know, other than Desmond Tutu, Nelson
Mandela and F W de Klerk, the names of South African people who have been
awarded the Nobel Prize. Some would remember Chief Albert Luthuli, but very
few know of the literary giant Nadine Gordimer, the writer J M Coetzee, the
biologist Sydney Brenner and any of the other laureates. But maybe the
subtle truth of James’ argument is very prevalent in South African society.
As South Africans we do not appreciate our successes.

When we debate the issue of building a better society today we must agree
that we are too complacent about what we have achieved in terms of
rebuilding our country. Centuries of oppression have been replaced in 10
years with a society where in terms of article 7(1) of our Constitution,
the Bill of Rights is the cornerstone of our democracy in South Africa. It
entrenches the right of all people in our country and affirms that the
democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom. The Preamble of
the Constitution further reiterates:

      South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity.

Chairperson, diverse we are indeed. Maybe the motto of this provincial
legislature is very appropriate also for this debate: Unity in diversity.
That diversity, however, must unite us as a nation so that we respect each
other as human beings and where we come from. I am an Afrikaner from
Scottish and Dutch ancestry. I will never be a Zulu or a Venda or a Xhosa
or a Turk, but I will forever be a South African. [Applause.]

The language that we speak, our mother tongue, greatly determines what we
are. Max du Preez recently said:


      The soul of the people of South Africa isn’t English-speaking.

We must therefore treasure our diversity and build patriotism, a South
Africanism that would further propel South Africa forward as a winning
nation. The South Africanism must be built on mutual respect and
understanding of our diverse cultures. That doesn’t mean that we do not
have challenges. We have too much poverty and unemployment; too much crime
and too many diseases, but as South Africans we are preparing to tackle
those issues with zest.

Therefore, hon Deputy President, I want to propose that government once
again evaluates the necessity of implementing community service for the
young men and women of our country. The ultimate purpose of this service is
to build our country, South Africa, which would encapsulate our diversity
and enhance our efforts as a nation. Through this service young people
would be empowered through skills and sports training, education and other
related activities, indeed a South African RDP of the soul. If we do, I
believe that we will be building a better society founded on recognised
human rights and maybe then we would appreciate and understand our
successes. I thank you. [Applause.]

Rre T GWABENI (North West): Modulasetulo wa ntlo e, ya Lekgotla la
Diporofense, Motlatsaporesitente, Premier, Mmusakgotla, Makgosi a rona,
Modulasetulo wa SALGA, Batlotlegi botlhe ka go farologana ga lona. Ke tsaya
nako e ke re, re ya lotšha. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Mr T GWABENI (North West): Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces, Deputy President, Premier, Madam Speaker, our chiefs,
chairperson of Salga, distinguished guests, I greet you all.]

Let me take this opportunity to sincerely apologise for our Premier. She is
not well. The debate today is around engaging our people in building a
better society founded on recognised human rights and committed to service
delivery. Our forebears made it clear to all in our country and the world
that for too many decades of knocking on barbed-wire doors when they said:
“No government shall claim authority on the will of the people.”

I must also quote what one of the great leaders, Julius Nyerere, once said,
that there is a time for planting and a time for harvesting. Ours is the
time for harvesting. It is very important to quote what Nyerere said,
because there are some people among us who want to harvest when there has
never been time for planting. [Applause.]

Mokgatlo wa rona wa African National Congress o lole dintwa dingwaga di le
dintsi thata. Gompieno re nale puso ya batho ka batho e e nang le
dikgatlhego tsa batho. Re na le puso ya bosetšhaba, ya diporofense le
dipusoselegae. Batho ba kgona ka tlhamalalo, go nna karolo ya dikopano go
ikagela go ya ka Molaudi Ward Committee, diforamo di tshwana le CPF, di
“school governing bodies”, di-NGO’s le CBO’s. Tse tsotlhe di dirwa gore
batho ba nne le lefoko e bile ba kgone go susumetsa dikgatlhego tsa bone mo
go se se diriwang ke mmuso e le boammaruri.

Seo ke maungo a seo se jetsweng ke bao ba neng ba kopane kwa Kliptown
dingwaga tse di le masome amatlhano tse di fitileng. Go tsaya karolo mo di
pitsong tsa di-Premier le maloko a khuduthamaga go kopana le batho mo
ditulong tse di farologaneng, le go tsamaela pele ka go tiisa ntlha eno.
Karolo e tsewang ke puso ya bosetšhaba, NCOP le dikomiti tsa ntlo peo molao-
“Legislature” tse di farologaneng, go kopana le batho le go utlwa dikakanyo
tsa batho le yona ke karolo ya ntlha ya go tiisa mmuso le go mo atametsa
thata mo bathong.

Maikarabelo a makhantshelara, di mmeyara le batho botlhe le gone ke seabe
se se dirang gore, go nne motlhong batho ba atamelane le baeteledipele ba
bone, ba ba itse, ba kgone go kopana le bone ba kgone go ba eletsa.

Palamente ga mmogo le bakhuduthamaga le dikhanselera, ba tla tswelela go
ithuta le go tsaya dikeletso mo bathong gangwe le gape fa ba kopana le
batho, mme seo se ba thuse go fetola mananeo a bona le go tla ka maranyana
a ba tla beng ba a bone mo bathong.

Rona kwa porofenseng ya Bokone Bophirima, nngwe ya dintlha tse re di
itumelelang ke pegelo e e dirilweng ke MoPremiera ka pulo ya Palamente, fa
a ne a bolelela setšhaba le batho gore dilo ga di kake tsa diriwa ka mokgwa
o le mongwe fela. Mme e bile mafapha a a sa kgoneng go dirisa madi a
reboletsweng, ga a kake a tswelelela go nna mo godimo ga madi ao, mme madi
ao a tla fiwa mafapha a a kgonang.

Go dula ga NCOP gompieno kwano, ke nngwe ya maiteko a go bontsha le go
tsweletsa maitlhomo le maikaelelo a Freedom Charter, a gore puso e nne puso
ya batho ka batho. Gompieno re kopane kwano, mme re a tshwanela gore re
dire boikuelo go batho ba rona gore fa e le gore puso e, ke ya batho ka
batho, ga batshwanela go tsoga mo moŝong ba tswale ditsela, mme ba
itshenyetse.

Re a tshwanela gape jaaka re le puso ya batho ka batho re seke ra itirela
ka go ithatela mme molao le tolamo di se ke di diragadiwe. Re tshwanela ke
gore re totobatse lebaka la botlhokatiro, tlala, botlhoki, le go tlhoka
matlo. Dilo tse tsotlhe ke dilo tse di tsetsweng ke aparteiti le dikokomana
tsa yona. Ga se dilo dingwe tse di tlhodilweng ke puso ya ANC.

Ra tshwanela gape re lebe ka leitlho le le ntšhotšho, bao ba ba itirang
bomaitsegotlhe, ba bao tlisang dikarabo tse di motlhofo go dipotso tse di
bokete, tse di batlang kakanyo tse di tseneletseng. Re tshwanetsi go eletse
batho ba rona gore go na le bao ba ba batlang go itira baeteledipele ba
batho mme ba sa tlhophiwa. Ka jalo ba dira dilo tse di tswileng mo tseleng
ka gonne ba batla go tlhagelela modiromamoweng, ebile ba batla go
tlhagelela mo makwalodikganyeng mme ba se ditso.

Ga go kgakgamatse le gompieno ga ke utlwile tokololo e nngwe fa e bua gore
batho ba re tsogela kgatlhanong, batho ba lapile. Batho ba rona ba tla leta
fela jaaka bakeresete ba dumela gore Jesu ka letsatsi le lengwe o tla tla.
Batho ba tla tswelela go leta jalo ka kitso e tseneletseng gore puso ya
African National Congress, e ikaeletse ebile e tswelelela go tlisa
diphetogo mo dikarolong tse dintsi tsa naga. Mme gape batho ba tshwanetse
ba itse, gore ga gone go diragala jaaka legadima, ka gore bone batho ba ba
neng ba re gateletse, ba jele madi e bile ba re tsentse mo dikolotong tse
dintsintsi. Gompieno bangwe ba bona ba rata go itlhatswa ba itira
baeteledipele ba ba botoka, o ka re ba tla tlisa pharologanyo.

Re tswelela go ungwela kwa porofenseng ya rona ka lenaneo la ”Ëxtended
Public Works” ka motho e tla re fa a bua a re, ga a re dikgomo di a sisa a
ba bone ka tsa gabo, seo kwa ga Modimola batho ba ka re pakela gore setopo
re supa sa nakedi magogwe o begiwa a sule.

Mo ketelong ya rona le maloko a Palamente ya kwa gae, go batho ba kwa
Modimole, batho bao bane ba tswelela gore gopotsa gore, Modimole o ntse a
le teng ga se lefelo le le ntšha. Modimole o ne a le teng ka nako ya
tlhaolele, Modimole o ne a le teng ka nako ela ya bo itirela ka lefitshwana
kwa Bophuthatsotsi, Modimole o ntse a le teng le gompieno, mme batho ba
simolola go bona phaphang fa e sa le go goroga puso e e ya ANC, mme ba a
leboga.

Kantoro ya Mo Premieya wa rona ga mmogo le “Office of the status of Women”
le Komiti ya “Legislature”, e e tepatepanyang le merero ya bomme, go
itekanela ga bona, baša le batho ba ba sa itekanelang sentle, e tsweletse
ka metseletsele ya go bona gore ba ba neng ba itlhokomolositswe, ke mananeo
afe a ka tsengwang mo tirisong go dira gore le bone botshelo jwa bone bo
nne botoka. Tshwetso ya porofense ya go dira gore e ntshetse kwa ntle se re
se bitsang “tender committee”, mme mafapha a kgone go ithendarela one. E
bile mafapha a dira gore go nne le tsweletso. Ndiyabulela Enkosi. [Legofi]
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[The African National Congress fought for many years. Today we have a
government of the people by the people, which has the interests of the
people at heart. We have the national government, provincial government,
and local government. People participate directly in forums like the
Molaudi Ward Committee, CPF, school governing bodies, NGOs and CBOs. All
these are done to enable people to raise their views and also to influence
government in what it regards as essential.

This are the results of fruits that was planted by those who met in
Kliptown 50 years ago. The participation in meetings by Premiers, members
of executive committees with people in various places emphasizes this
point. The role played by the national government, the NCOP and various
committees of the legislature in meeting and interacting with people and
listening to their views is also the first stage to strengthen government
and bring it closer to the people. The responsibility of the councilors,
mayors and all the other people also bring people closer to their leaders,
getting to know and advise them. Parliament, together with the councilors
will continue to frequently accept submissions from people as they meet
them. This will help them change their programmes because of proposals made
by people.

We, in the North West province, are happy about one of the aspects in the
report prepared by the Premier in his opening of the legislature address,
in which he told the nation and the people that things could not be done in
one manner only. Departments that do not use their budgetary allocations
should not be given another allocation. Instead the money should be given
to other departments that can use it.

The sitting of the NCOP today is one of the indications that we are
carrying out the objectives of the Freedom Charter, having a government of
the people by the people. As we are gathered here today, we should appeal
to people that if this is a government by the people for the people, then
there is no way people can go on a rampage destroying their things and
think that nothing will be done to them. We must say to our people that
there is no way, when we are part of a government of the people by the
people, that we can allow people to do as they like without upholding the
rule of law. We must acknowledge that there is unemployment, hunger,
poverty and a lack of housing.  All these resulted from apartheid and its
founders, who were not from the ANC government.

We must also carefully look at those who regard themselves as experts by
providing easy answers to difficult questions that need deeper thinking. We
must advise our people to be careful of people who have no value systems,
who want to make themselves their leaders when they have not been elected,
but do things that are wrong so that they can appear on television and in
the newspapers. It is not even surprising today to hear one member saying
people are revolting against us because they are tired.

Our people will wait like Christians who believe that one day Jesus will
come. People will continue to wait in that way, knowing that the ANC
government intends to bring changes in many areas of the country. People
must know that it will never happen quickly, because the same people who
oppressed us misused money for their own benefit and left us with many
debts. Today some of them would like to appear to be good, innocent
leaders, as if they would make a difference.

We continue to benefit our province through our Expanded Public Works
Programme. As the saying goes: “ People talk from experience”, the Modimole
people will bear us witness. During our visit with members of the local
legislature to the Modimole people, those people continued to remind us
that Modimole has been in existence for a long time, even during the
apartheid era, it is not a new place. Modimole was there even in the
Bophuthatsotsi era, when things were not transparent and it is still here
today. People are starting to notice a difference since the new government
of the ANC has come to power, and they are grateful. The Office of the
Premier, together with the Office on the Status of Women and the committee
of the legislature which handles issues relating to women’s health, youth
and the disabled people, are continuing to look into these groups that were
initially ignored, and to check which programmes can be put in place to
improve their lives. The province is to remove tender committees from
departments to allow them to conduct their tender with the assurance that
there is development. Thank you.] [Applause.]]

Nk F MAZIBUKO: Sihlalo, ngibingelela uSihlalo womKhandlu kaZwelonke
weziFundazwe, uSekela Mongameli uMnu Zuma, uNdunankulu wesifundazwe
saseMpumalanga uMnu  Makwetla, abahlonishwa , amalungu oMkhandlu
ngokushiyana kwezikhundla zawo, ngibingelele amalungu esiShayamthetho
wonkana athamele le mbizo yanamuhla, ngibingelele amakhosi namakhansela
aholwa nguNyambose, ngithokoze komama nobaba nasezivakashini zethu. Kubasha
ngithi: Hhola Seveni!

ABASHA: Hhola!

Nk F MAZIBUKO: Ngibonga leli thuba engiliphiwe ukuthi nami ngiphonse
esivivaneni kule nkulumompikiswano ngaphansi kwesihloko sokubandakanya
abantu ekwakheni isizwe esingcono, kubhekwe ngisho namalungelo abo. Le
nkulumompikiswano yenzeka ngenyanga lapho sigubha kh ona ukuhlonishwa
kwamalungelo abantu futhi kungunyaka la sigubha khona ama-50 eminyaka
kwaqoshwa uSomqulu weNkululeko yaBantu, iFreedom Charter.

Lo somqulu yiwona othi abantu bazobusa, uhulumeni kuzoba ngowabantu, kubuse
abantu usebenzele abantu. Lo somqulu wethu wenza ukuthi sikwazi ukuphucula
izimpilo zabantu zibe ngcono, kube nentuthuko emiphakathini yethu.

Lo Mkhandlu ubaluleke kakhulu kule nkulumompikiswano ngoba wenzeka
ezinsukwini ezingengaki kuphele ingxenye yokuqala yonyaka uMongameli wezwe
ubaba uMbeki esinike iziqondiso ethi masiphume njengamavolontiya siqonde
kuzo zonke izinkalo sisize abantu ukuze iminyango yezemfundo ivuleke,
abantu babe nendawo lapho bengafihla khona amakhanda futhi bavikeleke.

Ngesikhathi kusabusa uhulumeni wengcindezelo abantu besifazane bebephila
impilo yasemakhamandeleni, bebecindezelekile, becindezelwe ngumphakathi
jikelele. Emakhaya bebephila impilo ngaphansi kwengcindezelo kanti
nasemsebenzini bebebizwa ngamageli, bethwala imigqomo beyokha amanzi
emifuleni.

Masikhumbule kule nyanga yamalungelo ukuthi nabo abesifazane banawo
amalungelo. Siye sithi ayikho inkwali ephandela enye, nabantu besifazane
bazisukumele bazilwela, belwela amalungelo abo. Sebewatholile.
Ngaphambilini abantu besifazane bebengavunyelwe ukufunda, kuthiwa
ukufundisa ingane yentombazana ukuchitha imali ngoba izogana ihambe
iyokwakha eminye imizi. Kepha namuhla uhulumeni uthi zonke izingane,
ikakhulu ezamantombazane, maziye esikoleni zifunde zigogode zibe
ngochwepheshe. Namuhla  abesifazane sebengo ngqongqoshe, amalungu
ePhalamende,  amakhansela nabaholi kanti  abanye banamabhiziinisi abo.
Ngingabalani ngithini? Kungaze kushone ilanga nginibalisela ngemisebenzi
emihle eyenziwe nguhulumeni kaKhongolose.

Kulabo-ke abangakaphucuki abasacabanga ukuthi umuntu wesifazane uyi-
punching bag, ngithi kubo bazoyikhotha imbenge yomile. [Ihlombe.] Ingalo
yomthetho inde. Uma ubeka umuntu wesifazane isandla uzobhadla ejele umuncwe
yizimbungulu.

Kudala abantu besifazane bebephethwe sengathi yizingane ezincane bengenawo
amalungelo. Uma ngenza nje isibonelo, umyeni wakho uma edlula emhlabeni,
bekuthiwa ingane yakho yomfana ayibe yinhloko yomuzi noma wenziwe umfazi
wamangeno. Uma uyovula incwadi yokubeka imali ebhange ububuzwa ukuthi
umyeni wakho uyazi na, kuthiwe hamba uyombiza. Uma ungenaye umyeni
njengami, kwakuthiwa hamba uye emzini wezinsizwa uyokhetha isigqoko khona.
[Ihlombe.] [Uhleko.] Zinqunywa amakhanda ziyekwe! Namuhla akusenzeki konke
lokho ngoba abantu besifazane banamalungelo njengawo wonke umuntu. Siyay e
sithi amalungelo abesifazane angamalungelo esintu.

Izilimi esizikhulumayo nazo zibalulekile, masizikhulume ngokuziqhenya,
sizigqaje ngazo. Yilungelo likawonkewonke ukuthi umuntu akhulume ulimi
aluthandayo engenamahloni ukubukelwa phansi uma engakhulumanga ulimi
lwendlovukazi yamaNgisi. Lapha eNingizimu Afrika sinezilimi ezingama-11,
alikho izwe elinezilimi eziningi kangako, ngingasishiyi nesitsotsi
ngasemuva. Sihlalo namalunga, iqhaza elibanjwa yile Ndlu yesiShayamthetho
enguMkhandlu weziFundazwe libalulekile kakhulu ekuqinisekiseni ukuthi
uhulumeni uyazifeza izidingo zabantu.

Uhulumeni uhlinzeka abantu ngamanzi nogesi nangezinye izidingo ukuze
izimpilo zabo zibe ngcono ngakho-ke kubalulekile ukuthi sikuqondisise
ukuthi kule minyake eyi-10 sesenze umsebenzi omningi. Akekho omunye
uhulumeni owake wakwenza lokhu ngesikhathi esifu shane. Yebo izinselele
zona ziningi. Iningi labantu lisadinga amanzi, ugesi, kanti nemitholampilo
iseyibanga elide. Izikole nazo zidinga amalabhorethri nemitapo yezincwadi.
Masiqiniseke-ke ukuthi sakha izakhiwo zombuso emiphakathini yethu,
njengamakomidi ezigceme, lokhu okuthiwa ama-ward committees, ama-community
policing forum kanye nawo ama-governing bodies.

Okubalulekile-ke ukuthi uhulumeni kufuneka abe seduze nabantu, abantu
babambe iqhaza ekuphuculweni kwezimpilo zabo. Kuthiwa: Uzoyithola kanjani
uhlezi ekhoneni? Ukuze kube nentuthuko emiphakathini yethu, masibambe
iqhaza ezinhlelweni zokusebenzisana kuhlanganyelwe , lokhu okuthiwa ngama-
IDP ukuze uma kwabiwa imali izidingo zethu singumphakathi kube yizona
ezokuqala ezithola osheleni. Yintando yening i eyenze ukuthi sibe nala
mathuba okubamba iqhaza. Masiwasebenziseni lawa mathuba, akekho omunye
ozosipha wona ngaphandle kukahulumeni ka-ANC. Mayelana nabaholi,
emiphakathini yethu masikhethe abaholi abaqotho hhayi laba abazosilutha
bathi akuvukelwe umbuso.

Ngethemba ukuthi besibona kwezinye izindawo beshisa amathayi bevimba
imigwaqo. Lokhu ngeke kusilethele lutho, okubalulekile ukuthi sibambe
iqhaza sikwazi ukuphucula izimpilo zethu. Namaziko olwazi, ama-multipurpose
centre, kumele siwasebenzise sikwazi ukuthola ukuthi izinhlelo zikahulumeni
zihamba kanjani.
Isifo sengculazi singasishiyi ngemuva, ngoba siyawubhubhisa umphakathi
wethu. Masikhumbuleni ukuthi ngaphambi kokuthi siye ocansini sifake ijazi
lomkhwenyana. One condom one round. No condom no sex! [Umzuliswano
yikhondomu. Ngaphandle kwekhondomu, ucansi alukho.

Ukuphetha-ke, mangithi: Bantu bakithi, ixoxo nexoxo liyazigxumela, alikho
eligxumela elinye. Uma ningatholi izihlinzeko zenu, iyani emahhovisi
ePhalamende, nibambe iqhaza kumakomidi ezigceme, amakhansela asebenzisane
nabantu abize imihlangano.

Thina njengamalunga sesithathe leli thuba. Kuzothi ngomhlaka ka-30 kuMashi
sibe nomhlangano no-Rand Water Board esiwucele emuva kokuzwa izinkinga
enibhekene nazo zamanzi. Sizonilethela-ke umbiko wokuthi sihambe kanjani.
Ngicela kuwe Sekela Mongameli ukuthi ugcizelele ukuthi Batho Pele. Okunye-
ke, masenze umehluko ezimpilweni zabantu. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mrs F MAZIBUKO: Chairperson, I greet the Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, the Deputy President Mr Zuma, the Premier of
Mpumalanga Mr Makwetla, the honourables, members of the Council in their
respective portfolios, members of the legislature attending this imbizo
today. I greet the amakhosi, councillors led by Nyambose, mothers and
fathers and our guests. To the youth I say: Hhola Seveni! [Holla Seven!]

HON MEMBERS: Holla!

Mrs F MAZIBUKO: I am grateful for this opportunity that I have been given
to make meaningful input in this debate, which falls under the topic of
involving people in building a better nation, and making sure that their
rights are observed. This debate has come during the month in which we are
celebrating human rights and this is the year we are celebrating the 50th
anniversary of the Freedom Charter.

This charter is the one that says that the people shall govern, there will
be a people’s government, the people will govern and it will work for the
people. This charter enables us to make the lives of people better, and
brings about development in our communities.

This sitting of the Council is very important, as is this debate because it
is taking place after the first quarter since the hon President of the
country has given us the directive that we should go out as volunteers and
help people so that the doors of education can be opened, and people have
shelter and security.

During the time of the apartheid regime women were leading the lives of
vagrants; they were oppressed, oppressed by the community in general. In
rural areas they were also being oppressed and in the workplace they were
called “girls”, while they had to carry containers when fetching water from
the river.

Let us remember, during this Human Rights month, that women too have
rights. In Zulu we say, “every man for himself”, and the women should also
stand up and fight for themselves, and for their rights. They have now
received them.

Previously women were not allowed to go to school, it was said that
allowing a girl child to go to school was a waste of money because she
would marry and build other people’s homes. But today the government is
saying all children, especially girl children, should go to school and
study and become experts. Today women are Ministers, members of Parliament,
councillors and leaders and some have their own businesses. What else can I
say? I can tell you about the good works of the ANC till sunset.

To those who are still uncivilised, who still think of a woman as a punch
bag, I say, “woe unto you ”. [Applause.] The arm of the law is long. If you
lay a hand on a woman you will languish in jail and be bitten by bedbugs.

A long time ago women were treated like children and they did not have
rights. If I may cite an example, if your husband passes away, it would be
said that your son is the head of the house or an “ngena” custom would be
practised on you. If you go to the bank to open a savings account, you
would be asked if your husband was aware of that, and you would be told to
go and call him. If you did not have a husband, like me, you would be told
to go to the hostel and fetch a male there. [Applause.][Laughter.] Those
were the days! Today all this is no longer happening because women have
rights, like everyone. We normally say women’s rights are human rights.

The languages that we speak are also important, let us speak them proudly,
and be proud of them. It is everybody’s right to speak the language that
they prefer without being ashamed of possibly being looked down on because
they do not speak the queen’s language, English. Here in South Africa we
have 11 official languages. There is no other country that has so many
languages, and I am not leaving out the “tsotsitaal”. Chairperson and hon
members, the role played by this legislative House, the National Council of
Provinces, is very important in making sure that the government fulfils the
needs of the people.

The government provides people with water and electricity and other
necessities to make the lives of the people better, therefore it is
important to understand that in the past 10 years we have done a lot of
work. No other government has ever done this much in such a short time.
Yes, there are still many challenges. Most people still need water and
electricity, and the clinics are still far from people. The schools also
need laboratories and libraries. Let us make sure that we build
governmental structures in our communities, like ward committees, community
policing forums and also governing bodies.

What is important, therefore, is that the government must be close to the
people, people must take part in making their lives better. It is said: How
are you going to get it if you are in the back seat? So as to bring about
development in our communities, let us take part in the programmes of co-
operative work, which are called IDPs, so that when the budget allocations
are made, we as community are the ones who get the first share. It is
democracy that has given us these opportunities of taking part. Let us use
these opportunities, there is no one else who is going to give them to us
but the ANC government. With respect to the leaders, let us in our
communities elect bona fide leaders, not those ones who would mess us
around and say, let us sabotage the state.

I hope we have seen this in some places, when they were burning tyres and
blocking roads. This will not bring us anything; what is important is
taking part and being able to make our lives better. We must also use the
multipurpose centres for obtaining information regarding government
programmes.

Let us not leave the Aids pandemic behind, because it is destroying our
community. Let us remember that before we engage in sex, we must wear
condoms. One condom, one round. No condom, no sex!

In conclusion, let me say: Dear people, every person for himself or
herself, and no one for the other. If your needs are not met, go to
Parliament’s offices, and take part in ward committees; councillors should
work with people and call meetings.

We as members have taken this opportunity. On 30 March we will have a
meeting with the Rand Water Board, which we requested after hearing about
the problems it was facing. We will bring the report of the outcome to you.
I am asking you, Deputy President, to emphasize Batho Pele. The other thing
is, let us make a difference in the people’s lives. I thank you.]

Mr F ADAMS: Hon Deputy President, hon members, Premiers, MECs Special
delegates and speakers. Chairperson, our country and our continent have
been blessed as both original home of all mankind and now as the emerging
home of mankind, full of hope for a future not defined by conflict,
aggression and oppression, but instead by compassion, tolerance and peace.

On 8 January 1980, celebrating the 25th anniversary, the late Hon O R Tambo
said:

      The Freedom Charter contains the fundamental perspective of the vast
      majority of the people of South Africa of the kind of liberation that
      all of us are fighting for because it came from the people; it remains
      still the people’s charter. It contains the one basic political
      statement of our goals which are all genuinely democratic and
      patriotic South Africa are here.

The architect of our democracy that we had just celebrated 10 years of
remains true to the ideals and vision that was conceived in Kliptown 50
years ago and we are able to navigate the way through the despair of
apartheid South Africa and emerge with the hope of a better life, which we
are beginning to realise day by day, slowly but surely. All these can be
attributed to the fact that 50 years ago there was a generation of people
who refused to be shaped in the image of racism, division, exclusion and
inequality of their oppressors. Instead they said: “South Africa belongs to
all who lives in it black and white.”

It is this simple assertion that gives our Constitution its moral clarity
and directs our efforts to build a single yet diverse nation in this
country.

The last 10 years in South Africa have been marked by achievements and
successes, who would have thought 50 years ago that we would one day set an
example for others to follow? Who would have predicted 50 years ago that
South Africa would help other nations find peace? It is my sincere belief
that in the not too distant future all of Africa will be a symbol of hope
and reconciliation, a place where children are valued, protected and
nurtured, a place where all people have the opportunity to grow and to
prosper.

It has been said that success breeds success but in South Africa I believe
a decade of success has also created in many communities a pattern of
acceptance. Too often we allow ourselves to forget the importance of what
South Africa has achieved and the scope of the challenges that we must
still meet together.

I believe that we must reconnect as a nation with the sources of strength
that 10 years ago launched us on the path of success. It was faith and
shared humanity that let former enemies work together. It was faith and
belief in God that gave us the strength to act. We need to believe in the
potential of our country and our people. We need men and women from every
community to drive a new patriotism underpinned by faith because our
people, mostly the poor, negotiate circumstances that history has dealt
them with the merest minimum of dignity.

With the barest minimum of support and family networks, they have displayed
a remarkably resilient and tenacious to strive for a better life, these are
the people whom we seek to empower and around whom we seek to design our
interventions, holding to quiet heroism and dignity.

In 10 years we have had great successes. Many more people have water and
electricity, many more people have houses, there are more clinics and more
schools, but is it is not enough. We must work together to make sure that
the next decades are even better. We owe it to our children.

Too many people think that human rights are just words on paper. It is easy
to pay lip service to moral issues and to find fault with others. South
African politics has no lack of leaders who speak loudly about fighting
back. We know whose party uses the words “fighting back”; we know about the
race card, about economic responsibility and about character. These are the
same leaders who most often see only the beauty of these failings. Our
country and our people have no time for leaders whose permanent occupation
is finding fault.

Our ANC government knows that human rights are really about freedom. It is
about the freedom of a young child to play and learn without the pain of
hunger in her belly; the freedom to go down the street and through the park
without the fear of being raped or murdered.

Dit is die vryheid van ’n Christen, ’n Moslem en ’n Jood om openlik hul
geloof te beoefen. Dit is ook die vryheid van ’n pa of ’n ma om werk te kry
en ’n lewe te maak en vir hulle gesin kos op die tafel te sit. [It is the
freedom of a Christian, or a Muslim or a Jew openly to practise their
religion. It is also the freedom of a father or a mother to find work, make
a living and put food on the table for their families.]

These are the freedoms and human rights our people thought about when they
drew up the Freedom Charter in 1955, after they had collected the opinions
from across the length and breadth of the country. They knew that you must
take the long view and remain rooted in the conviction that what they were
committing to the Charter can and will be fruitious beyond their lifetimes.

It is our responsibility to carry forward these challenges because
challenges like these require all South Africans to roll up their sleeves
and to work together in the same way that co-operation and partnership were
the key to bringing democracy to South Africa. It remains the key to our
future success. We South Africans must work to meet these challenges. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mev C SEOPOSENGWE (Noord-Kaap): Voorsitter, Adjunkvoorsitter, ons Premier,
die konings wat hier is, die raadslede wat hier is, ek wil eerstens
verskoning vra vir die afwesigheid van ons Premier. Hy is ‘n baie goeie
Premier, maar hy kan nie hier wees nie. Ek praat vandag ‘n bietjie
Afrikaans, want ek mag enige taal praat en ek het gekies om Afrikaans te
praat. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mrs C SEOPOSENGWE (Northern Cape): Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, kings
present here, councillors present here, in the first place I want to tender
our Premier’s apologies. He is a very good Premier, but he is unable to be
present. I am speaking a bit of Afrikaans today, because I am allowed to
speak any language, and I have chosen to speak Afrikaans.]

Fa re ne re le mo pusong ya maloba, Afrikaans e ne e le puo e o neng o
patelediwa gore o e bue. Matsatsing a gompieno, re bone jaaka re kopane fa
re le puso ya batho re tlile mo bathong gore, batho ba bua maleme a bona
jaaka ba rata.  Ke ka moo ke reng le Afrikaans re a kgona go e bua, mme
fela ra re a re tlhompheng dipuo tsa batho ba bangwe. Batho ba tla busa. E
le ruri, batho ba rona ba a busa.

Dingwaga tse 50 tse di fetileng, fa go kopanwe kwa Kliptown, bangwe ba rona
re ne re ise re tsalwe. Bangwe ba ne ba tsetswe. Ba ba tsetsweng morago, ba
ile ba utlwa molaetsawa gore batho ba tla busa. Baša ba Aforika Borwa ba
ile ba ema ka maoto ba potlakanyetsa  puso ya maloba. Ke gopola malatsi a
maloba, e ne etle e re fa OR Tambo a bua le rona, re mo reetsa ka Radio
Freedom. O ne o sa e utlwe sentle. O ne o potela mo morago ga kgoro kgotsa
mo morago ga ntlo gore o kgone go utlwa baeteledipele ba rona ba Aforika
Borwa ba bua le rona ba le kwa Lusaka. Ba ne ba seyo mo gare ga rona mme .
. . (Translation for Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[During the previous dispensation, we were forced to speak Afrikaans. These
days, look how united we are as government for the people; today we came to
the people so that people could speak their own languages as they like.
That is why I’m saying we can even speak Afrikaans, but let us respect
other people’s languages. The people shall govern. Surely our people are
governing.

Fifty years ago, during the gathering in Kliptown, some of us had not yet
been born. Some had already been born. Those who were born after that
received the message that the people shall govern. South African youth
stood up against the former government. I remember those days, when O R
Tambo spoke to us, and we would listen to him on Radio Freedom. It was not
clear. One would go behind the door or the house in order to listen to our
South African leaders talking to us from Lusaka. They were not with us, but
. . .]

. . . hulle het altyd ‘n plan gemaak sodat hulle met die mense kan praat.
[. . . they always made a plan so that they could talk to the people.]

Ke gopola ka nako tsa bo-80, bangwe ba rona re santse re le baša. Re ne re
taboga, re tlala mo mebileng re re, batho ba tla busa. Re re, re tshwanetse
gore batho ba rona ba buse le fa re ne re sa itse gore ba tla busa leng. Ka
tsela eo, ANC e ne ya potlakanyetsa gore batho ba buse, mme ra thusiwa ke
Cuito Cuanavale e e neng ya shashara batho. Fa e sena go shashara batho, ra
bona mekoloko ya batho e ya go bua le baetapele ba rona, ba tswa ba ya
Lusaka ba ya go buisana le bona, go ipaakanyetsa Aforika Borwa. Ke batho ba
ba neng ba itse gore batho ba tla busa.

 Ke nnete batho ba rona ba busa gompieno. Se se botlhokwa thata ke gore, re
na le baeteledipele tota e seng dipekenene. Baeteledipele ba tshwana le bo
OR Tambo, rre Luthuli, rre Sisulu le Motlatsa Presidente, JacobZuma. Ke
baeteledipele ba ba nang le ponelopele e seng baeteledipele ba ba nnang ba
leletse ruri, ba ba ipeileng.

Se se diragalang mo Mpumalanga gompieno, ke tiro e ntle thata. Re ntse re
utlwa batho ba tla go bua fa. Ke itumela thata gore gompieno ke itse tota
gore Comrade Kenny Sentle ke mang , o tswa kwae?  Batho ba rona ba ile ba
gololosega go bua gore ke bona bo mang. Ka mafoko ao , re a leboga.

Ke rata gore go Modulasetulo, rona re le Kapa Bokone, re amogetse programa
e ya goya kwa bathong. Fa e sale re e setse morago go tloga kwa KwaZulu-
Natal. Fa re bowa kwa KwaZulu-Natal . . . (Translation of Setswana
paragraphs follows.)

[I remember that during the eighties, some of us were still youth. We would
chant, take to the streets and shout that the people shall govern. We were
saying that our people must govern, even though we did not know when. By so
doing, the ANC expedited government by the people, but Cuito Cuanavale that
wooed people helped us. After the wooing of people, we saw multitudes
flocking to talk to our leaders; they left for Lusaka to talk to them and
they prepared themselves for South Africa. They knew that the people should
govern.

Certainly, our people are governing today. What is of essence is that we
are blessed with real leaders and not puppets. Leaders like O R Tambo, Mr
Luthuli, Mr Sisulu and Deputy President Jacob Zuma are leaders with vision.
They are not self-imposed leaders who are complaining all the time.

What is happening today in Mpumalanga is a very a good thing. We have been
listening to people talking here. I’m pleased that today I know who Comrade
Kenny Sentle is and where he is from. Our people are free to say who they
are. With these words, we thank you.

To the Chairperson, I would like to say that we as Northern Cape welcome
the programme involving visiting the masses. We have been following it
since KwaZulu-Natal. On our return from KwaZulu-Natal . . .]

. . . what we did immediately, was to initiate the very same programme. We
have been going from one region to another as a legislature. We have been
talking to our people, talking to the community leaders and talking to our
councillors about their problems or the challenges in their communities.
Therefore, this programme is working. [Applause.] We also want to
appreciate and thank the MEC for finance in our province, because he made
it possible for us to continue with this programme as a legislature. At
least he was able to allocate us a little more funding so that we could be
able to do oversight work and to talk to our people as we are seated here
today.

Deputy President, we have gathered here since Monday to engage with our
people in our efforts towards building a better society founded on
recognised human rights and commitment to service delivery. This commitment
is not in vain because our Constitution demands that we ensure and protect
the rights of all our people, in particular the workers and the poor. Our
commitment to service delivery is a means to achieve equality for all.

Ladies and gentlemen, comrades, let me also say to you that, as the
Northern Cape, we want to put a firm proposal to the NCOP on the table. We
are ready to host you in the Northern Cape on 26 June. That is a firm
proposal. Rest assured that you would be safe in the Northern Cape. The
myth, which is that the Northern Cape is the capital city of rape, is not
true. Women, you are safe. Women parliamentarians, please be free to come
to the Northern Cape. We’ve got a beautiful province.

Much has been said already. I don’t want to waste time, but I want to say I
know that soon, hon Chair, you would be able to respond to the proposal.
From here we are going to roll up our sleeves as a province and prepare
ourselves so that when you come, we are able to engage in the same type of
programme. I want to say to you also, Chair, that throughout this week we
have seen our women leaders coming here to give information to the people
of Mpumalanga. I was so proud to be a woman myself, because I realised
that, yes, this ANC-led government has not made a mistake to appoint women
as Ministers. [Applause.] You can see that even those women who’ve been
coming to stand here, are real leaders, not elastic leaders. We want to say
to you . . .

 . . . malibongwe igama lamakhosikazi, malibongwe! [. . . let the women’s
name be praised, let it be praised!]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Let it be praised!]

Mrs C SEOPOSENGWE (Northern Cape): Long live, the people’s government, long
live!

HON MEMBERS: Long live!

Mrs C SEOPOSENGWE (Northern Cape): Long live, the people’s assembly, long
live!

HON MEMBERS: Long live!

Mrs C SEOPOSENGWE (Northern Cape): Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President, Premier and the Speaker
of my province, all other dignitaries, ladies and gentlemen, it is indeed a
pleasure and a privilege to be part of this delegation to my own province.
It is just a pity that unlike you, so many others have tried to make this
into a rally, but I understand this because it is an election year.

I really cannot tolerate and not say something about the apologetics like
the hon Van Rooyen, who really tried to polish his own image by praising
the ANC and trying to diminish the good that the DA does. I want to
challenge him to come to Mpumalanga, or to any outpost where our people
are, where the different languages of this country are spoken, and to find
a place where I am not known for working among the people, which happens
while he sits in the shades of Bloemfontein’s trees, and I am working with
the people.

“Moshemane eo, Van Rooyen, a se ke a lebala hore Basotho ba re: ‘Ho tseba
kotsi ke ho feta pela yona’.” [Mahofi.] [This boy, Van Rooyen, must never
forget that the Basotho say: A person who knows pain is the one who
experienced it first hand. [Applause.]]

The topic of building a better society encompasses a lot of ideas, but we
need to look closely at the stipulation founded on recognised human rights.
We don’t need to analyse Maslow’s Hierarchal Needs to know that the most
basic human rights are education, health care, recreation, etc.

Mr T S RALANE: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary to
refer to the hon Van Rooyen as a “boy”?

Mr A WATSON:  I withdraw.  Is he no longer a boy? [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP:  Order, Mr Watson! Could you apologise
properly.

Mr A WATSON: I withdraw, because it wasn’t meant to be derogatory. It was
meant as a masculine term. But I withdraw unconditionally.

I was saying that we don’t need to analyse Maslow’s theory in order to know
what the needs of the people are.  Building a better society really means
that these basic rights, the human rights, have to be in place before we
can go any further. But what is the de facto situation? Instead of
targeting the needs, the government seems hell-bent on transformation
without any regard for negative consequences.

Transformation may be very necessary to right the wrongs of past, but if it
means that the best brains and experiences are driven away from
institutions, to be replaced by the inexperienced, corrupt and unskilled,
then it is bad for the country and bad for the people. It is bad that this
leads to bad administration, which means that ultimately it is the poor who
are suffering, and our children who are neglected.

How can the basic need for education be promoted when school books are not
distributed, but are stored or maybe hidden away in a warehouse in Witbank,
where incidentally the DA discovered them and alerted the MEC and the
department?

This week we again found many dedicated and willing health workers who are,
however, hamstrung from performing properly because of the health system
that has totally collapsed. The hon Premier says that our people are
rioting as if they are not being heard. But if corrupt officials are being
given more and more time and corrupt mayors are given more and more rope to
corrupt the people, then those people are not being heard, Mr Premier.
Something must be done. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Hon Chair, his Excellency, the Deputy President of the
Republic of South Africa, hon Premiers, hon members of this House, and our
beloved countrymen of Mpumalanga, I want to lend support to the topic under
discussion based on the building of a better society founded on recognised
human rights, and committed to service delivery.

At the church service that I attended recently, the preacher took great
pains, and in fact, was literally sweating, to engage his congregation to
build a better society, founded on Christian principles and committed to
the service of the Lord.

Today in the beautiful province of Mpumalanga we are confronted with an
interesting debate led not by a religious leader, but by a political leader
by the name of his Excellency, the Deputy President. With basically the
same message of building a better society that is founded on recognised
human rights. I understand him to be saying that we, as members of
Parliament, have the great responsibility of taking our people by the hand,
rolling up our sleeves, and to start building a better society that is
founded, not on political rhetoric, but on recognised human rights.

This means that whatever we shall be doing should be aimed at achieving
certain goals or bearing fruits. I understand a better society to mean a
society that is free from abuse of our womenfolk and children, free from
corruption, and free from all the other ills that are calculated to degrade
us as a people.

In the last few days we have been seriously engaged in and interacting
together with the people of Mpumalanga, to find ways and means of building
a desired, better society. Together we have discussed vital issues related
to provision of water and sanitation. We have discussed issues related to
health, education, agriculture, social development, and others. In certain
instances our engagement has unintentionally bordered on the brink of
offending local government functionaries.

Another important issue that was emphasised in our programme was to take
along the people with disabilities, so that they too could get all the
benefits that other people were entitled to. It was agreed, once more, that
schools and offices must be compliant to these needs, so that they too can
have unhampered access to schools and offices.

In conclusion, and on behalf of my party, we wish to support this statement
being debated today together with the efforts being made regarding moral
regeneration. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A MASONDO (Salga): Lotshang, dumelang, [Good afternoon] Chairperson, hon
Deputy President, Jacob Zuma, Ministers and Deputy Ministers amongst us,
members of the NCOP, the Premier of Mpumalanga, Thabang Makwetla, MECs,
Inkosi uMakhosonke II, Inkosi uMaishe III, Chairperson of the House of
Traditional Leaders in Mpumalanga, Khosi Mashile, members of the Mpumalanga
Provincial Legislature, the Salga leadership collective amongst us, mayors
and councillors, members of the community, distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen. The SA Local Government Association is honoured to participate
in the NCOP activities that are taking place in this province.

We are inspired by our commitment to the concept “Putting our people first”
by taking Parliament to the people. We are pleased to be part of this
initiative and to participate on a platform that enables all stakeholders,
the elected public representatives, organisations of civil society,
communities, and the government to consider debate and seek solutions to
the challenges that face our society.

We, at Salga, are guided by an understanding that local government is
democracy in action. It is an agreement that works at the municipal level
and provides its councillor with a rare opportunity to grapple with real
issues on the ground. There is the need for understanding the centrality of
ordinary people in shaping history and development and the need therefore
to interact with people should at all times remain uppermost in our minds.
Our understanding is that local government hinges not only on periodic and
regular elections, but is also informed by the need for reactive
participatory process that ensures consultation with communities and civil
society organisations.

We understand local government as that sphere of government that is closest
to the people, that sphere of government that deals with bread-and-butter
issues, service delivery aimed at addressing the day-to-day needs of local
residents. Perhaps that is why so much pressure has been brought to bear on
councillors.

It is also our view that local government should seek to position itself in
such a way that it becomes, and intervenes, as an economic role-player of
significance, a government that is committed to creating wealth, economic
opportunities, employment, as well as getting directly involved in issues
of development. It is therefore important to emphasise that the public
representatives, managers, and officials of local municipalities are all
there to see to these needs so as to ensure that they are addressed.

This is not to say that there are municipalities that are unable to meet
their obligations. The financial, administrative and other resources,
capacity and other constraints, do indeed exist. This constitutes a reality
that we have to contend with. We are meeting two days before 21 March,
Human Rights Day. The past system of the apartheid era evokes horrible
memories that come flooding to mind, as we remember the struggles against
the passbook. This also known, to many, as the badge of slavery.

This is so primarily because the passbook represented the total control of
the lives of the oppressed: where one should reside, where one should work,
one’s movement, access to education and health care and seriously limited
housing and related opportunities. It defined all those other than whites
as less than human. Our Human Rights Day in South Africa has been born out
of our unique struggle, the struggle that led to the birth of a new
democratic dispensation. Ours is a struggle that continues to strengthen
our efforts towards achieving a more humane and caring South Africa.

The building of such a caring and people-centred society requires a
collective contribution by all South Africans irrespective of colour,
creed, gender or race. Human rights and human dignity can only become a
reality if all of us put the shoulder to the wheel. The SA Local Government
Association is a body constituted of a number of municipalities. It is
organised local government. Our role can be summed up as acting as the
voice of local government, engaging in lobbying and advocacy work that
enables the voice of municipalities to be amplified and heard.

Being the voice of local government should help to ensure that there is an
improvement of the quality of life for all at the local level. We are there
to ensure that such issues are listened to, that the various spheres of
government and institutions relate and become responsive to the
representation that we make. We also seek to help many municipalities in an
ongoing manner, to build capacity and enable them to deliver services and
serve local communities.

We continue to see ourselves as the centre of knowledge on matters of local
government. In this regard we encourage interaction between ourselves and
institutions of higher learning, as well as local government practitioners.
More importantly, the idea that the public representatives, managers and
officials of local government are answerable to local communities should be
the cornerstone of what we do. Without these communities there is no
municipality or local legislature to speak of. Without communities, there
can indeed be no local government to speak of.

What we need is the understanding that there is an implied contract between
the public representatives that are elected by the people, the managers and
officials that are employed at the local municipal level on the one hand,
and the public on the other. This idea makes it possible for service to
occur and to be delivered at an acceptable level. This contract is two-
fold: Firstly, it should be understood that it is a privilege to serve in
any local government institution, and indeed it therefore follows that the
public representatives, managers and officials who work at local
municipalities have an obligation to attend to the day-to-day needs of our
communities effectively and efficiently.

We must strive to do so honestly, and be open to public scrutiny. The
concept Batho Pele or “putting the people first” should act as a guide in
the work that we do. The following Batho Pele principles are indeed
creative: Consultation, citizens should be consulted about the level and
quality of the public service they receive, and wherever possible should be
given a choice about the services that they are offered. Regarding service
standards, citizens should be told what level and quality of public service
they would receive so that they are aware of what to expect.

All citizens should have equal access to the services to which they are
entitled. Citizens should be treated with courtesy and consideration at all
times. Citizens should get full, accurate information about the Public
Service that they are entitled to receive. Openness and transparency,
citizens should be told how local, national and provincial departments are
run, the service they deliver, how much they cost, and who is in charge. If
the promised standards of service are not met, citizens should be offered
an apology, a full explanation, a speedy and effective remedy, and when
complaints are made, citizens should receive sympathetic, positive
responses.

Concerning value for money, the Public Service should be provided for
economically and efficiently in order to give citizens the best possible
value for their money. We do not just say these things, we are committed to
them.

In conclusion, allow me, Chairperson, to say that the customer is never
ever wrong. This is the message that should go out there to all our people,
especially those who are public representatives, and those who are employed
by municipalities. Every citizen, resident and rent-payer deserves better
and should be listened to and heard. The people should be treated with
respect and dignity. The voice of local government is meaningless if it
does not put the needs of the people first. We are there to serve. Let me
assure you, we are there to serve. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr T MUFAMADI (Limpopo): Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Chairperson, Deputy
President of the Republic of SA, Premier Makwetla, MECs present here,
Chairpersons of Select Committees, Chairperson of Salga – Ntate Masondo,
magosi a rena ao a lego mo [Mr Masondo, all Chiefs present], and all
protocol representatives observed . . . “ri ri ndi lihulwane nahone lo
pfala. Ri do li swikisa Musanda.” [. . . we are saying that the message is
clear and will be referred to the Chief].

Almost a year ago the people of South Africa gave the ANC-led government an
overwhelming mandate to implement its policies, programmes and strategies
for at least the next five years. The Freedom Charter says: ‘‘The people
shall govern’’. This, to us as elected representatives, means that there is
no government that will claim that the people are governing if that
government is not a democratic one.

Democracy is not just about the franchise, but in South Africa it means
that there must be broad participation by the people in formulating and
shaping the policies of our government. Therefore, Chapter 9 institutions
say that supporting democracy is an important foundation that guarantees
the advancement and protection of the rights of our people in a democratic
place.

The process of the imbizos is central to the realisation of a transparent
and consultative society. Our province continues to be very consistent with
this practice, by taking its Cabinet sessions to the people periodically.

In addition to this, it is how we formulate our budget. In Limpopo we
consult with the communities and various stakeholders to ensure that our
budget is indeed a reflection of the interests of our people, hence we are
proud that as we enter the second decade of our democracy, we do so based
on what the people themselves have identified together with us. Key aspects
of socio-economic development, with the key focus being on job creation and
eradication of poverty, are to be at the top of our national agenda.

What is important about the April 2004 election results is not only the
fact that the ANC extended its national majority, but we have achieved this
in all nine provinces independently. The results are here for all of us;
all of our nine provincial legislatures are represented in this important
debate today.

The ten-year review highlights the tremendous progress we have made in the
past decade to deliver services and bring about a more equitable society.
It also underscores the fact that local government is indeed the sphere of
government closest to the communities and thus reflects the service
delivery point. Therefore, it is in this sphere of government that the
character and form of our government will be determined. The developmental
agenda of our government will be tested.

Therefore, the people have a right to demand of our elected representatives
in town and district councils to deliver quality services, and in time.
There can be no excuses for any of the public representatives in all
spheres of government to claim that they are not conversant with the needs
of our people. In our province, in the coming budget, we have prioritised
the improvements of our social infrastructure, particularly the elimination
of classroom backlogs, roads and the supply of water.

As representatives of our province, we are also keenly aware of many
challenges that still exist within local government, especially in rural
provinces such as Limpopo. One of these challenges is a major skills
handicap - an issue that is experienced within the broader economy, but
felt especially within the local government sphere.  These lower skill
levels have an impact on our ability to meet the major developmental
challenges and effectively deliver the basic services.

One of the primary duties of this House is to reflect the views of the nine
provinces and to integrate this into the broader national strategies and
programmes. We also believe that this House has an opportunity to consider
the broader issues of service delivery and to study and debate options on
how to allocate resources, including human resources, to ensure sustainable
development, both at national and provincial levels. This is an issue that
is being discussed in detail in the representative forums and working
groups, including Salga and Nedlac.

We believe that the time has come to put in place effective and responsive
senior management in local government structures throughout our country,
and in particular in our province, to stop relying on crisis management and
stopgap measures. As the national government and provincial departments
continue to transfer huge and increased budget allocations directly to the
local authorities, it is therefore incumbent upon our municipalities to
ensure that money is spent in effective and productive ways.

There are a number of government programmes designed for maximum impact on
poverty relief and job creation. The Expanded Public Works Programme is but
one of these programmes designed to use infrastructure development as a
means to push back the frontiers of poverty. To achieve these goals, we
will require major national consensus and a commitment by all relevant role-
players to address underdevelopment in the second economy. Training of our
people to enable them to move from being under-skilled to being employable
must be high on the list of priorities.

In this regard, the role of our institutions of learning should not be
found wanting. We have engaged in this regard all institutions of higher
learning in our province to be alive to the challenges of our province.

We are proud of the significant progress Limpopo has made over the 11
months of the second decade of freedom. In building on the achievements and
successes of the first decade of our democracy, we have convened various
summits to interrogate in more detail the value chain of economic
activities in the province and put Limpopo on a trajectory of sustainable
growth and development. These summits culminated in the Provincial Growth
and Development Summit that adopted a strategy that will certainly enable
us to expand our economic base and horizons and create more opportunities
for job creation and the development of our local skills base.

Over and above enhancing our tourism industry and all sectors of our
economy through initiatives such as those highlighted earlier on by the
Deputy President, and fortifying the Moria City, we have also set aside an
amount of about R30 million to partner the private sector in making sure
that we begin to construct an international convention center. At the same
time, we recognise our role as Limpopo, that we are indeed the gateway to
Africa. We also believe that we can continue to play a pivotal role in the
integration of SADC economists by probably being considered to be the host
of the permanent seat of the Pan-African Parliament.

In conclusion, we as Limpopo conclude today’s discussion and debate with a
renewed sense of hope and optimism about the future of Limpopo and it is
with a similar sense of hope that we are participating in this debate and
listened to the message brought by the Deputy President. We trust that this
honourable House will continue to do its work and monitor the programmes
that we have committed ourselves to as provincial government. Thank you
very much. [Time Expired.] [Applause.]

Mr B J TOLO: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President and Ministers, one or
two Ministers in this hall, hon Premier and MECs present, Your Majesties
King Makhosonke II and King Maishe III and all traditional leaders present
here, mayors and councillors and, most importantly, our people, some of
whom have traveled long distances to be with us here today, good day
everybody.

Now, Chair, before I actually read my prepared speech here, I just want to
make one or two comments in relation to what DA actually said here. I just
want to tell hon Watson that it is not necessary for him to tell us that he
is working throughout the length and breadth of this province. The
elections are coming very soon and they will tell us what he was doing,
because we know the people will speak on that day. And we also understand
why he is so agitated. It is because hon Watson has never in his political
life addressed the magnitude of people that he sees here today.
So, he is actually trying to throw his net wide, with the aim of, or maybe
thinking he will catch one or two. How mistaken you are, hon Watson.

Now one thing he also tells us here is that government is actually
expelling experienced civil servants that and we are hiring people who are
not experienced. I want Watson to show me one experienced civil servant who
is experienced in administering democracy. Let him, if he can, show me one
person who was expelled who has ever administered democracy, because all
those that he was talking about are those who are experienced in
administering apartheid. So, we don’t need that type of experience here.
Those people are square pegs in round holes and we don’t need them.

Chair, Watson also states there is corruption in government and all those
sorts of things. We want to tell the hon Watson that government itself
exposed almost 80% of the corruption that we found in government.
Government itself exposes it and every time government comes across it, it
actually deals with it decisively. There are many of examples in this
regard, and therefore we don’t understand what is he talking about.

Let me go back to my speech. The year 1994 was an important event in the
history of this country. It is the year in which our people, led by the
ANC, once and for all broke free from the shackles of apartheid and set
them an agenda of building a society based on universal human rights. We
set ourselves goals of building a democratic, free, nonracial and nonsexist
society. Since then, we have never looked back as we are focused on
transforming the country from an apartheid nation so that we can take our
rightful place as equal partners among the community of nations.

Our Constitution with its Bill of Rights is second to
none in the world and is exposing real equality among people and
guaranteeing the rights of all the citizens of our country. I usually say
that 10 years is a very short time in historical terms, but within that
short space of time our achievements have been unparalleled. We have
surpassed many countries that achieved their liberation decades before us.
The Freedom Charter and the RDP policy documents joined our democratic
government to move our country decisively towards social transformation and
the eradication of poverty and underdevelopment.

As we meet here today, both foe and friend recognise that we have made
decisive progress in bettering the lives of our people. One of the social
tragedies of apartheid was an introduced racially and ethnically based
education system, which rendered millions of our people illiterate and
ignorant.

However, we have managed to abolish the fragmented, inferior system of
education and on its ruins we have established one education system in our
country. The old curriculum that encouraged rote learning is safely in the
museum of history, alongside the spinning wheel. In its place a new,
progressive curriculum is being phased in, a curriculum that would produce
learners who will be in a position to compete with the best in the world.
Indeed, the doors of learning and culture are open, as the Freedom Charter
states. Schooling in our country today is compulsory for all children up to
grade 9, or 15 years of age. There isn’t a child that can be denied access
to school because the parents cannot pay school fees. We have also heard
from the Minister that from next year the schools in the lower quintiles
will be exempted from paying school fees. We think we should commend the
government and the Minister of Education for such a bold step to lift the
burden of school fees from our poor communities.

In addition to this, there is the need to create a conducive environment
for all children. As we speak now, our children are supplied with learner
support material free of charge and in primary schools there is what we
call the national school nutrition programme. Education at institutions of
higher learning is no longer the preserve of children from relatively rich
families. It is now accessible to the poorest child out there. It is
possible because government is now providing financial support to every
child who deserves to go to university. There is therefore no excuse for
any child who passes matric and who has matric exemption to roam the
streets, using poverty as an excuse. Today the Department of Education has
put aside more than R800 million for this very purpose.

Chair, we must also hasten to state that any student who fails his or her
exams is disqualified from this financial help. During our interaction with
the stakeholders, from the MEC for education in Mpumalanga this week we
learned that our children are not doing very well at school in this area.
This enclave performs below the provincial average in matric. Our view is
that the problem is not only in matric, but is to be found at all levels of
schooling. [Time expired.][Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon members, invited guests who are with
us here today, I must thank the hon members for this very encouraging
debate. I think members of the NCOP have addressed all the issues that
needed to be addressed this morning. I think it has been a very
enlightening debate.

Let me in passing say something about the remark I made earlier, because I
noticed that the speakers from provinces made a point of apologising on
behalf of their Premiers. I think that if we are running an institution of
this nature, we should be able to submit apologies in time. [Applause.]
What actually occasioned my remark was that I did not see some of the
Premiers here and the Chair did not say to me that there were apologies
from Premiers for very serious reasons. But, of course, I have been
informed that yesterday two Premiers did apologise. The Premier of KwaZulu-
Natal, as you heard, has had a death in his family, and the Premier of the
Eastern Cape has also apologised. The Premier of Gauteng apologised this
morning. Other than those, there were no apologies, except when speakers
came here to say that their Premier was very busy.

The point I am making is that we do need to take our institutions seriously
at leadership level so that everyone would take our institutions seriously.
I just thought that I should make that point because it is important. Our
Premiers are our leaders who necessarily have to be here to represent their
provinces. But, nevertheless, I think the representatives of provinces did
their job by giving us information as to what their Premiers were doing. I
think to hear what provinces are doing has enriched the debate. Many
speakers spoke about the achievements that we have made and also indicated
where there have been difficulties.

One of the issues that have been raised is the demonstrations that have
taken place. Two provinces have reports against the councillors or the
local government. There has been also a report of a very high degree of
complaints raised by the people in this province. The Chairperson repeated
that when he was making his contribution to the debate. I think this is
important because it shows that people are vigilant and that they are able
to raise their voices where they believe there is something wrong in the
manner in which we are governing, at whatever level of the three spheres of
government.

However, the Chair correctly made the point that it is impossible that
every councillor here does not do his or her work. If you paint everyone
with one brush, you undermine your case. It is not possible to say that all
councillors out there don’t do what they are supposed to do. It is
therefore important that the people make the point properly. I have said
this on many occasions, and I want to repeat it here: It does not help if
you say that councillors don’t do their work. If you know of a councillor
who is not working, come forward and say to us that councillor so-and-so is
not working so that we can address the issue. If you make the statement in
general, how can we address the issue? The next councillor may say he or
she is actually working, and there may be evidence to that effect. So, I
think if we are to make that case, let us make it properly so that the
issue could be addressed.

Those who demonstrate should also identify the problems, because if it is
not done properly, it then gives the impression that it can be interpreted
in many ways. Unfortunately, the problem with these protests is that they
come on the eve of elections, and people tend to demand the resignation of
all. Now, the danger of it is that somebody might say: People say I should
resign from my post so that they can come in and take that position. If you
want to alert government to a problem, why don’t you do it at all times and
not only when we are on the verge of elections? That’s the problem that I
thought I must underline so that our concerns are not misinterpreted or
used by the very same councillors politically to say that people are
campaigning against them because they want them out, and not because they
are not working.

I think it is important for us to monitor local government and continuously
report about those matters. I would, in fact, be happier when, at the point
when we go out into the streets, we could say that we have reported our
problems and nobody listened to them. And if we have been reporting to the
councillors or to the mayors themselves, and they did not listen, let that
be heard when people begin to say that they are dissatisfied.

I am making this point because I believe that the NCOP ought to make an
analysis of this because local government is the most difficult level of
governance. I have said in my opening address that the President has
identified the problem of capacity at that level. It is the most difficult
and it is therefore an area that needs our concentration and constructive
interaction to help councillors. The Premier of this province made rather
an important point when he said that many of the councillors are not
employed full-time and as a result part of the time they are doing other
work. Maybe that is the issue we need to look at. In some areas, we cannot
do without councillors who also do something else and therefore we will
have more problems. There are some deep rural areas where the teacher does
everything. He is a leader of the community and he does everything. And if
you say the community must participate, they wouldn’t know what to do in
such a situation. So, it’s an area that needs our serious attention to
resolve the issue so that the issue is not abused.

It is my view as well that a lot of effort ought to be put into local
government. Well, as I said, many members of this House said many good
things. I am happy that the people here saw how Parliament operates. There
was a little bit of the usual parliamentary heckling, calling for some
order and everything else associated with Parliament.  I always say that
this House, the NCOP, operates in a better fashion than its sister House,
the National Assembly. There is more noise and heckling in the National
Assembly. If it was the National Assembly that came here, you would end up
not knowing what was happening. [Laughter.] Maybe it is because of the size
of the House. There are some people who are always on their feet, calling
for points of order.

Here it really happened just once. I saw one member calling another member
to order, asking whether it was parliamentary for the member to say this or
that and the hon member did not even wait to be called upon by the Chair to
apologise. He apologised immediately. I think you saw a bit of how this
House operates. But it is always a very good House. I think members were
more behaved here because they were with the people, where they could be
seen. [Laughter.] I am very happy because it means they take the people
seriously.

I’m sure the last speaker attempted to deal with the issue, which caused
him to spend more time on it, instead of using his time for what it was
given. It is an issue that was raised by the hon member of the DA, who said
that transformation and affirmative action tend to undermine skills and
knowledge, and also probably a number of other things.

I just thought it was important to attend to this issue because there is
the false complaint that is generally entertained by many people, that if
you apply transformation or affirmative action you are undermining others.
People even go to the extent of saying you are practicing racism in
reverse. I think it is important for us to know that the decades of the
colour bar and racism in this country did not just act in a superficial
way. These things were institutionalised and embedded in every law, decree,
practice and ordinance for many, many years. If we were to sit and do
nothing about that, and just think that it will happen on its own, it would
take the same time it would have taken from the arrival of Jan van Riebeeck
up to now to correct it. And when it was done, it was very violent, very
despicable, and very arrogant. I think what is being done, without changing
anything, is to say: Let us take those who were disadvantaged and lift them
up to the same level. You can’t fight that. It’s actually picking a fight
where there is no fight at all. You can’t pick that fight because all you
are saying is, let’s take those who were disadvantaged and let them remain
there.

With regard to the issue of the brain drain, where people were leaving the
country; it is not people of a particular nationality who leave the
country. Almost everybody in South Africa - people with skills – who left
the country are now all coming back, irrespective of colour, for they have
realised that there is no danger here.

I’m merely underlining this point because I think we should not raise
points that are controversial. Instead, we should be saying: how do we find
ways and means of addressing this issue?

With regard to the issue of language, I answered a question in the national
Parliament a few days ago and said that there is, in fact, no crisis with
language. There are two languages in this country that have been promoted
to the national level, English and Afrikaans. The rest of the 11 are not
necessarily national, and we are promoting them to reach that level. Why do
we need to pick a fight? I thought it is important to make the point in
this House because critically we need to understand that we don’t just
speak for the sake of speaking, but we must raise issues that help us to
move forward.

I would like to underline what was said about the Men’s Summit here. The
Men’s Summit was held in Durban, KwaZulu-Natal. I think it is an absolutely
important development because society, over centuries, has been structured
in the manner that men had the last word and therefore the relations have
been, in a sense, tilted in their direction. I think that it would be an
achievement in this country if we men began to meet and debate this issue.
[Applause.] We therefore need to encourage MEC Mabuyakhulu to circulate
whatever was said there as a declaration and to plead with all of us – men
– to take it seriously.

Chairperson, many issues were raised, including the fact that we are
celebrating Human Rights Day on 21 March. I think hon members have
correctly characterised its history and its importance. I can only thank
hon members for such a valuable discussion. Provinces have given very
detailed programmes. Thank you very much, for you are so active when it
comes to the task of governing the provinces. We do need to take this
Parliament to the people more. Therefore, one appreciates the new culture
that is emerging  - of members beginning to invite the NCOP to have its
next sittings in their own provinces. I hope we could have more of these
because, as you have seen, it does help you to understand the problems of
the people; it does help the people to meet with their leaders – national
Ministers, provincial MECs, as well as members of Parliament, to raise
issues. There is no other way you could best practice the participatory
democracy that we have, except when people come together like this and
talk. I think the people of Mpumalanga have learned something and when you
come back next round they will be better prepared to interact with you. I’m
sure that in whatever area that we have gone, they remained behind and said
that next time they will be better prepared.

I would like to thank you very much for your very illuminating
participation in the debate that we had today and hope that the NCOP will
continue to deepen democracy in this country, as we have done. I would like
to thank the people of Mpumalanga, who had an opportunity to really sit
within the same premise as Parliament and experience this. And you really
behaved like members of Parliament . . .  [Applause.] . . . as if they knew
the Rules.

They were well disciplined, but there was also a little bit of heckling,
which is necessary. Thank you very much for using the opportunity. The
Chair said yesterday that since they came here, you have been raising
issues. And one of the issues that you raised is that of people with
disabilities, which led to the Chairperson going to see the place for
himself, and he is working out a way of addressing that issue immediately.
These are the benefits of the campaign Taking Parliament to the People.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! You can all take your seats and be
quiet, please.

Hon members, allow me, as we wrap up this session today in KwaMhlanga, to
thank a few stakeholders who participated in making this Taking Parliament
to People very successful. If I omit one, please note that it is not
intentional, for I might have forgotten you. But we will also take the
trouble of writing to you to thank you for the work you have actually put
in to make this exercise such a very great success. I want to thank the
Premier of this province, hon T P S Makwetla. [Applause.] I want to thank
the Speaker of the Mpumalanga Legislature. [Applause.] I would like to
thank the two kings who were here with us since Monday and all other
amakhosi.

I would like to thank the Thembesile Municipality, the Department of Public
Works, the Department of Health, the Department of Education, the Rand
Water Board, the Ekangala District Municipality, and all other people who
made this a success. [Applause.] And most sincerely I would like to thank
the people of this province who, when we said we were coming here,
participated very actively with us throughout the week. [Applause.] I am
happy that no MEC, no Minister from national government, no member of
Parliament or special delegate lost their temper when serious questions
were raised with us. [Applause.] I would like to thank all staff members
who prepared this and the entertainers outside who have been entertaining
us on Monday and today. [Applause.]

The request from the Speaker of the Northern Cape Legislature will be
addressed when we get it formally, in writing and it will be discussed by
all stakeholders when we go back to our traditional seat. [Applause.] This
encourages us as the NCOP. It tells us that people appreciate what this
institution does. And it encourages us to do more. It also tells us that we
have a lot of challenges as an institution.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 13:46.


