---
title: 'National Assembly - 09 March 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-03-09
---

WEDNESDAY, 9 MARCH 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.




ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.



                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mev D VAN DER WALT: Voorsitter, hiermee gee ek kennis dat ek gaan voorstel
dat die Huis die bevordering en die beskerming van al die amptelike tale in
Suid-Afrika tydens ’n debat bespreek. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans
Notice of Motion follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move
that the House debates the promotion and protection of all official
languages in South Africa. Thank you.]

Mr M WATERS: Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall move that this House
debates the role of social grants in alleviating poverty. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, I give notice that I shall move on behalf of the ACDP
that the House debates whether or not 16 Days of Activism is the most
appropriate response to the unabated child and woman abuse in South Africa,
and whether or not it drains or stimulates finances and resources needed to
accurately address the problems and deliver relevant and desperately needed
services. Thank you.

    CONGRATULATIONS TO ERNIE ELS ON WINNING THE DUBAI DESERT CLASSIC GOLF
                                 TOURNAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairman, I move without notice:

      That this House –


   1) congratulates Ernie Els on winning the Dubai Desert Classic Golf
      Tournament for the third time; and

   2) recognises the excellent role he plays as an ambassador for our
      country.

[Applause.]

Agreed to.




                 PROF S M MAYATULA TO PRESIDE DURING SITTING


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the House elects Prof S M Mayatula to preside during today’s sitting
  of the House, when requested by a presiding officer to do so.

Agreed to.

                        ORDER OF PRECEDENCE:QUESTIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the first Motion
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


       That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 29(8) and Rule 113,
       Questions shall not have precedence today.

Agreed to.


               HOURS OF SITTING OF EXTENDED PUBLIC COMMITTEES


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the draft
resolution printed in the name of the Chief Whip on the Order Paper, as
follows:

      That, notwithstanding Rule 23, the hours of sitting of Extended Public
      Committees to consider Budget Votes will be as determined by the
      Programme Committee.

Agreed to.

 DEBATE ON “THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN THE ESTABLISHMENT AND FUNCTIONING OF
    MECHANISMS TO PROVIDE FOR THE JUDGEMENT AND SENTENCING OF WAR CRIMES,
  CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY, GENOCIDE AND TERRORISM, WITH A VIEW TO AVIODING
                                  IMPUNITY”

Ms N M MAHLAWE: Chairperson, hon members, Judge Navanethem Pillay, in his
address on African perspectives on universal jurisdiction for international
crimes, which was held in Arusha in Tanzania, said:

      We are at a crucial crossroads. I believe it is a time for national
      parliaments and the international community to develop clear rules and
      approaches that should be taken to render the rule of law effective
      against oppressors who are on the run, or who are still too powerful
      to be prosecuted successfully in their own national courts.


He then calls for the provision of a uniform set of universal jurisdiction
laws that will meet the challenges of prosecuting perpetrators of
international human rights.

Without any doubt, the recurrence of immeasurable atrocities of the past
would bring shame to the “never-again” undertaking of the Nuremberg era, to
act as effective catalysts and revive the call for international criminal
justice.

Events of unprecedented barbarism, unthinkable after the excesses of the
Second World War, mass genocide in the Great Lakes region of Africa and
ruthless ethnic cleansing in the former Yugoslavia, brought the idea of
judicial enforcement to the forefront and paved the way to the era of
international justice, which is predominantly concerned prominently with
enforcing the now universally recognised human rights standards.

This is an era of international criminal justice, which follows
articulation, codification and enshrinement of human rights in
international instruments such as the Nuremberg and Tokyo charters, from
which the concept of crimes against humanity emerged. I am talking here of
the Geneva Convention, the Genocide Convention, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and other instruments which target elimination of
discrimination and torture.

Preceding this era, were the efforts of humanising war through law, which
evolved beyond regulations on the conduct of hostilities to converge on a
protection regime for the most vulnerable. Despite exposure of the world to
gross human rights violations, states’ protectiveness of their own
sovereignty made them reluctant to contemplate the inevitable yielding of
exclusive power that would attach to the creation of a supernational forum.

Because states can only act to their officials, such officials themselves
are granted attributes of the state, such as privileges and immunities,
which construct sees these individual actors not engaging their own
personal responsibility, but that of the state, with the convenient result
that they could escape altogether any form of criminal accountability, at
least outside their own borders.

This is a culture of impunity, as a result of which even those individual
actors who perpetrate violations of human rights, whether in times of war
or peace, are not brought to book. Today the global society is brutally
affected by war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, which are all
grave breaches of international law. Therefore, it is imperative for all
parliaments of the world to ensure respect for human rights contained in
various international instruments, which in effect ensure respect for human
dignity.
But despite the importance attached to the attainment of justice and all
the existing mechanisms, which guarantee the protection of victims at
national, regional and international levels, impunity still thrives in many
societies without caution.

There is a growing world conviction that impunity will no longer be
tolerated. States have concluded agreements to punish and prevent war
crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism, and established
corresponding penalties and mechanisms.

The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court is the most striking
milestone in the struggle for justice. The International Criminal Court is
designed to ensure justice and dignity for the victims, the re-enactment of
the rule of law, and fosters long-lasting national reconciliation and
peace. The mandate for the International Criminal Court is to try cases of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity committed after 2000 by
all states that are party to this statute.

One hundred and twenty states of the United Nations adopted the treaty to
establish a permanent international court in 1998. South Africa was the
23rd state to ratify the Rome Statute. Of importance is that the statute
defines gender crimes more explicitly than before. These, inter alia,
include rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy,
enforced sterilisation and other forms of sexual violence.
Parliaments have a responsibility to enact rules for domestic
implementation of these provisions of the International Criminal Court.
This includes those parliaments that have not ratified the Rome Statute.
All member parliaments of the International Parliamentary Union are urged
to assume responsibility for implementing and enforcing, through enactment
of national rules, the international agreements that have been concluded to
punish and prevent war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and
terrorism, and to establish corresponding penalties and mechanisms to avoid
impunity.

Elokugqibela ke, Sihlalo, ndicinga ukuba iya kuba nomdla into yokuba
ndiyibeke imo yoMzantsi Afrika wethu ngokubhekisele kulo mbandela. UMzantsi
Afrika wavumelana neKhonvenshoni yaseGeneva ejongene nokuphathwa
kwamabanjwa emfazwe ukususela ngonyaka ka-1952. Kwakhona ngo-1998 uMzantsi
wavumelana nokuthintelwa kwanokohlwaywa kwezenzo zobunqolobi ezibizwa
ngokuba kukutshatyalaliswa kohlanga oluthile.

UMzantsi Afrika wavumelana nokuthintelwa kwentshutshiso kwanezinye izenzo
ezithoba isidima sabantu okanye izohlwayo ezikwanjalo. Sele usisayinile
isivumelwano saseRome esingeNkundla yaMazwe ngaMazwe ejongene nezenzo
zobundlobongela. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)
[Finally, Chairperson, I think I must clearly state the South African
position with regard to this subject. South Africa reached an agreement at
the Geneva Convention on the status of prisoners of war as long ago as
1952. Again in 1998, South Africa agreed to prevent, and punish
perpetrators of terrorist acts such as genocide.

South Africa agreed on preventing acts of persecution and other forms of
crimes that degrade human dignity. A treaty on the International Criminal
Court has been signed in Rome.]

Lastly, in our perception of a peaceful, safe and secured world, we must
take cognisance of the daunting task facing the international community in
its capacity as the moral guarantor of peace: the needs of those people to
heal from bitterness, left behind by killings, distraction and
dehumanisation, as we have seen in Iraq and other African states. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr R COETZEE: Chairperson, it is right that parliaments from around the
world should unite against war criminals, perpetrators of genocide and
terrorists, for they are destroyers of peace and enemies of civilization.
They cause pain and bring death. They embody what is worst in humanity.

Sadly, our history is littered with examples of human beings brutalising
each other. Indeed, history gives us no cause for complacency, for as we
work for a world in which human beings treat each other with respect and
decency, we must expect that there will be those who will continue to
violate the humanity of others.

So, it is right that the parliaments of the world should stand shoulder to
shoulder against those who wish to destroy all that is good in humanity. As
the Secretary-General of the United Nations puts it, people all over the
world want to know that humanity can strike back, that whatever and
whenever genocide, war crimes or other such violations are committed, there
is a court before which the criminal can be held to account; a court that
puts an end to the global culture of impunity.

So, the DA supports the resolution that will serve before the International
Parliamentary Union next month, which invites parliaments around the world
to implement and enforce provisions to punish and prevent war crimes,
crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism, to ratify the Rome
Statute, if they have not done so, and to accede to the International
Criminal Court.

However, in politics, good cannot simply be done through the signing of
treaties, the passing of legislation and the establishment of courts. What
is required, above all, is political will, for political will is the fuel
that will drive our progress towards a more humane and just world. Where
there is political will to do right, there right will be done.

No doubt, much will be said today of the decision by the United States to
make use of a Bilateral Article 98 agreement to prohibit the surrender of
United States persons to the International Criminal Court, unless it is
with the consent of the United States. Indeed, if humanity is going to put
up a united front against the agents of death and destruction, then every
country needs to play a full and committed part in the development of the
International Criminal Court.

However, what our Parliament needs to question critically today is whether
we have done enough and whether we are playing our proper part in the
global battle against the brutalisation of humanity. The truth is that we
did not do enough. Indeed, we did very little while a million fellow
Africans were slaughtered in Rwanda just over 10 years ago. Of course, we
were meeting challenges of our own at the time but, still, we did not do
enough.

Since then, we have not done enough while our neighbours in Zimbabwe were
being beaten, raped, starved and murdered. Indeed, our government has
failed us, has failed the people of Zimbabwe and has failed all of humanity
by its failure to speak out and take action against a regime of human abuse
in Zimbabwe.

Still further north, but still in Africa, the people of Darfur in the Sudan
have been subject to brutalisation, starvation and murder. Some people like
to quibble over the technical definition of genocide. We say that where
people are being beaten, driven away from their homes and killed,
governments like ours must speak out and act, yet when he visited the Sudan
recently, President Mbeki could not find it within himself to condemn the
atrocities in Darfur or call on Sudan to become a signatory to the Rome
Statute.

There is a film that will reach our shores soon. It is called Hotel Rwanda,
and relates the events that took place in that unfortunate country a decade
ago. Let us not wait another 10 years for a film called Hotel Darfur before
we face up to our own failure to fight for decency and justice in the
Sudan.

At the International Parliamentary Union later this month, when we confront
those who are reluctant to participate fully in the work of the
International Criminal Court, let us do so from a position of moral
authority, secure in the knowledge that we practise what we preach. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, at the end of this month the
International Parliamentary Union will hold its 112th meeting. Practically,
all parliaments of the world will be represented there, as will our
Parliament under the leadership of Madam Speaker. Once again, matters of
mutual interest will be discussed and one would accept that events such as
the tsunami disaster will be debated and suggestions voiced on how we could
avoid similar disasters.
The South African delegation will voice the position of this Parliament. It
is therefore necessary for the South African delegation to share with our
colleagues the agenda that will be discussed. In this respect, I refer to
the item on the Order Paper, which deals with the role of parliaments. It
says: “The role of parliaments in the establishment and functioning of
mechanisms to provide for the judgement and sentencing of war crimes,
crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism, with a view to avoiding
impunity.”

The question begs a definite answer. Therefore, we have to debate what
roles parliaments can play and also have played so far. I wish to deal
briefly with that question.

An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Dumela mojapere. [Good day.]

We have to bear in mind though that in this respect, half a century ago,
over 250 000 conflicts around the world have resulted in millions of
people, most of whom are women and children, losing their lives, their
rights, as well as their property and dignity. In only a few cases have the
perpetrators of those atrocities been brought to justice.

Various steps have been taken by the international community and particular
parliaments, as did this Parliament. We signed the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court on 17 July 1998 and lodged the instrument of
ratification on 27 November 1998. We have done various other things. On 18
July 2002, we passed the implementation of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court Act.

Terrorism is the topic that has seized the world’s attention ever since the
11 September 2001 attack in the US. South Africa has in fact taken concrete
steps - whether that is enough is another question - to give effect to its
international and continental obligations to combat terrorism. At the end
of 2004, the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorism and
Related Activities Act was passed. The purpose of the Act is, inter alia,
to provide measures to prevent and combat terrorist and related activities;
to provide for an offence of terrorism and other offences associated or
connected with terrorist activities; to give effect to international
instruments dealing with terrorist and related activities and various other
points.

But all parliaments of the world have a responsibility to ensure that peace
and security is promoted and protected within their borders, as well as
internationally. To promote stability internally, parliaments should ensure
that the democratic processes are put in place and guarded. Such processes
could include, inter alia, the holding of regular free and fair elections;
the promotion of respect for the political right of opposition parties; the
promotion of tolerance and diversity; ensuring that women and minority
groups are represented in parliament; ensuring that international human
rights law instruments are ratified and that the necessary implementation
mechanisms are put in place.

There is much more to be said about this subject and there is much more to
be done, but I think I have outlined some basic steps taken by this
Parliament which, according to some, may not be enough, but at least are a
good start. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, shortly after the Second
World War the international community came to understand the full extent of
the genocide and other crimes against humanity perpetrated by Hitler. The
words “never again!” were uttered and a United Nations Convention was
adopted.

Sadly, however, since then six decades have elapsed with numerous such
crimes against humanity being perpetrated. In that same period, the spectre
of international terrorism has become a prevalent global occurrence. Whilst
the attacks on America three years ago received sensational publicity,
there have been equally terrible terrorist attacks in Russia, Africa,
Europe and Asia.

The international ramifications and execution of these crimes require a
united and integrated response from the governments and parliaments of the
world. The UN conventions that have been adopted thus far especially
require such a response.

The role of parliaments should not merely be confined to the creation of
domestic mechanisms for the judgement and sentencing of these crimes. These
domestic efforts must be co-ordinated, eventually to create a global legal
framework that leaves no place to hide for such criminals.

Simultaneously, such a co-ordinated effort by all parliaments must seek to
ensure that the pursuit of justice and protection against such crimes must
not itself degenerate into, or even be abused for, the violation of basic
democratic principles. An immediate example of this is the untenable and
legally dubious Camp X-ray in Guantanamo Bay.

The extent that terrorism and genocide are political … [Time expired.] I
thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Hon Chair, the ID believe that the issue we are debating
today is of prime importance for us both as a nation and continent.
Apartheid was classified as a crime against humanity and only ten years ago
we all witnessed the horror of the brutal genocide in Rwanda.
As the world has become more globalised, so too have our problems. Only if
we have concern for the wellbeing of all our neighbours can we truly call
ourselves a global village. No longer can we adopt the attitude that what
takes place in another country is simply that country’s internal affairs.

War crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism are stains on
all of humanity’s conscience. It is clear, however, that some perpetrators
of these atrocities, particularly those that hold state power, will try and
define their actions differently. It is therefore imperative that we
establish and strengthen existing international mechanisms that hold all of
humanity accountable to a common definition of these atrocities. In doing
this it is vital for parliaments, as representatives of the people, to
engage in this debate and ensure that we can all reach a common
understanding on this issue. Only in that way can we generate the country-
level support necessary for these mechanisms to take effect.

In developing these mechanisms and ensuring that they are used effectively,
we as a community of nations will be sending out a strong signal to those
who commit atrocities that these actions will no longer go unpunished. The
most marginalised groupings in the world, some of whom cannot depend on
their own state structures for protection, will at least have the knowledge
that the global community has the political will and authority to prosecute
these criminals.

Prosecution is only the last step in the chain though, and we as the
international community must do more to ensure that we are able to prevent
these crimes from happening in the first place. Only in that way will we
give credence to the statement “never again!” I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Mr Chairperson and hon members, despite the fact that
there were various treaties in the nineteenth and twentieth century on the
laws of war, the twentieth century was the bloodiest century in human
history – simply because people got away with it. Only in recent years has
the international community set up structures to ensure that the gravest
international crimes do not go unpunished – no matter who committed them.

In South Africa it was only after our first democratic elections in 1994
that the issue of human rights was given prominence. A Bill of Rights was
introduced as part of our Constitution, confirming what importance is
placed on human rights and human dignity in our society. Before 1994 the
previous government had a very skewed view on human rights, only applicable
to a minority of our population.

As part of this debate I want to concentrate on international humanitarian
law, or the rules applicable to warfare, also referred to as the law on
armed conflict. Our Constitution responds to past failures with several
provisions, designed to ensure compliance with international humanitarian
law by our security services, in particular the SANDF.

Our White Paper on Defence, compiled in 1996, furthermore clearly states:

    International law on armed conflict will enjoy primary consideration in
    the preparation and execution of military operations.


Not surprisingly, we were one of the first countries to ratify the Rome
Statute, creating the first ever permanent and independent International
Criminal Court, with jurisdiction to prosecute individuals responsible for
the most serious crimes of international concern, namely genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. This Rome Statute entered into force on 1
July 2002. To date, 98 countries are states parties to the Rome Statute,
including 26 African states.

In February 2003 the Assembly of States Parties elected the 18 judges of
the International Criminal Court. These judges constitute a forum of
international experts that represents the world’s major legal systems. The
International Criminal Court will not replace national courts. It will
allow national courts the first opportunity to investigate or prosecute,
and will thereafter only be complementary to national criminal
jurisdictions.

As the International Criminal Court deals with the most serious crimes, its
trials may also involve victims of such crimes. Such victims may include
child soldiers, rape victims or victims whose properties and livelihoods
have been destroyed during fighting. For this reason, a victim’s trust fund
has been established to channel money to victims either individually or
collectively.

To date, three states parties have referred cases to the Office of the
Prosecutor in the International Criminal Court, namely the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Republic of Uganda. A
United Nations commission has recently recommended that war crime cases in
Darfur, Sudan, be referred to the International Criminal Court. The United
States of America vehemently opposed this. Not only has the United States
continued to oppose the International Criminal Court, but also, in
addition, has applied pressure on many countries to agree not to surrender
or transfer US nationals to the International Criminal Court, in order to
gain immunity for its citizens from this Court.

In terms of section 231(4) of our Constitution, we as Parliament adopted
the Implementation of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
Act, Act 27 of 2002. This Act of Parliament incorporates international
humanitarian law norms into a national Act, to fulfil two objectives:
Firstly, to fulfil the state’s obligation to investigate and prosecute the
gravest international crimes committed in South Africa; and secondly, to
provide for mechanisms in order to co-operate with international
enforcement jurisdictions, including the International Criminal Court. We
as a Parliament can therefore proudly say that we have taken a very
important step in implementing the essence of the subject for discussion
before us, namely the judgement and sentencing of the core crimes in the
Rome Statute.

Members of our SANDF are being educated in international humanitarian law
as part of their civic education programme for the armed forces since 1997.
This programme aims to make a significant contribution to instil a common
set of values in the Department of Defence. These values derive from our
Constitution. This civic education programme in the military spells out the
responsibility of every commander in relation to the law of armed conflict,
during training and also in times of armed conflict. Every commander in the
military is therefore responsible for the proper training of his or her
troops in the law of armed conflict. Our men and women in uniform are being
taught the general principles of the law on armed conflict, namely military
necessity, prevention of unnecessary suffering and hostilities regulated by
the law on armed conflict.

Each member of the SANDF is issued with a code of conduct card, which he or
she carries on his or her person every day. On this card is also printed
the rules of war, and the rules are clearly spelled out. Due to the fact
that South Africa has ratified the Geneva Conventions, it implies that
every member of the SANDF is subject to the law on armed conflict. Any
grave breach – and there is a list of such acts – is regarded as a war
crime and shall be repressed by penal action. We are obliged to prosecute
or extradite those soldiers who have committed a grave breach of conduct.

As a signatory to the Rome Statute, members of the SANDF are schooled on
the definitions and scope of these core crimes, including genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. South Africa has brought the Ottawa Treaty
on the Banning of Antipersonnel Mines into national law through the
Prohibition of Antipersonnel Mines Act of 2003. The International Committee
of the Red Cross acknowledges this as the international benchmark in
today’s world.

Currently, we are also working on the Certain Conventional Weapons
Convention to introduce a prohibition or a restriction on certain
conventional weapons Bill, which will be a world first, comprehensive piece
of legislation on this subject. I can conclude that South Africa is at the
forefront to effectively implement international humanitarian law on our
Statute Books.

I do not agree with Mr Coetzee when he says that we are not doing enough. I
have just indicated to you how much this government and how much this
Parliament – which he is a party to – has already done in this regard. We
can safely say that South Africa is playing a leading role today on this
subject that is before us today. [Applause.]

We have to congratulate the ANC government and this Parliament for the
steps that we have already taken to apply the implementation of
international humanitarian law in national legislation in South Africa. We
are a leader in the world in this regard.

We as the ANC, in conclusion, want to honour our soldiers who are doing an
excellent job in the rest of Africa in implementing the international
humanitarian law and implementing legislation that we as this Parliament
have put on the Statute Books. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP supports the draft resolution to be
considered by the IPU, that Parliaments have a primary responsibility in
the prevention, punishment and avoidance of impunity for war crimes, crimes
against humanity, genocide and terrorism.

Parliamentarians, undoubtedly, have a key role to play to ensure that
domestic legal systems implement effective laws and remedies to fight
impunity and complement the action of the ICC. The structure has been
established and it is now incumbent upon parliamentarians to ensure that
the Rome Statute is widely ratified by member states and to oppose attempts
to undermine it.

Clearly, the ultimate objective of the ICC would be to serve as an
effective deterrent to international crime. It is widely accepted in
criminal justice theory that well-educated would-be criminals are often
deterred by the certainty, or high probability, of punishment, which makes
their criminal plan too risky and not effective enough. As stated at the
2004 conference on the Rome Statute in New Zealand, constant, swift and
firm reminders by both NGO and government sources to vulnerable
constituencies of serious personal legal implications and ramifications of
any actions they may be contemplating remain an essential component of this
international law.

If we are serious about the motion being considered by the IPU we should
utilise the threat of ICC intervention to curb violence and break the cycle
of impunity in current or future crisis situations, for example, those
being experienced in the Darfur region of the Sudan and in Zimbabwe.
Parliamentarians, as political leaders, should disseminate knowledge of the
Rome Statute and implications for would-be perpetrators to discourage them
from their courses of action.

Parliamentarians should also urge relevant international bodies, such as
the UN, the EU and the AU to alert political and military leaders of the
implications of their actions. Co-ordinated and concerted actions would lay
the groundwork for the ICC as a force of deterrence. I thank you. [Time
expired.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Prof S M Mayatula): May I appeal to the House to
tone down their talking, please?

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Geagte Voorsitter, die VF Plus huldig ook die standpunt
dat daar uiteraard gekyk moet word na maniere hoe oorlogsmisdade gestraf
kan word. Maar, as ons praat van oorlogsmisdade, dan moet ons ook baie keer
sê daar is mense wat dit uit ‘n subjektiewe hoek beoordeel en dat dit nie
noodwendig altyd in terme van ‘n objektiewe benadering wel ‘n
oorlogsmisdaad is nie.

Die Afrikaner kan getuig van oorlogsmisdade as ons teruggaan na die Boere-
oorlog toe. Dit was ‘n geval van vroue en kinders wat in konsentrasiekampe
geplaas is, waarvan 27 000 vroue en kinders in konsentrasiekampe gesterf
het, waar die velde afgebrand is, huise afgebrand is, diere gedood is, en
dít in ‘n oorlogsituasie.

Dit was niks anders gewees as ‘n oorlogsmisdaad teen die Afrikaner nie.
Daar word baie ophef gemaak oor ander oorlogsmisdade wat plaasgevind het,
daar word verwys na die Jode, ensovoorts, maar ons moet nooit vergeet nie
dat in ons eie land ook die Afrikaner deel was, en slagoffers was, van
oorlogsmisdade. Daarom is die VF Plus ten gunste daarvan dat daar gekyk
moet word na maniere.

Maar, ons moet ook sê dat baie keer moet daar gekyk word na wat die oorsake
is van oorlog. Tans is daar ‘n internasionale debat aan die gang spesifiek
betreffende terrorisme, en een van die interessanthede van dié debat,
internasionaal in hierdie stadium, is dat hulle sê die enigste werklike
effektiewe manier om terrorisme te voorkom, is om ‘n behoorlike demokrasie
daar te stel. ‘n Demokrasie, is werklik ‘n demokrasie in die sin dat dit
alle groeperings se demokratiese regte in ag neem – ook minderheidsregte –
want ons kan hier praat, ons kan prosedures en meganismes daar stel, maar
die uitdaging is werklik om te voorkom dat daar iets is wat oorlog laat
uitbreek. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, the FF Plus also maintains the
standpoint that naturally ways in which war crimes could be punished must
be examined. But, when we speak about war crimes, then in many instances we
must also say that there are people who judge it from a subjective angle
and that it may not necessarily always be a war crime from an objective
point of view.

The Afrikaner can testify about war crimes if we go back to the Anglo-Boer
War. It was a matter of women and children being interred in concentration
camps, where 27 000 women and children died, where the fields were burnt,
houses were burnt down, animals were killed, and that in a war situation.

This was nothing but a war crime against the Afrikaner. A much fuss is made
about other war crimes that have taken place, reference is made to the
Jews, etc, but we must never forget that in our own country the Afrikaner
was also part of, and victims of, war crimes. That is why the FF Plus is in
favour of methods being examined.

But, we must also say that often the reasons for war must be examined. At
present there is an international debate specifically regarding terrorism,
and one of the interesting aspects of this debate, internationally at this
stage, is that they are saying the only really effective way of preventing
terrorism is to establish a proper democracy. A democracy, is a true
democracy in the sense that all the groups’ democratic rights are taken
into consideration – also minority rights – because we can speak here, we
can establish procedures and mechanisms, but the real challenge is to
prevent these being reasons for war break out. I thank you.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, all governments, regardless
of how they ascended to power, yearn for security, peace and stability.
Efforts have been made in South Africa to safeguard law and order with the
adoption of the Rome Statute in 1998, whose sole purpose is to ensure that
human security links peace and stability with respect for the human rights
of all. Parliaments are thus charged with the responsibility of ensuring
that peace and stability prevail and are promoted.

With the establishment of the ICC on 1 July 2002, perpetrators of genocide,
war crimes, in fact all pogroms are subject to prosecution. That is why the
then warlords of Rwanda are being prosecuted. It is unfortunate that the
ICC’s jurisdiction is not retroactive; otherwise, those who called
themselves the master race in South Africa would face the music because of
the crime against humanity, namely apartheid.

We in South Africa have to hold our heads high in the company of the
nations of the world, because through this Parliament, we signed the Rome
Statute in July 1998 and lodged our instrument of ratification on 27
November 2000. All that remains is for this Parliament to ensure that the
agreement on privileges and immunities of the International Criminal Court
is signed.

This is in stark contrast to what the belligerent President George W Bush
of the United States set out to do in 2000, to unsign the Rome Statute that
was signed by his predecessor, Bill Clinton, in December 2000. America is
not alone in this negativism. Russia, India and Israel are also opposed to
the Rome Statute as they argued that its obligation compromises their
sovereignty.

To ensure that we are not doing a disservice to our commitment to world
peace and order, last year this Parliament, passed the Protection of
Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities Bill,
which, amongst others, aims to provide measures to prevent and combat
terrorism and related activities; and to give effect to international
instruments dealing with terrorists and related activities.
The UCDP subscribes to the establishment of all these mechanisms that
establish peace, security, law and order. I thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, when considering the role of parliaments with
regard to war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism,
African Parliaments, in particular, must look back into their pre-colonial
history and see how Africans treated some of these matters and contributed
to international law.

For instance, under King Moshoeshoe, the Basotho Africans had laws on war;
for example, respect was to be paid during war, to women, children and the
aged. Those who surrendered in war had their lives spared. King Dingaan,
who has been portrayed as the most barbarous king in war, never killed
white missionaries and other white civilians. In 1858, that is over 100
years before the 1949 Geneva conventions on the laws of war came into
existence in Europe, King Moshoeshoe wrote to Boshoff of Lebowa – a trekker
in the Free State; he was shocked at their conduct in war, and said:

      No, the captains of your commandos are not Christians. I shall never
      believe that Christianity consists in carrying away women and children
      into captivity, shooting down old and sick people.

Parliament must establish a mechanism to provide for the judgement and
sentencing of crimes under international law, not with the objective of
avoiding impunity, but with the objective of ensuring that justice is not
only done, but is seen to be done. Close to home, this Parliament must not
consistently ignore the international convention on the suppression and
punishment of the crime of apartheid through which the United Nations
declared apartheid a crime against humanity.

This Parliament behaves as if a crime against humanity does not apply to
Africans. The PAC’s former Azanian People’s Liberation Army members and
some former MK soldiers are languishing in the prisons of this country,
while almost all apartheid criminals where given amnesty by the TRC. All
... Izwe lethu! [The land of the people!] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Thank you, Chairperson. The atrocities of war crimes, crimes
against humanity, genocide and terrorism are punishable and need to be
punished so as to balance society in terms of correcting violations of
human rights.

The MF believes that as Parliament we are a duty bound to pass legislation
and policies that condemn these crimes as punishable and further legislate
punishments for such crimes. The MF acknowledges that we have had the TRC
handle many of South Africa’s horrors during the apartheid era, with many
receiving amnesty. But the truth is that these horrific stories are a
reality and a reality that South Africans never want to relive or see any
people around the world live through.
How do we protect society against such atrocities if suicide bombings are
the method used? However, we must try, as justice and law have to prevail.
The judgement and punishment of these crimes should serve not only to deter
such offenders, but also to bring justice to the families and loved ones of
so many victims, and in a way, return balance to society.

The MF acknowledges that this year’s Budget caters for bigger prisons to
deal with our overcrowded jails. We do not want the space. We want less
crime and fewer criminals. Society needs to be educated in the value of
human life, no matter our diversity, and that these crimes can lead to war,
and resolve nothing. Parliaments, globally, in representing their people,
need to go back to the communities and allow for greater public-government
interaction. Hear your people and be a government for your people.

The UN has served as a great body promoting global peace, human rights and
global relations. Many countries have committed to working together with
the UN to ensure this. However, unfortunately countries like the USA,
throwing its weight around, going against the UN, went ahead and attacked
Iraq. The MF condemns this.

These crimes against humanity are not only committed by individuals or
terrorist organisations, but by countries too. In this case, how …[Time
expired.]

Mr M S BOOI: Chairperson, hon members, we will attempt as the ANC to answer
in terms of the role we have played to make South Africa able to adopt the
protocols we are talking about. We will be able to champion, and show the
champions that we are, in building the democracy we have at this particular
moment. We will definitely show as wrong what Coetzee says in that we have
not played our role and that the ANC, through the President, Thabo Mbeki,
has not been able to say what should happen to society itself.

The President, in his message, says that democracy and equality before the
law are entrenched in our Constitution. Women, workers, youth, professional
people and people with disabilities, traditional leaders, religious
communities, businesspeople and rural communities all have the right to
utilise the opportunities that have come with freedom. Our first 10 years
of freedom have been 10 years of growing unity in action; 10 years of peace
and stability; 10 years of increasingly making the resources in the hands
of the state available towards uplifting disadvantaged South Africans; 10
years of expanding opportunities to build a better life for all. That is
what the President says, and that is what the ANC is saying. That is the
type of mandate we carry as members of Parliament of the ANC.

Parliament has become an institution to which the ANC, through the 93 years
of the existence of the ANC, has been able to bring all its experience and
the hard work it has done through all the years – to express this in
Parliament. We have been able to constitute and write a Constitution that
all South Africans, black and white, have been able to adopt, and have been
able to live up to. That is why we talk about a constitutional state.

So, if you say the ANC – through the expression of Comrade President Thabo
Mbeki – has not been able to play its role, then you are definitely doing a
disservice to all South Africans, because it is through the history of the
ANC that we have been able to express our willingness and, untiringly, been
able to show that we are willing to negotiate and we are willing to share
some of our experiences with different South Africans. That has happened
since 1994.

That is why the SA Police Service in its own role, and through being able
to put together a Bill to ensure that South Africans can mediate and talk
amongst themselves in how to resolve - rather than using terrorism in the
old way – and in a new way of being able to see to it that we don’t use
harsher laws to criminalise those that are opposing us overnight. We have
been able to do that. And we have been able to establish a SA Police
Service that has taken upon itself, and made it its responsibility, to
continuously look after South Africans all over, black and white, and
ensure that South Africans do feel that there is peace and stability within
the country.

So, that is why I am saying that the ANC’s own experiences go back 93
years, in different countries and in the experiences that have been
expressed by members around the issues of Rwanda, around the issues of
Congo and the communities. When the ANC was founded in 1912 it made sure
that the issues of ethnicity were thrown at the back of all our people and
that the ANC was united as Africans and South Africans.

That experience is the experience that we have been able to use, and in
terms of which we have been able to bring ourselves together as one House
and craft a Constitution that all of us as South Africans are able to abide
by. We have been able, together as South Africans, to have national
legislation that has brought peace and stability to our country. So, this
means that the ANC, through its different people, through its different
leaders, through the executive, through the different arms of government,
has been able to play its role, has been able to express fundamentally
where society is supposed to go.

When President Mandela stood here and when Comrade President Thabo Mbeki
was here the week before last, they were able to talk about reconciliation
amongst South Africans. That history speaks for itself. It really shows the
commitment the leadership and the ANC have towards their own people – of
being able to make sure that we do understand how to work together and how
to reconcile, whilst we say to ourselves that this is only dependent on
true South Africans to be able to achieve and be able to make sure that the
provision we are having today is implemented. That is only the history of
the ANC that speaks for itself.

Within the Police Service, one of the major mechanisms that we have been
able to make use of has been the community police forums. We have been able
to make sure that communities assist us in fighting for peace and
stability.

In essence, what we are trying to do is be able to say: Hold onto every
South African that is able to fight crime. Hold onto every South African
that is able to make sure that society becomes stable, and extend your
hands towards them. And, then, make sure that your community police forums
are working.

So these are some of the responsibilities that we have been speaking to as
South Africans, as the ANC, so that we are able to make sure that the type
of democracy and the entrenchment and deepening of democracy are being
respected within our country.

One of the things that is within the history of the ANC in the 93 years of
its existence, to show that we have rejected ethnicity - we have made sure
that things that could lay the basis for South Africans to battle amongst
themselves should be fought and should be rejected – was clearly to learn
from some of our own leaders when they put together the Xuma Naidoo, the
Xuma Dadoo, pact together. That pact has been able to lay the basis for a
nonracial society and lay the basis of building a nonsexist society, and
build a democratic society.

So all these experiences are experiences of the ANC, and they have been
able to come within the precincts of Parliament and strengthen Parliament
to continue deepening democracy and continue making sure that South
Africans live a better life.

One of the things that we have been able to do in the years of the
existence of the ANC is the following. In 1955 we came up with the Freedom
Charter - after we had conversed and mobilised different South Africans in
order to be able to come together and talk and express the type of country
and type of government we should be able to constitute. That’s why we have
been saying – until today – that the people shall govern. That has been
strong with us, and that has been carried into the precincts of Parliament.


We have been able to make sure that South Africans from all walks of life
outside this Parliament are able to live up to this mechanism and make use
of it, because we continue saying to ourselves that as the ANC, in all the
good that we could do, in all the responsibilities that we have given
ourselves in the 93 years of our own existence, we will have to make sure
that the history of the ANC speaks to that particular theme. That is the
mechanism, that is the organ that has been able to build society and
reorganise society.

We have not been able to go back and put in place legislation that is born
and bred from the apartheid laws. We have rejected that, and we continue
showing that we aren’t going to go back to that. We are saying that as we
continue with this debate, as we continue expressing to South Africans
where we are going as the ANC, we remain the pillar of society that we have
to draw strength from, and that we draw from our own experiences and make
use of the leadership we have as the ANC. This is so that we are very clear
and able to say that that experience is the experience we will always
continue to make use of.

Let’s look at one of the other things that the ANC has been able to
influence society to adopt. It is the Preamble itself to the Constitution.
In terms of that Preamble:

     We, the people of South Africa,
     Recognise the injustices of our past;
     Honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land; Respect
     those who have worked to build and develop our country; and
     Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
     diversity.

That is how the ANC has been able to make sure that all South Africans do
understand and do work together. That is what we are saying to Coetzee in
that this is what Comrade Thabo Mbeki has been able to express as one of
the leaders of the ANC, and been able to talk to the issue to say: As South
Africans, let’s hold hands together. Let’s make sure that we are able to
work together. Let’s make sure that we work towards, and we look upon, the
diversity we are talking about.

Regarding what the hon Mr Groenewald has been talking about, as the ANC we
have walked over it. We have, in the past 10 years that we have been here,
Mr Groenewald, stretched out our hands to the different Afrikaners. We have
sat down with the Afrikaners. We have interacted with them. We have spent
time understanding their language, and we have been able to talk the
language of the communities you come from.

So, at no stage will the ANC alienate the people that they know are
patriots. We will always be working with them. That is why we have
stretched out our hands towards the National Party and been able to guide
the National Party to join the ANC. This is because we take it out of our
own responsibility, out of our own history, that it is us that will have to
make sure that we continue taking hands with the Afrikaners and march with
them all the way and not leave them behind. That is the responsibility that
we say we will be able to take.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, will the hon member take a very easy
question?
Mr M S BOOI: When I’m finished, sir.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: When you’re finished. Please leave one minute.

Mr M S BOOI: So what I am saying is that we have shown that responsibility
– the commitment that we have shown towards the Afrikaner community - is
undoubted and we are unshaken about it. That’s why we say that this is not
about party politics. It has always been about the responsibility that has
been borne in the 93 year of the ANC. That is what we are continually
practising, and that is what we are continually espousing. I can give …
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, there is no time for
your question.

Debate concluded.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES – see that book.

                FILLING OF VACANCY ON MAGISTRATES COMMISSION

                                (Nominations)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The Magistrates Act of 1993
requires the NA to designate four of its members to the Magistrates
Commission, at least two of whom must be members of the opposition parties
represented in the Assembly. On the 22nd of June 2004 the House designated
three such members to the commission. It is therefore necessary for the
Assembly to designate a fourth member from the opposition parties to the
Magistrates Commission.

I have received a letter from the IFP nominating Mr L K Joubert to serve on
the commission and a letter from the ACDP nominating Mr S N Swart to serve
on the commission. Are there any further nominations from the opposition
parties?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, we made
representations not to divide the House on this issue, we discussed it with
our colleagues in the IFP, and our understanding was that they were
withdrawing their nomination so that we would all support Mr Swart.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chairperson, may I confirm that? I was
advised by the chief whip of the IFP that Mr Joubert was standing down and
therefore we all agreed that we were prepared to support Mr Swart.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Can we ask the IFP to confirm?

Mrs S A SEATON: Thank you, Mr Chairperson, it would seem that Mr Douglas
Gibson thought that perhaps he should confirm on our behalf. We do confirm
that, thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you. Therefore we only have
one nomination - that is the nomination of Mr S N Swart - and therefore
he’s duly nominated. [Applause.] I take it your applause was confirmation
that there’s no objection to the nomination. Thank you very much. Mr S N
Swart is then duly nominated to serve on the commission.

  OPTIONAL PROTOCOL TO THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE ELIMINATION OF
                  ALL FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN

            (Consideration of request for approval by Parliament)

Mrs M S MAINE: Chairperson, hon members, the UN Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, Cedaw, was
adopted by the General Assembly in 1979 and came into force in September
1981. Cedaw recognises that discrimination prevents women from enjoying the
whole range of human rights and freedoms, including several of a cultural,
economic, political and social nature. It sets out the obligations of
governments to end such discrimination in public life, in family life and
in customary and social life. This includes the obligation to report
periodically to the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
Against Women, the Cedaw committee, on measures taken to implement Cedaw.

The campaign is a global initiative set at enhancing the domestic
implementation of Cedaw through advocacy around notification and use of its
optional protocol. It seeks to build the capacity of constituencies to
mobilise around the ratification and use of the optional protocol as well
as monitor the implementation of the human rights of women through the lens
of Cedaw.

However, since the coming into force of Cedaw, the mandate of the Cedaw
committee has been limited to monitoring compliance on the part of states
parties by receiving, reviewing and issuing observations and
recommendations on the periodic reports that governments are obliged to
submit. The committee was not mandated to consider individual complaints or
to take recommendations on behalf of individuals.

Consequently, although Cedaw is one of the most widely subscribed-to
international women’s rights instruments, violations of women’s human
rights remain widespread in all societies and cultures and women are not
aware of their rights and have difficulty in getting remedies to violations
of these rights. Therefore an optional protocol to Cedaw was proposed to
provide for better enforcement of women’s rights.

The Cedaw optional protocol does not create new substantive rights. It
creates procedures for addressing and redressing the violation of rights
established in Cedaw. The optional protocol is a separate treaty that came
into force on 22 September 2002 in terms of article 15 of the optional
protocol. Only states parties to Cedaw can become party to the optional
protocol and must ratify or accede to the optional protocol in order to be
bound by it.

Often, human rights treaties are followed by optional protocols that may
either provide for procedures with regard to the treaty or address a
substantive area related to the treaty. Optional protocols to human rights
treaties are treaties in their own right and are open to signature,
accession or ratification by countries that are party to the main treaty.
The optional protocol mandates the Cedaw committee to act on individual
complaints, as well as initiated inquiries.

This allows the Cedaw committee to focus on cases and situations that they
cannot address through the standard reporting system. Thus, by ratifying or
acceding to the optional protocol, a state recognises the mandate and
jurisdiction of the Cedaw committee to review cases and situations in which
alleged violations of women’s human rights have occurred.

The procedure mandated by the optional protocol benefits women in the
following ways: They provide an opportunity for redress when states parties
violate women’s human rights or fail to protect women against
discrimination according to the terms of Cedaw. They fill an existing gap
in the protection of women’s human rights, in particular by providing
international resources to women who have been denied access to justice at
national level. They allow the Cedaw committee to highlight the need for
more effective remedies at national level as stipulated in Cedaw, and to
make detailed recommendations on how these remedies can be achieved. They
enable the Cedaw committee to elaborate recommendations into an existing
body of jurisprudence on how women’s rights should be guaranteed and
protected in real-life situations. They allow the investigation of
substantial abuses of women’s human rights by an international body of
experts; give the Cedaw committee an opportunity to make recommendations
regarding the structural causes of violation, and allow the committee to
address a broad range of issues in a particular country.

South Africa ratified Cedaw on 15 December 1995 without reservation, and is
therefore eligible to become party to the optional protocol. In so doing
the country confirms its commitment to the international community and
domestic stakeholders to eliminate all forms of discrimination against
women and to achieve equality between women and men, and to introduce and
implement policies, laws and programmes to achieve the above-mentioned
goals.

The optional protocol was tabled in Parliament on 3 March 2005, and
referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
Life and Status of Women in the NA, and to the Joint Monitoring Committee
on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women in the NCOP on 4
March 2005 for consideration.

Should South Africa decide to ratify the optional protocol, it can benefit
in the following ways: Take additional steps to implement Cedaw; foster or
fast-track changes in discriminatory laws and practices; and enhance
existing mechanisms for the implementation of human rights nationally,
regionally and within the UN system. At the Fourth World Conference on
Women held in Beijing in September 1995 governments committed themselves to
supporting the elaboration of a draft optional protocol to the women’s
convention that could enter into force as soon as possible. By ratifying
the optional protocol...

...naga e nngwe le e nngwe e e batlang go lwela kgololosego ya nnete e tla
kgona fela fa bomme ba naga eo ba gololosegile, ba na le ditshwanelo le
seriti sa go itumelela botshelo. [… any country that wants to fight for its
true liberation can only achieve that if the women in that country are
liberated, have rights and the dignity to enjoy life.]
By ratifying the optional protocol, South Africa will be realising this
commitment. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, it is all very well to adopt the optional
protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women. However, in doing so, we need to take a
critical look at ourselves here in Parliament to see whether we have, in
the past 10 years, given action to the vision and promises made at the
Beijing Platform in 1995.

A worldwide review by the Women’s Environment and Development Organisation
concludes that most governments have failed to turn the platform into
action. It says that many governments worldwide have adopted a piecemeal
and incremental approach to implementation, and that this approach cannot,
by any stretch of the imagination, achieve the economic, social and
political transformation underlying the promises and vision of Beijing
1995.

One of the major challenges that we as a Parliament need to address is the
increased pressure from fundamentalist movements worldwide in respect of
reproductive and sexual health care. The United States’ plan to insert a
clause in the declaration specifying that the document does not create any
new rights and that it does not include the right to abortion must be
challenged fiercely.

I personally believe that with sexual abuse as a weapon of war on the
increase, and the escalation of HIV infection partly because of sexual
subordination, the right of women to choose to have an abortion should be
seen as one of the key human rights.

One of the main achievements of this protocol is an increased awareness
around the issue of the trafficking of women and children, and our
Parliament needs to consider legislation on this issue as a matter of
urgency. Also, while there is an increase in the number of reported cases
of rapes in South Africa, with 52 000 reported in the period 2003-04, there
has not been a parallel increase in the number of successful convictions.
Therefore, we have to examine whether we are, in reality, running a legal
system that may unintentionally discriminate against women.

It is commendable to adopt the protocol, and the DA is fully in support of
this. However, it is regrettable that our delegation to the Beijing and
Beyond Conference did not debate South Africa’s report in Parliament before
they left. One wonders whether South Africa’s report will be tabled as a
true reflection of the views of all those in this House.

The Joint Monitoring Committee met only once last year, and once this year.
If we are truly serious about improving the quality of life and the status
of women, then we need to show that or else it really will be a case of
“Beijing betrayed”. [Applause.]
Ms S C VOS: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The IFP supports South Africa
acceding to this optional UN protocol to the so-called Cedaw Convention
because it is clearly the right thing to do, not, sadly, because we believe
that by doing so, we will assist sooner rather than later in bringing rapid
relief and justice to the millions of women throughout the world whom it is
intended to assist.

This optional protocol strengthens complaint mechanisms in signatory
countries, and I stress the keywords “signatory countries”. It gives women
a forum to submit claims of violations of the rights enshrined in the Cedaw
Convention if they believe that they are not – let me stress that again,
not – adequately addressed in their own countries.

The devil is always in the detail and many of the countries in which we
know women are suffering - and Darfur, Sudan, is a classic example - are
not signatories to this optional protocol. Some countries in the war-torn
Great Lakes area are also not signatories.

By doing what we believe is right today, we cannot, however, slacken, we
believe, in our endeavours to ensure that we seek African solutions to
African problems throughout our continent and particularly where they
affect the women of our continent. Thank you.

Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Speaker and hon members, the UDM supports South
Africa’s accession to this optional protocol. As a leading nation in the
pursuit of equality and dignity for women, South Africa should not hesitate
to endorse this optional protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.

Our leadership should be exemplified by our willingness to be open to the
scrutiny and advice of the community on the elimination of discrimination
against women, as set out in the optional protocol.

Various UN conventions and international mechanisms have been created to
formalise the fight against gender discrimination. Despite this, and the
domestic application of these principles by many states, discrimination
against women remains with us. We realise that the objective of gender
equality is a long-term objective, but we cannot be merely content with
slow progress.

It is sincerely hoped that this optional protocol will ensure the proper
functioning of the committee, since it is the best mechanism to ensure the
signatories to the convention actually achieve their goal instead of merely
paying lip service. I thank you.

Nkskz M N MAGAZI: Somlomo, Malungu endlu siyi-ANC siyayixhasa into
yokityikitywa koluxwebhu. Ukwaziswa kwalomnqophiso obizwa ngesingesi njenge
optional protocol. Yabayinzuzo nenkululeko enkulu kumakhosikazi ehlabathi
jikelele. Iqulethe indlela ezimbini apho ubani okanye iqela lingafaka
isimangalo sokunyhashwa kwamalungelo ekomitini okanye inike ikomiti igunya
lokuqalisa ngophando apho amalungelo athe anyhashwa, ize ithi isebenze
kunye nabantu abangenabathetheleli ezizweni zabo ijonge ukuba banayo indawo
apho banokuthi bathethelele khona. Leyo yinto eyenza ukuba isibhambathiso
esenziwa eBeijing ngo-1995 singabizo zithukuthuku zenja zona ziphela
eboyeni, koko sifezekiswe.

Njengoko esitsho uNobhala wezizwe ezimanyeneyo, sizamile ukwenza imitsi
kwinkulungwane edlulileyo, ngoko ke masisebenze kule. Sisixhobo
esifanelekileyo le protocol apho zithi izizwe zityikityele amakhosikazi
ukuya kule komiti xa sithe isikhalazo asasabeleka ngendlela efanelekileyo
kwilizwe laso. SinguMzantsi Afrika nathi kufuneka sizeke mzekweni wokuba
yinxalenye yesisibhambathiso. Ngokwenjenjalo ngaphakathi apha ekhaya kuya
kubakho indlela yokufumana amancedo angawo, unxibelelwano lokwazi ukuya
kumangala kule komiti ukuba isebe lezobulungisa aliphumelelanga ukulungisa
le ngxaki kwelo lizwe.

Inzuzo yoko ke kukuba uMzantsi Afrika uyakuwaphucula ngakumbi amalungelo
amakhosikazi, uphumeze oko kuke nkomfa, ubhinqe omfutshane ukulungiselala
amakhosikazi ukusuka kwizithili ukuya kwizizwe ezimanyeneyo. Bazakukwazi
ukunxibelelana namanye amazwe aye azibandakanya kwelixwebhu, akhabana
nezinto ezingavumelaniyo nezikhalazo zamakhosikazi kwanamalungelo awo.
Izikhalazo zabo zizakuya nqo kurhulumente welizwe elo libandakanyekayo. Le
komiti nayo iyakulandela ngokuba iyokwenza uphando kwesozizwe. Kwisithuba
senyanga ezintandathu kufuneka le komiti inikezele ngengxelo yophando
neengcebiso-recommendations, kwilizwe elo lichaphazelekayo ngokubhala,
nelizwe elo kufuneka luphendule kwisithuba seenyanga ezintandathu, linike
ingcaciso nesisombululo seengxaki ezo, emva
koko ikomiti iyakuthi ihlale intlanganiso esekhusini ishukuxe le mibandela
ngokwesikhokelo somnqophiso.

Singamakhosikazi aseMzantsi Afrika Siyalixhasa eligalelo. I-Status Of Women
siyazihlala iintlanganiso, kodwa yona I-DA ayiphumeleli. Namhlanje izokuthi
apha ihleli kabini, kanye kulonyaka nakulo uphelileyo, ndifuna ukuyicacisa
ke loo nto leyo yokuba mabaphumelele ezintlanganisweni xa zibiziweyo,
ukwenzela into yokuba ingazokuma eplatifomini ithi iJoint Monitoring
Committee on the Improvement of quality of life and status of women
ayihlali. Enkosi Somlomo. [Kuyaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech
follows.)

[Mrs M N MAGAZI: Speaker, hon members, the ANC supports the signing of the
protocol. The optional protocol is a positive step towards freeing women of
the world. According to this document, an individual or a group can submit
a complaint or lodge a grievance against the violation of human rights to
the committee, which can then begin an investigation process about those
abuses. It is meant to represent the people whose rights are being
violated. That would certainly prove that the Beijing Conference of 1994
was not a futile exercise after all.

As the UN Secretary-General asserted, we have worked hard to establish
policies in the past 10 years, which we therefore, during the next 10
years, need to implement. The optional protocol is the right tool for women
to utilise when they find that their problems are not resolved in their
countries. South Africa should ensure that it is part of this agreement. By
doing so, we would be able to assist one another and there would be better
co-ordination of processes and activities as well as making sure that
procedures that are to be followed when complaints are lodged with the
committee if the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development does
not satisfy them are clearly understood by all concerned.

This would certainly improve the status of women in South Africa and fulfil
the objectives of the conference with regard to all women under the
auspices of the UN. They will be able to mobilise with women from other
nations of the world that are part of this agreement in the fight against
the abuse of women. Their grievances would be lodged directly to the
country concerned. The committee will then be committed to conducting an
investigation into that country. After six months the committee should
submit a written report about the findings of its investigation, together
with recommendations to the country. The country concerned would be
expected, within six months, to make its submissions and resolutions with
respect to the matter. After that the committee would hold a private
meeting to debate the issues within the guidelines of the agreement.

As South African women, we support this effort. When the Office on the
Status of Women holds meetings, the DA does not attend. Today they are
making false claims, that the office has only sat twice - once this year
and once last year. I am asking them to attend and take part in these
meetings so that they can make their contributions to the Joint Monitoring
Committee on Improvement of the Quality of Life and Status of Women. Thank
you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]]

Ms F BATYI: Hon Speaker and members of the House, the ID wholeheartedly
supports the optional protocol to the UN’s Convention on the Elimination of
all Forms of Discrimination Against Women and agrees that such will be
determined to ensure the full, equal enjoyment by women of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms and to take effective action to prevent violation
of these rights and freedoms as stated in the protocol, including all
socioeconomic rights enshrined by our Constitution.

Our very progressive Constitution clearly makes provision for the equal
promotion of women and states that no person may unfairly discriminate
directly or indirectly against anyone on one or more grounds in terms of,
inter alia, gender, sex, pregnancy or marital status. The ID therefore,
believes that it is absolutely imperative that all measures should be
adopted that will contribute to the promotion of these constitutional
rights.

However, the ID is concerned about the implementation of the protocol,
especially when the progress and the status of women in South Africa, as
well as around the world, have not improved to the point as anticipated by
the Beijing Platform for Action. In South Africa women still constitute 57%
of all unemployed people, still have incredibly high electricity rates and
still have difficulty in gaining access to the benefits of the economy and
gaining the needed skills.

Therefore, in light of these and other continuing problems, the adoption of
this protocol should be seriously considered by government in order to
strengthen the faith of South African women in our third democratic
government. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the ratification of Cedaw by the SA government
increased efforts on measures to address discrimination against women.
However, despite levels of advancement that have been attained, there is
widespread consensus that progress with regard to promoting women’s rights
has not resulted in a satisfactory reduction in poverty, abuse and
violence, so prevalent among women. The optional protocol makes available
the rights of individuals and groups of women to partition the committee on
the elimination of discrimination against women and to initiate inquiry
procedures by the committee.
The ACDP would welcome this additional resource for women in South Africa
and around the world but remains opposed to the Cedaw convention which
affirms the reproductive rights of women thereby promoting and protecting
legal abortion on demand and legally binding countries that have ratified
or acceded to the convention to put its provisions into practice. The ACDP
commends the US delegation for bravely and unashamedly protecting the right
to life of unborn babies and the right of future generations of women to
exist. I thank you.

Mr S K LOUW: Madam Speaker, it is an honour for me to participate in this
debate. I will focus on the procedures provided under the optional
protocol. As mentioned previously, the optional protocol provides for two
types of procedure, for example the individual complaints procedure, and
the inquiry procedure.

The individual complaints procedure - article 2 of the optional protocol -
empowers any individual woman, or group of women, whose rights under Cedaw
have been violated in the state that has ratified the optional protocol, to
present a written complaint to the Cedaw committee.

However, this can only be done after all domestic remedies have been
exhausted, unless domestic remedies are unlikely to bring effective relief,
or the application of such remedies is unreasonably prolonged – article 4.
This means that if violations against women occur in countries where access
to domestic remedies are denied or significantly restricted, they may bring
their cases immediately to the attention of the Cedaw committee. Moreover,
the optional protocol empowers individuals, the victims themselves and
organisations, including nongovernmental organisations – NGOs – to lodge
complaints on behalf of victims with their consent. This feature is
important in the light of the political, economic, social and cultural
factors that so often restrict women’s access to information and to
practical opportunities to claim their rights.

The inquiry procedure – article 8 – of the optional protocol empowers the
Cedaw committee to launch, on its own initiative and on the basis of
reliable information, inquiries into grave or systematic violations of the
rights of women as contained in Cedaw. The Cedaw committee can consider
information on grave or systematic violations from credible sources,
including information provided by women’s organisations and NGOs when
initiatives and inquiries are launched.

Grave violations include severe abuses, for example discrimination against
women such as a violation of their right to life, physical and mental
integrity and security of the person. “Systematic” refers to the scale of
prevalence of violence or to the existence of scheme or policy direction
violation. Violations not amounting to the level of severity implied by
graveness may still be the focus of inquiry if there is a pattern of
violation, or if abuses are committed pursuant to a scheme or policy. An
example is forced sterilisation of indigenous women in public hospitals.

The optional protocol provides for an in-depth examination of the
underlying cause of the discrimination against women, and can focus on
abuse that would normally be submitted to the Cedaw committee by means of
individual complaints. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Speaker, comrades and hon members, the PAC supports the
ratification of this protocol by Parliament as forming part of and
consolidating the general thrust and sweep of our own commitment,
demonstrated through numerous institutions, measures and enactments to the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which proclaimed all human beings as
born free and equal in dignity and rights.

Our ratification of the protocol is a reaffirmation of our commitment to
ensuring the full and equal enjoyment by women of all human rights on our
continent and the world over. It is regrettable that 10 years after Beijing
and its Platform for Action and despite the momentum it generated and the
new paradigm it created, the universality of women’s rights is not yet
universal.

Our ratification of the protocol should serve to strengthen international
solidarity against discrimination against women and help to expose and
isolate states where discrimination against women is still pervasive -
women without the right to vote; women without the right to be voted for;
women without the right to drive a motor vehicle; women given in marriage
without their consent; women given away to settle family and tribal debts;
and a whole host of other traditional and legally based forms of
discrimination. These states are indeed the outposts of tyranny. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Igama lamakhosikazi. [In the name of women.] [Applause.]
Madam Speaker, our democracy comprises a system founded on the values of
human rights, equality, nonsexism and nonracism, to name but a few.

Women have been prioritised on the South African agenda and liberated in
all sectors, policies and legislation entitling them to equal status and
the same opportunities as men. In South Africa it is proudly acknowledged
that over the past 10 years women have been advanced greatly in our society
and have taken up senior and important positions, showing equal ability, as
well as the stance women are moving towards.

The MF condemns all forms of discrimination against women and all
humankind. In view of the protocol to Cedaw, we invite global efforts in
this manner to liberate and empower women around the world, which would
serve to eradicate this inhumanity. We, however, wish that the optional
protocol be extended to three procedures: communication, inquiry and action
to eradicate it.

The MF supports the accession to this optional protocol. Not only would we
be uniting with countries globally to uphold human rights, but would also
be setting and promoting the future and further eradication of domestic
discrimination against women. The MF supports the signing of the optional
protocol to Cedaw. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Nkskz P TSHWETE: Somlomo, Baphathiswa abakhoyo phakathi kwethu, booSekela-
Baphathiswa abakhoyo, malungu onke ePalamente, kuluntu lonke emakhaya,
masiyibulele intlanganiso ehlanganise amakhosikazi eNew York, abandakanya
awaseMzantsi Afrika nawamazwe onke.

Masiphinde sibulele ngentlanganiso ebibanjwe ngamakhosikazi apha
ePalamente, nalapho kuye kwavunyelwana ngamaqela onke ezopolitiko.
Ndiyayibulela ke loo nto.

Ndicela ukuba ndilungise kancinci, njengomhlalingaphambili
obambeleyo,…[Kwahlekwa.]… ohloniphekileyo uQabane uDudley ngelithi, thina
asinalo igama elithi “uqhomfo”; sine”lungelo lokuzikhethela ukukhupha
isisu”…[Kwaqhwatywa.] Loo nto ibonisa uxanduva esisenalo, makhosikazi,
lokuba kuse kude apho siya khona, kusafuneka sifundisile.
Amakhosikazi avumelene ngamxhelo-mnye, elandela isigqibo esathathwa
yikomiti ye-Cedaw, yona eza kuqinisekisa ukuba izikhalo zamakhosikazi
aseMzantsi Afrika, awaseAfrika nawelizwe lonke liphela ziyamanyelwa. Loo
nto ibonisa ukuba umzabalazo wooLillian Ngoyi, wooMama uNonyamezelo Mxenge
nooMama uMaxeke awusoze ube lilize. Ndiqinisekile ukuba amathambo abo
ayashukuma.

Masomelele, makhosikazi, silwe nobundlobongela obugqale kakhulu
kumakhosikazi. Masizame ukuba amakhosikazi aphaya ezilalini nawo
mawakhuseleke. Loo nto ithetha ukuba sinoxanduva lokuba siye kucacisela
amakhosikazi ezilalini ngesi sivumelwano. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms P TSHWETE: Speaker, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon members of
Parliament, the public at large, let us be grateful for the women’s
convention held in New York involving women of South Africa and the women
of the world.

Let us be thankful for the meeting held here in Parliament by women, where
all political parties reached an agreement. I appreciate that.

As acting chairperson, I want to rectify this … [Laughter.] Hon Dudley, we
do not have a word in our vocabulary for “abortion”, we have a right of
choice to terminate pregnancy … [Applause.] That shows how huge our
responsibility is, we still need to educate people.

Women have reached a collective agreement, following the Cedaw declaration
to listen to the cries of women in South Africa, Africa and the world. This
shows that the fight for freedom by Lilian Ngoyi, Mrs Nonyamezelo Mxenge
and Mrs Maxeke will not be in vain. I am convinced that their bones are
shaken by this accomplishment.

Women, let us be strong and fight the abuse of women. Let us try and
empower women in rural areas. Therefore, we have an obligation to go and
explain the agreement to these women.]

Ten years into democracy, we are proud to say that there are numerous
visible signs that show that we are committed to women’s emancipation. So
we have nothing to fear from committing to this optional protocol. We have
committed ourselves to improving the quality of life and status of women,
and to prove our commitment we have put in place a very complex gender
machinery.

The protocol will, therefore, ensure the long-term protection and promotion
of women’s rights as a result of the possibility that women will be able to
report any violation of these rights to the Cedaw committee. It will also
encourage us to keep on identifying and amending existing discriminatory
laws and policies, and to fully implement the provisions of the Cedaw
convention.

Kodwa ke, Somlomo, noxa kunjalo, kufuneka siveze elubala izinto ezingqamene
namakhosikazi. Amakhosikazi norhulumente kufuneka ezame ukuveza izithuba
zemisebenzi kuba uxhaphazo lubangwa kukungabikho kwemisebenzi.

Ndifuna ukwenza umzekelo. Singurhulumente kufuneka sikulwe ukuthengiswa
komzimba ngamakhosikazi kuba efuna ukondla abantwana bawo. Kufuneka siveze
elubala nabathengi aba. Ukubizwa kwamakhosikazi ngokuba ngoonondindwa
luxhaphazo olo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows)

[Nevertheless, Speaker we must put forward issues affecting women. Women
and government must fight against prostitution that is practised to
alleviate poverty. The clients of these practises must be exposed. It is
also abuse to call women insulting names.]

We can’t sell if there’s no one to buy.

Ngoko sidinga ukubeka elubala abathengi aba, kuba bona banethamsanqa kuba
abaveli. Esi sivumelwano masiveze elubala aba bantu bama phaya esitalatweni
baloba ngemali abantu bethu abaphethwe yindlala. Esi sivumelwano siza
kujongana nezinto ezinjalo. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Ndibulela ndiqinisa amadoda azimisele ukuncedisa kwilinge lokukhusela
amakhosikazi. Ndikhe ndatsho ngaphambili, njengomhlalingaphambili
obambeleyo, ukuba kulaa komiti yethu sesinamadoda amathathu. Sicela lande
inani lamadoda kuyo ukuze aze kusincedisa. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Andinakuhlala phantsi, Somlomo, ndingayenzanga inkuthazo kumakhosikazi
ukuba ayisebenzise i-Optional Protocol. Ngexesha amakhosikazi ebebambe
umngcelele ekhalaza ngokubhekisele kwityala lokuxhwilwa kwenkosikazi
elipolisa, uRasuge, amakhosikazi aye avakalisa ukuba azimisele ukulwa de
afumaneke, kwaye kufumaneke nomenzi wesi senzo. Ndicela ukuyaleza nakusapho
lwakhe ukuba thina singamakhosikazi siza kusisebenzisa esi sivumelwano,
kwaye silila nalo.

Siyambulela urhulumente ngeenguqu azenze kwixesha elincinane, iminyaka
elishumi kuphela, ezibangele ukuba abantu bakwazi ukuvula umlomo. Siyacela
ke ukuba amakhosikazi asisebenzise esi sivumelwano. Sicela nokuba
amakhosikazi ayeke ukuthi xa ebethiwe athi awe ebhafini, esoyika ukuxela
ukuba abethwe ngabayeni bawo ngephezolo.

Sicela ukuba siyisebenzise le optional protocol kuba ngokungenzi njalo siya
kuba asiluthabatheli kuthi uxanduva lwesivumelwano esamkelwe sithi sonke.

Xa ndihlala phantsi, makhosikazi, manditsho ukuba sinoxanduva naphaya
ezicaweni, lokuqinisekisa ukuba i-optional protocol ayipheleli nje ekubeni
ibe luxanduva lwe-convention, koko iba luxanduva lwethu sonke. Kufuneka
siye phaya ezicaweni, sithethe ngayo, sicacisele namakhosikazi ezilalini.
Ndiyabulela. Enkosi, Somlomo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows)

[We need to expose the clients because they are fortunate, as they are not
publicised. This agreement must be able to expose those clients who seduce
poor women. The agreement is going to guide us in such issues. [Applause.]

I thank and support men who are willing to help in preventing women abuse.
As an acting chairperson, I know that there are three men participating. We
request an increase in their number in order to get more support.
[Applause.]

Before I take a seat let me advocate to women to use the optional protocol.
During the march for Rasuge’s case - the policewoman who was abducted -
women voiced their commitment to fight until she is recovered and the
culprit is found. We as women want to tell the family that we are with them
and we are going to utilise this agreement.

We thank the government for the transformation it has achieved in a very
short period of time, ten years, for people to be vocal. We ask women not
to lie and cover up for their husbands about the physical abuses they
suffer.

We request women to use the opportunity of the optional protocol because if
we are not doing that we will not be holding to the agreement we made as
our responsibility.

In conclusion, I must say to women, we have a responsibility to advocate
this in churches so that it is not the liability of the convention only to
emphasise this but all of us. We must preach about it in churches and
explain it as well to the women in rural areas. Thank you, Speaker.
[Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination Against Women approved (African Christian
Democratic Party dissenting).

The House adjourned at 17:36.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                           THURSDAY, 3 MARCH 2005



TABLINGS



National Assembly


1.    The Speaker


     (a)    Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention on the
         Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, tabled
         in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Optional Protocol to the United
         Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
         Discrimination Against Women.

         Referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of
         Quality of Life and Status of Women for consideration and report.


                            FRIDAY, 4 MARCH 2005


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in the Presidency


     (a)    Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council for 2005.

     (b)    Strategic Plan of the Media Development and Diversity Agency for
         2005-2008.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Citation of Constitutional Laws Bill [B 5 - 2005]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 2 March 2005:

         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the subject of the Citation of Constitutional
         Laws Bill [B 5 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to
         it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75
         Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 5A - 2005].


                            MONDAY, 7 MARCH 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Prevention of Illegal Eviction from and Unlawful Occupation of
         Land Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of Housing on
         1 March 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Housing and
         the Select Committee on Public Services.


        2) National Credit Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of Trade
           and Industry on 3 March 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
           Committee on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on
           Economic and Foreign Affairs.



                            TUESDAY, 8 MARCH 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    Dr E A Schoeman has been elected chairperson of the
         Constitutional Review Committee with effect from 7 March 2005.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     Strategic Plan of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry for 2005-
     2008.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
     Life and Status of Women on the Optional Protocol to the United Nations
     Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
     Women, dated 8 March 2005:

         The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life
         and Status of Women, having considered the request for approval by
         Parliament of the Optional Protocol to the United Nations
         Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
         Against Women, referred to it, recommends that the House and the
         Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve
         the said Protocol.

     Request and report to be considered.

National Assembly

1.    INSERT   ATC0308


                           WEDNESDAY, 9 MARCH 2005


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report of the Auditor-General on the Performance Audit of Overall
     Management Measures at Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency [RP 11-2005].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - INSERT ATC0309


