---
title: 'National Assembly - 31 August 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-08-31
---

WEDNESDAY, 31 AUGUST 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDER OF THE DAY


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
without notice:

   That, notwithstanding Rule 29(8) and Rule 113(1), precedence be given to
   the motion on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the
   Majority Party.

Agreed to.


  APPRECIATION EXPRESSED TO MR N P NHLEKO ON HIS DEPARTURE FROM PARLIAMENT


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move the
motion printed in my name on the Order Paper:

   That the House places on record –


      In the light of the Hon Mr N P Nhleko, MP, leaving Parliament
      on 1 September 2005, its appreciation of the distinguished
      service that he has rendered to this Parliament since 1994,
      especially in the leadership role that he has played as
      Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
      Administration, the Chief Whip of the Majority Party and as the
      House Chairperson in charge of building the oversight role of
      Parliament.

Agreed to.




QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY:


Questions to Minister:


                    High number of unsolved murder cases


120.  Mr V B Ndlovu (IFP) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

           1) Whether, in light of reports that more than 10 000 murders
              have gone unsolved in the past year, the SA Police Service
              has any plans in place to try to rectify the situation; if
              not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (2)   what are some of the reasons for the high number of unsolved
           murder cases;


      (3)   whether the SAPS has the necessary resources to adequately deal
           with and thoroughly investigate each of the many murders that
           take place each year; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details?                                  N1779E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Deputy Speaker, hon Ndlovu, I am
worried about the number which is reflected in your question – 10 000
murders that have gone unsolved. I don’t know where this figure comes from.
So, I’ll respond to you, but not to the figures. I’ll respond to you with
respect to the other points you have raised in your question.

The following is already in place to deal with matters of this nature: In
the first instance, we have the automated fingerprint identification
system, which is assisting us to identify perpetrators of crime. We find
some of these perpetrators of crime when we mount roadblocks and we use the
MorphoTouch where we are able to pick up fingerprints of people who may
have been involved in any crimes.

We match the automated fingerprints, therefore, that we find to the various
crime scenes where they might be connected. We utilise the IB system; we
utilise DNA testing, and so on, to ensure that we are indeed able to
resolve outstanding investigations that we have.

Of course, there are some cases that still remain unsolved, including
murder, and this happens in the main because there are no eyewitnesses who
are available, and some eyewitnesses do not want to come forward for fear
of intimidation. At times, the perpetrators themselves are not known,
because some of them are not even South African citizens and, at times,
there is purely an absence of the evidence and clues that we require for
the investigations.

Of course, there are initiatives that are in place that are designed to
address some of the problems we have relevant to human and logistical
resources. The management forum of the SA Police Service has given
instructions that at least 30% of all entry-level constables from each
intake that we have must be experienced detectives so that we can carry
forward the experience that they have. This is so that in the end we will
find that contingent of experienced people who will participate together
with those who have been recruited into the Service when we investigate.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Minister. I just want to mention one case – the
case of Mrs Sabina McKinnough. She said that nothing has been done about
her husband who was killed in front of her. There was no feedback from the
investigator and, up to now, no arrest has been made. I mention this,
because other people read these stories in the papers. It would be wise of
us, therefore, to talk about it here, and to give the assurance to those
people who sometimes the investigators do not go to.

I am worried because if the investigators do not go to the people who are
the complainants and tell them what has been going on about the
investigations, sometimes the burden is on the investigators themselves,
instead of the people who are supposed to be witnesses.

Ngiyavumelana nomhlonishwa ngokuthi mhlawumbe ofakazi babuye babaleke.
Nokho, okusemqoka kakhulu ukuthi izihlobo nezizalwane zalabo bantu
abasengxakini kufanele ngaso sonke isikhathi baziswe ngokwenzekayo,
kungavele kucwebe nje isiziba. Ekugcineni babuye bathi amaphoyisa awenzi
lutho. Ngiyabonga.[Kuphele isikhathi.] (Translation of Zulu paragraph
follows.)

[I agree with the hon Minister that sometimes witnesses disappear. It is
important that families and relatives of the victims should always be
informed about developments and not be left in the dark. They will
eventually blame the police for having done nothing. Thank you. [Time
expired.]]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. There have been
some questions posed by the hon members here; not in the House, but I have
received correspondence from a number of them, where they raised similar
problems – the investigating officers have not gone back to give feedback
to people.

I have responded to a number of such letters and, in the great majority of
cases – I am sure members can attest to this – the investigating officers
have actually gone back to give feedback. But, somehow, people still say
that no feedback has been forthcoming.

In instances, of course, where no feedback has been given, we have told the
police that when they investigate, they should give feedback to people. In
cases where this is happening, it is not because there is a directive or
there is deliberate intention on the part of investigating officers to
withhold information from people who ought to know about the
investigations.

On other occasions the Police have indicated to us that they do not want to
regularly go back and give feedback because, at times, that information
that they place in the hands of family members at times filters back to the
very people that are under investigation. But, in cases where, quite
clearly, there is deliberateness on the part of the police, we intervene,
and we accept that there are cases like that. Thank you very much.

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, the greatest deterrent to
criminals is the certainty of detection and punishment. The forensic
laboratories in our criminal records centre are crucial in the process of
detecting criminals and obtaining convictions. Currently, there are
shortages of 91 posts in the criminal records centre, and there are 544
vacancies in our forensic laboratories. At the same time it is also
reported that we are also assisting 12 SADC countries with forensic
support.

Minister, we experience about 20 000 murders a year. What is government
doing about this specific problem in our forensic laboratories and criminal
records centre so that we can increase our detection and conviction rates,
and bring down the high rate of murder in South Africa? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. I am sure that we
all appreciate the fact that there is never going to come a time in South
Africa, or anywhere else in the world, where no crime will be committed.

The law enforcement agencies then have to put systems in place that deal
with those matters. The fact that not everything you have is commensurate
with the number of people you want to deal with is a fact of life. What
should be accepted, as a fact here, is that the crime trends in South
Africa are going down, and this is as a result of the good investigations
that our detectives and other members of the SA Police Service are doing.

Yes, there will be weaknesses with respect to the various levels of our
crime-fighting programmes, but the fact of the matter is that we are not in
the kind of situation where we will throw our hands up in the air and say
that we are unable to move forward.

We are moving forward, and we are bringing crime down in South Africa. We
have the various elements that relate to crime fighting that are available.
Some of them have been mentioned by the hon member. It is through those
very components of our crime-fighting machinery that we have been able to
reduce crime to the extent that we have been able to.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, we know that, because of the many cases
of murder that go unsolved, some families hire private investigators.
Christiaan Botha, the East London-based private investigator, who has
solved two seemingly insolvable Gauteng murders, says that unsolved murders
are a big problem in the country.

Recently, Mr Botha took a month to solve a murder case that police bungled
despite a year-and-a-half of investigations. He hunted down the killers of
36-year-old Deon de Villiers of Boksburg who was stabbed 37 times, had his
throat cut and was beaten with a rock. The two killers were convicted in
June.

What I would like to know, hon Minister, is whether you have considered
meeting with such successful private investigators to find out what they
are doing that makes them successful where our own police are failing,
taking into consideration the specific case I mentioned. We do not want to
see members of the public losing confidence in our police, and therefore
turning to private investigators in large numbers because they are
desperate and want the murderers of their loved ones to be arrested and
convicted. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, I have confidence in members of
the SA Police Service. I am not going to go to anyone and say to them,
``Please tell us what you do that makes you more successful than the
Police’’. You should understand also, surely, that if I want my services to
be employed by people, I must advertise. One way of advertising will be to
say the kinds of things that you mentioned here, which come from the
particular individual.

It must be understood that the police . . . we have among the best
investigators in the world. People who are involved in crime-fighting will
tell you this; it doesn’t matter whether they are Americans, Brits or
whoever. They will tell you that South Africa has among the best-trained
investigators in the world. I am satisfied that they do their work.

The fact that one person goes after one solitary matter and uses two or
three months and gets to the bottom of the matter in the end does not
reflect what is happening in the SA Police Service. We are in charge of a
country here. We are dealing with everybody. We do not take just one case
and get one person on that case for as many months as you have quoted.

I have confidence in the ability of the members of the SA Police Service,
but so do our people. Thank you.

Ms M M SOTYU: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, the ANC government is committed
to solving each and every murder case with the same commitment. It is
therefore necessary that we ensure in our oversight role that communities
receive the quality service that they deserve.

Minister, as you quite rightly say, it is not clear where this figure of 10
000 comes from, or even how it is determined. Can the Minister please
explain, for the benefit of the House, that a murder case cannot
necessarily be solved and result in conviction in the same year, as it
seems the process of justice is misunderstood by some members. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: You are quite correct. Apart from what
you said, members also ought to know this. There is no crime that has been
committed the file of which, willy-nilly, gets closed. Murder cases will be
investigated until the perpetrators are found. We do not simply take that
docket and lock it up in an archive. We do not do that. So, it does not
matter that there are people who will say that there are these cases. For
as long as we have not brought anybody to book, those cases and those
dockets remain open. Thank you.


                Military justice in SA National Defence Force


83.   Prof A K Asmal (ANC) asked the Minister of Defence:

      (1)   What (a) are the relevant details in respect of the enquiry into
           military justice in the SA National Defence Force which he
           instituted in 2004 and (b) progress has been made with regard to
           representivity in the military justice system since 2004;


     (2)    whether his department has given any consideration to
           instituting an ombudsperson for the SANDF; if not, why not?
                                                        N1637E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, the reply is as follows:

The Minister of Defence set up a ministerial task team in 2004 to provide
him with advice on how the military legal system could be transformed with
particular reference to, firstly, the independence of the judiciary;
secondly, the independence of the prosecuting authority; thirdly, whether
the military legal system should be staffed by military personnel only:
whether there was a role for civilians and, if so, whether there would be a
need for specific training; fourthly, who should provide oversight over the
administration; five, the independence of the SA National Defence Force –
what remedial measures are to be taken where there have been breaches of
the constitutional, statutory or policy prescripts, the constitutionality
of some of the penalties imposed by the military courts, the implementation
of penalties, and the possibility of overlapping jurisdiction.

The task team completed this mandate in April 2005. The internal process
for interrogating the recommendations of the task team was finalised in
August 2005. The process going forward in implementing the recommendations
is to amend the existing Military Discipline Supplementary Measures Act,
Act 16 of 1999, or to repeal the said Act and come up with a new Act. The
Council of Defence in August 2005 mandated the task team to proceed with
the implementation of its recommendations.

Regarding part (b) of the question, since 2004 efforts have been made to
reach prescribed representative targets within the military justice system.
An action plan has been developed, and it is being implemented. Over the
period January 2004 to August 2005, 10 new military legal practitioners
were appointed, of which nine were from previously disadvantaged
communities - eight blacks, one Indian and one white. Another 16
appointments are pending, of which 14 will be from the previously
disadvantaged communities.

Reaching gender representivity in the military justice system is still a
challenge. However, this is a matter the department is constantly seeking
to address.

The answer to the second part of the question is: Yes, in terms of the
Defence Review and the White Paper on Defence, the ombudsperson is to be an
independent person that is appointed and reports to Parliament. It was
initially intended that this be a dedicated office similar to that of the
Public Protector who argued that his office had a legal and constitutional
mandate to deal with matters pertaining to the abuse of power by any organ
of state, including the armed forces.

A post was then created in the establishment of the Public Protector to
deal specifically with military issues. The Public Protector does not refer
to this person as the military ombudsman, but as an investigator charged
with military matters.

We have an extensive reply, a copy of which has already been given to Prof
Kader Asmal. Thank you very much.

Prof A K ASMAL: Deputy Speaker, I thank the Deputy Minister for his reply.
The portfolio committee has spent an enormous amount of time looking at
these two issues brought before the House. Only yesterday we had a great
meeting with the equal opportunity and affirmative action advisory board,
whom the Deputy Minister has met.

They said to us, and I quote: “There is an urgent need for a responsive
dispute resolution and grievance procedure in the SA National Defence
Force.” Mechanisms and concerns were noted regarding the existence of
discrimination and the effectiveness of the military justice system.

Now in the past few months we’ve had a number of hearings on these issues,
and the Deputy Minister would be aware that the portfolio committee has
submitted a draft Bill to the department, which we understand the
department is looking at.

Of course it is quite clear to the portfolio committee that the issue of
investigating and dealing with legitimate complaints, if we count all this
as machinery, is cumbersome, complex, adulatory and unresponsive, and
severely compromises military discipline, especially when the machinery,
culture and attitudes do not reflect basic constitutional principles and
the principles of Batho Pele.

So, on behalf of the portfolio committee, I would ask the Deputy Minister
to discuss the issue with the Minister as to the publication of the report
you mentioned on the military justice system, so that we can have a public
discussion before legislation is prepared; and, secondly, that urgent
consideration be given to what the White Paper or the Tempe report said
when the unfortunate incidents took place there, led by the Defence Force,
namely that there should be a military ombudsperson.

We hope that he will give consideration to that, particularly since our own
investigation of the Public Protector clearly showed us that the Public
Protector’s jurisdiction was not extensive enough, was not supported by an
effective staff and did not meet the needs of genuine, legitimate
complaints of the Defence Force. I hope the Deputy Minister therefore will
consider the cry from the heart from the portfolio committee. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Speaker, the issues raised by Prof
Kader Asmal will definitely be attended to by the department, especially by
the Council of Defence. We have already started the process. We wanted to
make sure that before we even took the matter to the portfolio committee we
were sure of what we wanted to achieve.

It is a fact that there is a problem in terms of dispute resolution and our
grievance procedures. Firstly, they take too long. This is one of the
issues that we must address. Of course, there are also problems in that the
Defence Force is in South Africa and South Africa unfortunately has
inherited a system of discrimination and racial problems.

We are in a process at the moment of dealing with this matter. As I said in
my first response, we only took a decision this month and we are now going
to be able to see whether we can publish. But probably before we do that,
we would have to meet with the portfolio committee and make a presentation
to them before we publish the report. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Adv Z L MADASA: Deputy Speaker, the hon Asmal has really taken the words
out of my mouth. Nonetheless, I would still like to stress the importance
of the department expediting the matter of the reform of the justice system
in the army, because the problems that have arisen – not this year, not
last year, but long ago – go to the crux of the matter, which is the ill
discipline in the army.

Cases that have been pending for two to three years are unresolved and are,
in fact, unfair charges. So we do not even know whether the charges are
legitimate, let alone the outcome of the investigations. This matter is
really urgent if the department wishes to bring discipline to bear on the
SA National Defence Force. You don’t have to answer this as I’m just making
a statement. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Thank you very much, Mr Madasa. The issue
of transforming the military justice system is one of our priorities. We’ve
had a number of meetings, because it is a very complicated matter. We also
have a problem in that sometimes even the judges are not easily available.

But, especially as you’re a legal person, I would have been happier if your
choice of words had been different. I do not want to agree with you that
there is ill discipline in the army. There are frustrations, especially
among the lower ranks of our Defence Force, primarily because of the time
the disputes and grievances take to be addressed. So I wouldn’t like people
to leave here with the impression that there is ill discipline in the SA
National Defence Force because that is not entirely correct. Thank you,
Deputy Speaker.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is a fact that the
military justice system isn’t functioning effectively, and it is a fact
that the members of the SANDF have little confidence in the current
mechanisms involved in the military justice system, which is affecting the
morale and the rank and file of the SANDF.

Would the hon Deputy Minister then kindly tell this House what action has
been taken by his department to date to bring the perpetrators of the
shootings at Phalaborwa, Simon’s Town and Burundi to book; what steps has
the Department of Defence taken to ensure that these incidents are
minimised to the least number; how has the SANDF dealt with the offences
committed by our peacekeepers in cases of rape, abuse and other violations
of discipline, etc; and when will we see a report on this matter?

The parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Defence has worked on a draft
Bill. We have discussed it, as you heard the chairperson say. The Defence
Review makes provision for it; the White Paper makes provision for it. It’s
now six months down the line that we’ve had this draft Bill. I’m sure you
must have received a copy for your perusal. Why is there a delay in this
matter? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Speaker, I’m going to try my level
best, because I don’t want people to assume that Mr Sayedali-Shah and I
don’t like each other, because I like him very much.  [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: He says he likes you too.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: He again repeats what I said – that the
military justice system in our department is not functioning properly. That
is why there was a task team. I have already said that we are dealing with
the matter, but he is raising new issues that are not part of the question.
If he wants to get a report about some of the incidents he is listing, he
must do so. Then, we’ll come to Parliament or to the portfolio committee
and we’ll give a full report on what he is asking. Thank you, Deputy
Speaker.

Mr N T GODI: Deputy Speaker, may I start by saying that I think my talk
button is not that functional. That’s why I had to raise my hand.

Comrade Deputy Minister, the transformation of the military justice system
in the army for me is part and parcel of the general need to transform the
military in its broader sense. What I want to check is: what progress has
been made in the attempt to amalgamate the veteran’s association or the
liberation movement and those of the old SADF? I ask this because, as
things currently stand, the veterans from the apartheid army have more
benefits than the veterans from the liberation movement and, 11 years down
the line, we think that this process needs to have been concluded. Thank
you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Speaker, unfortunately, again the
people I like are letting me down! I like Mr Godi very well, but he is now
asking a new question that concerns the integration of the military
veterans, which has nothing to do with the military justice system. But for
his information, because I like him, we are in the process of integrating
the military veterans; but you cannot integrate before you level the
playing field. We have to make sure that especially those who were
disadvantaged are raised to the point at which they can integrate in such a
manner that they are not swallowed up by what he calls the former apartheid
military veterans. I thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I’m not going to allow other people who like the
Minister . . . [Interjections.] and the Minister also likes them.


                 Peace process between Israel and Palestine


  92. Mrs M A A Njobe (ANC) asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs:


      (1)   Whether the implementation of the current disengagement plan of
           the Israeli government contributes towards the establishment of
           an independent Palestine state; if not, what is the position in
           this regard; if so, how much of the occupied Palestinian
           territory is expected to be returned to the Palestinian people
           through this process;


             (2) how did the Spier Presidential Peace Initiative of 2003
             contribute in facilitating the current peace process between
             Israel and Palestine?                            N1750E


The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Madam Deputy Speaker, the disengagement
plan from Gaza has to be looked at in the context of the road map itself.
If it’s done in isolation of the road map, then it won’t be as useful as it
should be. But it has to be in the framework of the road map. Therefore it
must be seen as a first step in the implementation of the peace plan and
the withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories.

Gaza is about 365 km2, which is 6% of the occupied Palestinian territory.
Even the withdrawal from Gaza will be meaningful if the Palestinians are
allowed to determine and run the affairs in Gaza itself. If that does not
happen, then that will not be as meaningful as it should be. The part that
they will control is supposed to leave out the Philadelphia Corridor, which
is on the border with Egypt. But our belief is that they should then be
allowed to take on the affairs of that part.

The Israeli settlers had occupied approximately 30% of Gaza; therefore the
withdrawal constitutes the return of 30% of Gaza. That constitutes only 6%
of the occupied territory. The withdrawal from the four areas in the West
Bank will constitute 10%. That means that it will be a withdrawal from 10%
of the total of 94% because the occupied territory in the West Bank forms
94% of the occupied Palestinian territory. So that is the level of
withdrawal that we see. However, as I said, if it is seen in the framework
of the road map, then it is positive.

We know that in the West Bank, the withdrawal is not complete, unlike in
Gaza. As far as we understand, in the West Bank the withdrawal is partial
because the settlers will be withdrawn, but the military installations and
the soldiers at checkpoints are going to remain.

The other question is about the South African opinion, the Spier initiative
and how that fits into all these aspects. Of course, the Spier initiative
or process was really some background work or work behind the scenes to try
to encourage the peaceful resolution of the Palestinian-Israeli problem.
Initially, the interaction was between Palestinians and Israelis who are
for peace – commonly known as the peace camps. But later the Spier process
began to engage other people like the Jewish Diaspora, the Likud party,
Hamas and the Islamic Jihad.

We think that it’s important to still continue the work in the background
that encourages the movement towards the resolution of that conflict. Thank
you.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Hon Minister, thank you for the informative response to
the question. The ANC fully supports the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and to coexist with the people of Israel. We appreciate
South Africa’s intervention in the Middle East conflict and the
contribution made by the Spier Presidential Peace Initiative of 2003 to the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process.

Hon Minister, recent events in that part of the world have shown that much
still needs to be done. What further role can South Africa play to ensure
that the two sides take consideration of each other’s fears and concerns
and that they engage seriously with them as equal partners - I would like
to emphasise, “as equal partners” – through a structured negotiation
process? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Hon member, as you know, this matter is
handled by the United Nations. There is the quartet, which is supposed to
be the lead group that is supposed to lead all of us in the process of the
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but also in terms of the
establishment of the Palestinian state through the two-state resolution
where the Palestinians will have their own state and the Israelis theirs,
both with secure borders. Hopefully, they will coexist as neighbours.

As I have said, South Africa can only play a supportive role, which we have
been playing in various ways. Even in this process, it is important for us
to continue engaging both sides. We should engage the Palestinians and
assist them where we can, as we have been doing. We should also engage the
Israelis and share our own experience as South Africans.

For instance, when we met with the Likud party, it was not only as a
government delegation, but we involved other South Africans who could share
their own experiences with them. Former Minister Pik Botha and others were
part of that because they know them and were interacting with them before.
They could share experiences with them to show that the way South Africa
went was satisfactory and that there was no loser. Peace was the winner.

So it is important for South Africa to continue where we can meet with
Israelis, Palestinians and sometimes with both. But South Africa cannot be
the lead country in this matter. The quartet is the lead structure
designated by the United Nations. We must continue because of the need for
peace in that region. If we can solve that conflict peacefully, I think it
will be a big contribution towards peace in the world.

Therefore it is important for us - and everybody else - to participate
where we can. I just wanted to explain that we couldn’t be the lead
country. We will always work in the background, not on the front stage. The
quartet is supposed to be on the front stage. But all the time, we also
engage every single member of the quartet. We talk to them about that
situation. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, Madam Minister, I agree
with you about the role of the quartet and that of South Africa which of
necessity will be a modest and a marginal one. Perhaps our experience of
bridging a huge divide may be helpful to the people in that conflict.

My view is that the world has been surprised by the actions of the Sharon
government at the scenes of the Gaza withdrawal, which are played out on
our television screens. Would the Minister agree that there are encouraging
signs of a climate change and that pressure should now be exerted by the
South African government and others on both the Palestinians and the
Israelis? And the purpose of that would be to encourage them to continue
with confidence-building steps aimed at increasing negotiating momentum.

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Yes, I would agree that the withdrawal
from Gaza is a positive step, as I have already indicated, but not an
isolated one. So I agree that it is a positive step and that the two sides
must build on it. I agree that all of us, indeed, must put pressure, not
only on both sides but also on the quartet to play its leading role in
resolving that conflict as soon as possible.

So South Africa should do the same: put pressure on both, but also on the
quartet because they must take responsibility and build on this step. It
can’t just be this step and then nothing else happens. This must be in the
framework of the road map. This must open up the opportunity for the road
map to be implemented. So it must be both sides and the quartet.


                        Early release of rape suspect


  98. Mr J Selfe (DA) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:


      (1)   Whether the suspect arrested in connection with the rape of a
           three-year-old girl in Bokmakierie in Cape Town on or about 6
           August 2005, and who received an early release from prison in
           terms of his announced remission of sentences for prisoners,
           underwent any pre-release counselling; if not, why not; if so,
           (a) on what dates did this person undergo counselling, (b) who
           conducted the counselling and (c) what were the results thereof;


      (2)   whether any psychological and risk assessment was done as part
           of the pre-release programme for this prisoner; if not, why not;
           if so, what are the relevant details;


      (3)   what steps were taken to ensure that the early release of this
           prisoner would not pose a risk to society?         N1756E


The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Chair, all offenders who
benefited from the remission of sentence to the extent that it qualified
them for release were obliged to attend a compulsory prerelease programme.

In this specific case, the individual attended the prerelease programme on
13 June 2005. Prior to this, the individual appeared before the
Correctional Supervision and Parole Board on 1 April 2005. His co-operation
and behaviour in the correctional facility was quite positive. He was
granted an unconditional release date of 27 September 2005.

The answer to part (b) is: The prerelease programme was conducted by the
correctional officials, as is the case. The answer to part (c) is: By its
very nature, this programme was a didactic programme that included modules
on restorative justice, relationships and parole conditions.

The answer to part 2 of the question is: A prerelease assessment was
completed. It dealt with matters such as place of abode after release,
education and training, employment opportunities, religious and health
care, needs after release, and the material assistance that was required.

The answer to part 3 of the question is: The Department of Correctional
Services entered into partnerships with a range of organisations such as
Nicro, Khulisa, Sanca, the SA Council of Churches and the Salvation Army
specifically to assist with the reintegration of released offenders into
their respective communities. The department also worked very closely with
the SA Police Service in monitoring all cases of reoffending. Thank you.

Mr J SELFE: Thank you very much, Chair, and thank you to the Minister for
his reply. When he announced the special remissions on 31 may 2005, the
Minister told this House the following, and I quote: “No offender who
committed aggressive, firearm-related, sexual or drug-related crimes will
be released.” The alleged perpetrator of this crime was serving a prison
term for a sexual crime and had a history of sexual abuse, and yet he was
released early. The question is: Why was he released early?

Moreover, it is reasonably well established that sexual offenders do not
have a good rehabilitation record. What steps is the Minister taking to
ensure that sexual offenders are properly screened and for longer than a
single day, before they are released on parole and are properly supervised
while on parole to prevent a repetition of this very tragic event?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: First of all, let me just correct
one thing. I tend to agree with Mr Selfe on some of the issues he raised,
but let me raise one thing. When this particular individual was arrested –
let me read from the record very quickly - he was arrested and sentenced,
or was sentenced rather, on 28 September 2000 to five years’ imprisonment.

In terms of section 276 l(i) of the Criminal Procedure Act of 1977, for
indecent assault he qualified to be considered for conversion of sentence
on 27 July 2001 on the completion of one sixth of his sentence.  After
that, he was let out in 2001.

He was rearrested again on 12 June 2003. What he was arrested for this time
was for breaking parole rules – he violated everything while on parole. He
was not arrested this time for that, but he broke parole rules for that
sentence he was serving.
I also want to agree with Mr Selfe that we have to have proper screening
and proper risk assessment before we release anybody into the communities.

This is the first time that any remission of sentence procedure or process
has been done so well – if I may say so myself - and we have learnt from
it. From here we have laid a foundation that is going to assist us in the
future. It is difficult sometimes when sentences are meted out. The judges
do not indicate when it is a sexual offender.

Adv P S SWART: Chair, hon Minister, I think we were similarly shocked in
the ACDP at the brutal rape of a three-year-old child from Bokmakierie. But
we do also want to state that your department’s statement that the current
2,4% reoffending rate is admittedly low. We want to just point out that it
is significant that amongst the reoffenders there were three cases of
murder and eight cases of rape.

You also indicated on 31 May, when you made the announcement, that anyone
who presented a danger to society would not be released. Clearly, these
people fell through those cracks. We do just want to say that 2,4% is low,
and we hope that it stays low. Could you, hon Minister, give us an
indication where you also admitted at the portfolio committee hearing that
the system of community supervision is inadequate and needs overhauling?
What can we now do with 30 000 prisoners being released from prison in
terms of this amnesty? What is being done to ensure that the levels of
reoffending remain low and that the public’s safety is maintained? I thank
you.

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, you may certainly answer
the question, although it is not entirely linked to the question on the
Question Paper.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much, Deputy Chair. I
must also emphasise the point, as you have done, hon Swart, that we did
express ourselves as the department about that terrible deed that happened
to that three-year-old. We expressed shock at that and we expressed our
sympathy to the family for what happened.

With regard to the issue of community supervision, we are beefing it up
because we have large numbers of people that were released through
remissions. We are employing more and more people in the Department of
Correctional Services so that we can release those who have been with us
for some time to go into the communities to assist.

Regarding not being able to have assessed the risk of this particular
individual, as I have said before we are a responsible department. We are
not so naive as not to understand that some people will reoffend. The call
that I’m making on us as members of Parliament and on families and society
out there is that the issue of released offenders who get integrated into
society must be a responsibility for society as whole. It cannot be only
the responsibility of the Department of Correctional Services. We have, all
of us, to take the responsibility and make sure that people who come back
into our society are really looked after so that they do not reoffend
again.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Deputy Chair.

Umhlonishwa ngimuzwe ekhuluma ethi akazi kahle ukuthi abanye baboshelwani.
Umuntu odlwengulile kufanele ukuba ngabe akayena umuntu onikezwa ilungelo
lokuphuma ejele noma ngabe linhloboni. Kulokhu-ke kwenzeke iphutha
kwenzeka. Kufanele kwenzeke yini ngokulandayo ukuthi abadlwenguli badedelwe
na? Umbuzo omqoka kakhulu kabi lona ngoba laba bantu abadlwengula izingane
uma bezodedelwa masishane abantu lapha ngaphandle bazokwenza enye into
engavumelekile lapha emhlabeni. Bengithi angibuze lokho nje. (Translation
of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[I heard the hon member say that he does not really know why others are
arrested. A person who raped should not be granted the right to be out of
prison. No matter what kind of right it is. This time around, a mistake was
made; it happened. Is it supposed to happen the next time we release
rapists? This is a very critical question because if these child rapists
are going to be freed immediately, they are going to do other things that
are not acceptable in this world. That is all I wanted to ask.]

UMPHATHISWA WEENKONZO ZOLULEKO: Enkosi Bawo uVelaphi Ndlovu, ndiqinisekile
ukuba akekho umntu eluntwini ngokubanzi onokuze avume ukuba abantu
abadlwengula abantwana okanye abantu basethyini mangavele bakhutshwe nje
ejele. Ndingutata wamantombazana amathathu endiwathanda ngokungazenzisiyo
uNosiphiwo, uBhumbhum kunye noNeli. Ndingaze ndicaphuke kakhulu ukuba
kungaze kukhutshwe isidlwengu esidlengule aba bantwana. Nawuphina umntwana
olapha eMzantsi Afrika ndingutata kuye, ufanele kukukhuselwa,
angadlwengulwa.

Asinakuze sivume ke ukuba izidlwengu ziphume etolongweni. Lo yena oye
waphuma ebengangenanga ngolo hlobo. Wophule imithetho yengqawule, kodwa
ukusukela ngoku sizakujonga ukuba akukho sidlwengu siza kuphuma ngolu
hlobo. Asikwazi ukuthi siliSebe leZolungisa elisungule iphulo elaziwa
njenge: no violence against women and children. Silelona sebe ekufuneka
linqande into yokuba izidlwengu zingaphumi entolongweni xa zibanjiwe.
Siyakuthembisa ke bawo uNdlovu ukuba sizakuyisa iso loo nto, kwaye asoze
iphinde yenzeke. Enkosi. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you, hon Velaphi Ndlovu. I am
sure that no one among the general public could ever agree that sexual
offenders and child molesters should be let out of prison. I am a father of
three girls, Nosiphiwo, Bhumbhum and Neli, whom I love dearly. I would
become very angry if somebody who had committed a sexual offence against
them, who had raped any of them, were to be released from prison. I am a
father figure to every child in South Africa, and she or he has to be
protected against sexual abuse.

We would never allow rapists to be released from prison. The offender we
are talking about is the one who broke parole conditions. However, from now
on we are going to ensure that no sexual offender is released under the
amnesty conditions. As the department that initiated and leads the 16 Days
of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children campaign, the
responsibility is on us to ensure that sexual offenders serve the prison
sentences that have been handed down to them. I promise you, hon Ndlovu, on
behalf of the department, that we will look at this matter closely. It will
never happen again. Thank you.]

Mr J SELFE: Yes, thank you very much indeed, Madam Chair. When the National
Commissioner came to the portfolio committee, he briefed the portfolio
committee and said that the prerelease programmes were supposed to have
lasted for 10 weeks before these people were released. In fact, the
Minister told the House that the prerelease counselling consisted of one
day. Could the Minister explain to us why this programme was truncated in
such large measure and why only one day of prerelease counselling was
provided?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: I don’t think the hon James Selfe is
correct. It was not truncated to one day. We stretched it over a period of
three weeks into the 10 weeks in which we were releasing the offenders. The
commissioner did mention that if this was done according to him, which I
think is correct, we should have had more time.

Now, we have learnt lessons from this. This is the first time that this
special remission, which comes out of our Constitution, has been done in
this proper way. Of course, as the department, this has laid the foundation
for us in that when these remissions take place again people will do them
in the proper way.

Also, remember that as a department we are very new to this. The last time
it was done was in 1998, and it was done in a very Pamplona bullish kind of
way. You know the bulls of Pamplona? Yes, it was done in that way, but we
have learnt something from this. The lessons we have learnt we will bring
back to Parliament and give a report here on them and on what should happen
next should special remissions occur again.

       Intervention by government to prevent Zimbabwe’s expulsion from
                         International Monetary Fund

  82. Mr L K Joubert (IFP) asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs:


       Whether the Government has intervened on behalf of Zimbabwe to
       prevent Zimbabwe’s expulsion from the International Monetary Fund in
       July 2005; if so, what commitments were made by the Zimbabwean
       government in return?                             N1578E

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Some of us do not know the bulls of
Pamplona so maybe he should have explained to all of us what that means.

Having said that, yes, the South African government did ask for the
postponement of the IMF decision from 9 August to 9 September. But there
were no conditions secured or expected at that point of asking for the
postponement. Thank you.

Mr L K JOUBERT: Thank you, Minister. Chairperson, I find it strange that in
some cases the government seeks to develop mechanisms to influence other
countries, but in the case of Zimbabwe where we are in a strong position to
influence a government we seem to be paralysed.

Just last week in the portfolio committee we were given the policy on
Kenya, for example, and I want to quote:

    South Africa is to develop a mechanism of intervention that can be
    utilised to interact with the stakeholders in the Kenyan government, in
    case the current wrangles threaten the stability of the government and
    impact on the regional peace and stability.

I fully agree with this statement anyway, but my follow-up question is: Why
is our policy towards Zimbabwe different, why don’t we use the
opportunities to influence them? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: I do not know what you understand by that
statement in any case, because if you understood it the way I do, you would
not be asking that question. Because I do not think that there are any
mechanisms that we can use against Kenya other than engaging with them, to
be honest with you.

I do not know what you were made to understand we could do other than
engage with Kenya or any other country. Therefore, with Zimbabwe, I do not
understand when you say we are paralysed. If there is any country that we
have been engaging with and spending hours and days on, it is Zimbabwe. So,
we are not paralysed. Sure, we may not have the results that you expect but
it does not mean that we are not doing anything. It does not mean that we
are not engaging. Even with Kenya, we will engage with them. That is all
that that statement means. So, don’t read any more into it than that we
will engage with Kenya if needs be.

Yes, we engage with Zimbabwe as well but what I said even last week at the
imbizo was that I do not think that we should deceive ourselves that we
have some magic wand that we can wave and get Zimbabwe to change if they do
not want to change. [Interjections.] That is the honest truth. What is it
that we can do?

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Is it possible for you to afford our member here a
chance because the Minister has posed a question back to our member to
clarify her point. Is it possible to afford him another chance?

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): It seems to me that we may well be
opening another opportunity for a follow-up question. Hon Ramgobin!

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam Minister, notwithstanding the
comments of the so-called ``paralysis’’ of our stance with regard to
Zimbabwe, notwithstanding and over and above our initiative to take action
or an advisory position to delay the expulsion of Zimbabwe from the
International Monetary Fund, is it not absolutely necessary for regional
stability and security for our own national interest, to take more positive
steps to ensure that the meltdown of Zimbabwe does not take place and the
expulsion of Zimbabwe from the IMF does not take place? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon member. Of course, any
South African who has a South African interest or a continental interest or
an interest in humanity for that matter, will not want a meltdown in
Zimbabwe so that there is total collapse because who has to gain from total
collapse in Zimbabwe? There is none of us, not South Africa, not Zimbabwe
not Africa and not humanity. So, it is important therefore that we avoid as
far as we can the meltdown or total collapse of Zimbabwe.

Yes. Even if it was already there, why should we make it worse? It is not
in your interest to make it worse. So, yes I agree completely with you, hon
member.

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Minister, with all these questions about Zimbabwe,
the travails of Zimbabwe, it seems to me there is one person causing this
problem - who is a fallen hero, a fallen star -  and that is President
Mugabe. He has sent off the IMF with a flea in their ear. He will not
accept IMF advice and conditions. Likewise, President Mugabe has refused to
accept what is politely called a loan from South Africa. Is the government
going to insist on Zimbabwe receiving this loan on their own terms if they
do, or should we leave this troublesome President Mugabe, a fallen hero, so
to say, to stew in his own juice? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Well, I do not know how you force anybody
to take anything. How do you do that? We just deposit it in their account?
[Laughter.] Is that what you mean?

I do not understand when you say are we going to force him to take the
money. How do we do that? I do not know. Maybe I will ask the Minister of
Finance or the Governor of the Reserve Bank to say whether they can force
somebody to take a loan when he does not want to; I do not know.

But I think what is important really is that Zimbabwe consists of millions
and millions of Zimbabweans so we must not lose sight of that and try and
treat Zimbabwe as though we are talking about one person and that whatever
you may wish about that person then you think it will solve the problems of
Zimbabwe.

It will not be, so if we indeed care about human beings as we all say we
do, we must care about what happens to those Zimbabweans. If there is a
meltdown in Zimbabwe or a total collapse of the economy, what will happen
to those human beings? What do we wish for them? I really do not understand
your wish for a total collapse in Zimbabwe because it will affect millions
and millions of Zimbabweans, and South Africans for that matter.

Perhaps you think that when there is a total collapse you can go and grab
some funds, I do not know. [Laughter.]

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Order, hon members! The fourth slot has
been taken by the hon Khumalo.

Mfu M S KHUMALO: Sihlalo noNgqongqoshe ohloniphekuile, kuyabonakala ukuthi
umongameli uMugabe akafuni ukuzibophezela entweni ethile. Kubonakale
ngokuthi kuthi abantu be-IMF befikile ezweni lakhe abe matasatasa
kangangokuthi akanakuhlangana nabo.

Manje singenzeka yini isimo sokuthi iNingizimu Afrika igcine ikhiphe imali
ku-IMF noma izibophezelo zingatholakalanga? (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Rev M S KHUMALO: Chairperson and hon Minister, it is noticed that
President Mugabe is not prepared to commit himself to something. This was
noticed when the people of the IMF visited his country and he became busy
in such a way that he could not meet with them.

So now will South Africa be in a situation to end up withdrawing the money
from the IMF even though the commitments have not been received?]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZANGAPHANDLE: Mhlawumbe okufanele sikwazi futhi ukuthi
iZimbabwe yona nje ngokwayo ikhona imali esiyikhokhile kulezi zinsuku kwi-
IMF ngakho-ke asingakhulumi sengathi sikhuluma ngelizwe noma ngomuntu
ohleli nje ogoqe izandla, okhubazekile. Kukhona izigidi ezingaphezulu
kwekhulu asebezikhokhile kwi-IMF kulezi zinsuku. Asazi-ke ukuthi lokho
kusho ukuthini. Noma bona ngingababonanga, sengisho ukuthi ikhona imizamo
abayenzayo hhayi ukuthi bahleli nje balinde thina ukuthi sizobafunza
njengechwane lenyoni. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Perhaps what we should know is that a few
days ago Zimbabwe on its own contributed something towards the payment to
the IMF; therefore let us not talk as if we are speaking about a country or
a person which is just idly folding its arms and is disabled. They have
paid over a hundred million to the IMF in a few days’ time. We, however, do
not know what that means. Even though I have not seen them in person, I
mean to say that there are efforts that they are making; and it’s not as if
they are just sitting and waiting to be fed by us like a fledgling.]


              Deployment of SA Police Service members on trains


84.   Mr S Mahote (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:


      (1)   How many SA Police Service members were deployed on trains in
            the Western Cape;


      (2)   whether this arrangement is permanent; if not, why not; if so,
            what are the relevant details?                    N1739E


The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Deputy Chair, now and again there are
questions I am asked by hon members - and it is always my intention to
respond to those questions – which, at times, are questions whose answers
may, yes, enrich us here, because they provide knowledge. But there are
other people who, when they get the information, use it as a countermeasure
against us.

So, as I respond to this question, there are some details that I am not
going to make available to the member, because they are operational
aspects. I don’t want the people whom we are fighting against to have this
information and to get it directly from the police, so to speak.

It is true, as we indicated a while back, that we have some police deployed
on our trains in the Peninsula, and we did say that we would use that as a
project in order for us to define a similar arrangement elsewhere in the
country. We have, therefore, what we refer to as our National Mobile Train
Unit. This is a unit that therefore accompanies trains on our national
grid, particularly trains that go to Pretoria.

Here, in the Peninsula, we have four contact points - at Philippi, Retreat,
Bellville and Cape Town, which serve as community service centres for the
railway police. In other words, we have railway police that are working.
But I am not going to give the actual deployments and the numbers relevant
to this. Thank you very much.

Mr S MAHOTE: Thank you very much, Minister. I think that in your response
to my first question you also covered my follow-up question. Thank you.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Deputy Chair. Minister, I understand that you do
not want to give details. What I want to know is: Is it the SAPS that are
deployed here or have we trained special railway police members who will be
deployed there permanently?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Firstly, I just want to indicate that,
yes, these are permanent deployments and they are members of the SAPS. I am
sure you would recall, hon Ndlovu that the first time we spoke about this
we said that there was a division that had been established within the
police called the Protection and Security Services of the police. These are
members who are part of that division, but they are specially assigned to
the railways. They are SAPS members. Thank you.

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Minister, our public transport system has been
systematically eroded over the past decade, which has enormous economic and
other implications for the country. The increasing price of fuel further
enhances the need to deal with this problem.

Minister, the seriousness of the issue is highlighted by the R40 million
class-action suit instituted by the Rail Commuters Action Group and by
various strikes by Cosatu over dissatisfaction with the rail system. One of
the greatest areas of dissatisfaction for rail commuters is safety and
security. Besides commuter safety, there are also other security issues
such as vandalism, fare evasion, theft and delinquent commuters that also
cost the taxpayer a great deal of money and require action from the
Department of Safety and Security.

Minister, does the SA Police Service really have the manpower to ensure
that not only commuter safety but also these other aspects that I mentioned
are dealt with as part of a comprehensive safety plan for our rail system?
Thank you, Chairperson.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: The first thing I would like to say -
I am sure you know this, because it happened when some of you people were
governing this country - is that the railway police was disbanded by the
previous regime. We only restarted with a small unit to deal with safety on
the railways in the past year. That is why we only have the number that we
have at present to deal with these. To the extent therefore that it is
possible, the police are going to be able to help to restore people’s
confidence in terms of their safety and security on the trains. That is all
I can say at this stage. Thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, despite the minor
deployment of SAPS members on the trains, would you say that it was
substantial enough to ensure a decrease in incidents of crime on our
trains? Maybe this is not a question that I should ask now, but do you
perhaps have any statistics of arrests that have been made in the past few
months? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I, unfortunately, don’t have
statistics with respect to what has happened vis-à-vis possible arrests on
the trains. But I do wish to say that I recall there was a time - I think
it was in my Budget Vote speech – when I spoke about what we had done one
particular festive season, particularly here in the Western Cape, and,
when, apart from the railway police, we also deployed volunteers who helped
us.

I do want to reiterate what I said then, which is that as a consequence of
that deployment they were indeed able to deal with crime. Incidents,
therefore, of criminal activity against people were drastically reduced. I,
unfortunately, don’t have current information with respect to what has been
happening in the past few months. Thank you.

   Compliance with national building regulations by police stations under
                                construction

   80. Mr V C Gore (ID) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

       Whether the (a) Kabega Park, (b) Motherwell or (c) any other police
       station under construction complies with the national building
       regulations in respect of (i) accessibility for people with
       disabilities and (ii) the provision of lifts to higher floors; if
       not, what mechanisms have been put in place to rectify the situation;
       if so, what are the relevant details?
                                   N1257E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, what we have at Kabega
Park is leased accommodation, and not a police structure. We are leasing
that accommodation. Of course, it does conform to the national building
regulations and, therefore, is accessible to people who live with
disabilities.

The provision of elevators is not necessary, therefore, in terms of
regulations, seeing that the building is only two storeys high. In other
words, therefore, it is less than 10m in height. The national building
regulations, particularly of 2004, part T, clause 4(44)(1) stipulates that
lifts shall only be provided if the building concerned is higher than 10m.

The Motherwell police station is currently under construction, and when it
is completed it will have accommodation for people living with
disabilities.

This is the general thrust of my response to you. In other words, all new
police stations that we are building will have that accommodation and in
this case it’s only because this building is not high. Thank you very much.

Mr V C GORE: Chairperson, the ID would like to thank the Minister for his
commitment to ensuring that people with disabilities are not sidelined or
marginalised in society. All barriers need to be removed in order to ensure
that people with disabilities and their families are adequately integrated
into mainstream society.

I think the Kabega Park and Motherwell police stations illustrate the fact
that there needs to be some mechanism put in place to ensure that people
with disabilities are accommodated. With regard to Kabega, this is a police
station where reports have emanated that people with disabilities,
particularly wheelchair users, are not able to get to the second floor.
That creates a problem not only for the people that work within the police
station, but also for members of the public who wish to access the
services, for example, on the second floor.

What this case illustrates is that despite all the best intentions by you,
hon Minister, and your department, situations seem to arise more and more.
Unless, hon Minister, . . .

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms S-C Botha): Hon Gore, you have got nought seconds to
ask your question.

Mr V C GORE: The question I’d like to ask you, hon Minister, regarding
public awareness, is: What is your department doing in order to overcome
the barriers that exist in terms of people with disabilities?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, as I’ve said, the problem
with that particular station is that it is leased accommodation and it’s
not ours, so to speak. But even so, in terms of the regulations it is not
one of those structures where necessary changes have to be effected. But we
are quite alert to the particular problem that the hon Gore is raising and
we can’t undermine the gravity of it.

On the part of the police, as I say, all police stations that we are
building do have that accommodation because we are quite aware of the
problems that we will have in servicing people who live with disabilities
if we do not redefine the way in which these structures are put up.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Chairperson, I take the Minister’s point that the
building regulations have a limit, but you know, even a few steps are very
difficult for people with disabilities to cope with.

The question is, besides new police stations, what’s being done about
existing police stations, particularly those in rural areas, to accommodate
people with disabilities?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I really think that I
have attempted to respond to this question. Unfortunately, we can’t wish
away buildings that have always been as they were constructed at the time,
but it is our desire, as I say, to service people in the best possible
ways. I am sure we can make suitable constructions where it is indeed
feasible for us to do so without imposing on landlords from whom we lease
buildings, such as in the case of Kabega Park. We are quite aware of the
problems that the hon members are raising.

Ms M M SOTYU: Chairperson, I thank the Minister for the reply. Comrade
Minister, does the SA Police Service provide training to its members to
sensitise them regarding the rights and special needs of those members of
society who are differently able? If so, please provide us with some
details. If not, will the Minister consider implementing such training for
members of the SAPS?

At one stage, Minister, I visited one station that was under construction
and police members made us very proud because they went outside to assist a
disabled person who was in a wheelchair and took a statement outside the
police station. That is the reason why I am asking this question.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, in fact, hon member, I do
want to say that there are cases where the police have actually gone out of
their way to assist people who were not necessarily disabled, but were
undergoing very traumatic experiences. For instance, there is a police
officer that was going to report for work early one morning and he came
across somebody who was giving birth on a pavement in central Johannesburg.
That person went there and helped that woman to deliver that baby.

They also do this with respect to people who live with disabilities. There
is nobody who goes to a community service centre . . . and that is the
reason; incidentally, we now call police stations community service
centres, because that is where communities come together for various kinds
of services.

In fact, some of our police officials reported to me the other day that in
many instances people would come to the community service centre and ask if
it is possible for the centre to provide them with a room where they could
have a meeting. They are allowing them to do this, but they also go out of
their way to assist people who live with disabilities so that they can
access the various services that are available.


             Membership of gangs involved in criminal activities


93.   Rev K R J Meshoe (ACDP) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      Whether there is a law that prohibits membership of a gang that is
      involved in criminal activities; if not, why not; if so, (a) how many
      people have been arrested and convicted for being members of illegal
      gangs during the past five years (b) what is done to inform young
      people in particular about the dangers of belonging to a gang and (c)
      how can members of the public help the police by reporting the
      existence of street gangs without exposing themselves to danger?
                       N1751E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: This is a very long answer. Can’t I
just go to sit at a table with him and give my reply over a cup of tea?

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): You may ask him.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Section 9 of The Prevention Of
Organised Crime Act criminalizes active participation in or a person’s
membership of a criminal gang. This is the case if the person involved also
participates in criminal activity committed for the benefit of and at the
direction of, or in association with any criminal gang, or violent or
intimidatory activities of a gang.

A special project was implemented in the Western Cape to optimise
provisions for the so-called criminal gang activities contained in the
Prevention of Organised Crime Act. We have mobilised people, that is
communities, to deal particularly with young people so that they can give
them information with respect to this.

The police themselves have various projects that are designed to wean some
of these young people away from these gangs, such as in schools, the Adopt-
a-Cop Project, Youth Leaders against Crime, Captain Crime Stop and Top Cops
in secondary schools. All of these are designed to give information to
young people with respect to the type of crimes arising out of association
with criminal gangs.

Of course, we also invite people to give us information. And to ensure
their anonymity, they simply call Crime Stop’s toll-free numbers and give
us information regarding these matters without identifying themselves.
Thank you very much.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Chair, the fact that the Minister did not answer
the question as to how many people have been arrested and convicted should
be interpreted to mean that the conviction and arrest rates are very low.

Now, besides the fact that numerous workshops, special meetings and
consultations with gang experts from overseas to develop antigang
strategies have been held, gang activity, particularly in the Western Cape,
continues to grow.

Many thought that the implementation of Section 4 of the 1998 Prevention Of
Organised Crime Act, which criminalizes gang membership, would stop the
growth and expansion of street gangs, but this does not seem to be the
case.

The message of zero tolerance has been repeated regularly in speeches and
in newspaper interviews, but the war against gangsterism is not being won.
The late Minister of Justice, hon Dullah Omar, declared that the Prevention
Of Organised Crime Act, POCA, is the most drastic law passed by this
government. This drastic law that is supposed to criminalize gang
membership . . .

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms S-C Botha): Hon Meshoe, please ask your question.

Rev K R J MESHOE: My question is: Why are the convictions for illegal gang
membership still so low, particularly in the light of the fact that the
combined membership of the number of gangs on the Cape flats is still very
high? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. You see, we do
not arrest and charge people for being members of gangs. We charge them for
committing crimes. So when they are arrested, it is because they have
committed a crime. Yes, at times within the gang, in the advancement of the
interests of the gang and what have you, they commit crimes together as
gang members, but we charge them with that particular criminal act and not
for being members of a gang per se.

So it is difficult for me to give detailed information as to “how many
people . . . ”, as the question is put here, . . . “were arrested for being
members of illegal gangs?” It is illegal activities for which we arrest and
charge people. Thank you.

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): In the interest of gender equity,
Minister, you will have to ask her out to tea as well. [Laughter.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Hon Minister, you have given us some indication regarding
the steps that you are taking in the Western Cape to prevent gang
activities or people joining gangs to perform criminal activities. Do you
have any idea how effective those steps have been in preventing criminal
activities? Have you been able to effect the prevention of young people
joining those gangs? Do you have any ideas?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. Well, what we
have done here has helped us to curb this, but obviously we can’t say that
we have been able to stop it completely. Gangsterism still happens, but our
strategy goes a long way towards at least deterring young people,
particularly, from linking up with gangs.

We have been getting a lot of information from the people who have become
aware of these programmes that I have referred to. They have not completely
stopped gangsterism from happening, but they have gone quite some distance
in assisting us to curb it. Thank you.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo, mhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe, ngoba sengathi
kuyaphumelela lokhu kuphakwa kwamaphoyisa asebenza ukubhekana nalaba bantu
abenza ubugebengu, ngabe umhlonishwa uNgqongoshe uyacabanga yini ukuthi
mhlawumbe akhuphule inani labantu abazosebenza kulezo zimo, kanye nabantu
abazosebenza ngendlela yokuthi izigebengu zikwazi ukuziletha zona ngokwazo
ukuze sikhuphule inani, khona sizokwazi ukuwucindezela lo msebenzi omubi
wobugebengu bamagenge, ikakhulukazi lapha eNtshonalanga Kapa?

Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe, ngithi ngoba nakhu kunenhlansana yempumelelo ekhona
futhi ebonakalayo, ngabe ikhona yini imizamo yokukhuphula inani lamalungu
asebenza lo msebenzi ukuze kuthi noma impumelelo incane kodwa iye
ngokukhuphuka khona kuzoncishiswa amagenge ezigebengu lapha eNtshonalanga
Kapa? (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, hon Minister, because it seems as if this
deployment of police to deal with criminals is successful, is the hon
Minister considering increasing the number of personnel who are going to
work in those situations and those who are going to work in such a way that
criminals could turn themselves in so that we will be able to cope with the
criminal activities, specifically here in the Western Cape?

Hon Minister, what I am asking is, because there is a glimmer of success,
are there any efforts to increase the number of personnel that is doing
this work in such a way that we can decrease the number of criminals here
in the Western Cape?]

UMPHATHISWA WEZOKHUSELO NOKHUSELEKO: Ndikuve kakuhle, bawo. Ewe, siyawenza
lo msebenzi ukwenzela ukuba aba bantu basebenzayo, ngakumbi amapolisa enza
lo msebenzi, banyuselwe. Amanani amapolisa asebenza kweli candelo nawo athe
xhaxhe ngoku. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I understand your question, sir. Yes,
we do that in order for those individuals who do the work to get promoted,
especially the police. There is now an increase in the number of police
working in this unit.]

Mr O E MONARENG: Hon Minister, I just want to ask a follow-up question
around the issue of gangsterism. But firstly I would like to make a comment
that we in the ANC would like to thank the department for doing sterling
work in terms of alleviating gangsterism. Secondly, I would like to know
whether you would agree with me that gangsterism is a problem throughout
the country, but is rife in the Western Cape?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Yes, it is true that there are many
parts of our country where gangsterism is a problem. Indeed in the Western
Cape, in particular, it is a problem, but we have been dealing with it. It
has to do with a number of conditions that have been in place over many
years, which grew to the kind of phenomenon that we are facing now.

However, as you correctly said, and I am sure that members must have
themselves seen this, in the past few years the police have done
wonderfully well to control the situation with respect to gangsterism even
with regard to this particular province. Thank you.

             Impact of introduction of 7-day week establishment

90.   Mrs L S Chikunga (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      (a)How many professionals have (i) resigned from his department or
      (ii) turned down employment at his department at the last hour since
      the introduction of the 7-day establishment and (b) what impact does
      the introduction of this 7-day establishment have on the professional
      staff turnover in his department?N1745E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Chair, the introduction of
the 7-day week establishment is in line with the designation of the
correctional services as an essential service institution. This in essence
is aimed at ensuring that services are rendered on a 24-hour, 7-day basis.

This will reduce total lockup-time of inmates and will allow all inmates to
access more rehabilitation programmes in line with the new strategic
direction of the department even during the weekend, a practice that was
not possible when the department was on a 5-day week establishment.

The 7-day week establishment will greatly lessen the time worked by an
official and will allow more time for my staff members – abojele – to spend
quality time with their families. This will reduce stress suffered by most
members under the 5-day week establishment. To meet the needs of human
resources in this phasing in of the 7-day week establishment, the
department has to date recruited a total number of 2 064 in two intakes of
entry-level custodial staff in both Zonderwater and Kroonstad College.

As a department we have found no link between recruits turning down posts
because of the introduction of the 7-day week establishment. Professionals,
as in any scarce skills category, continue to turn down offers by the
department because of not being offered competitive salaries. This matter
is being addressed together with the Department of Public Service and
Administration, for it is this department that determines the salary levels
of these posts. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, . . . [Interjections.] . . .

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Sorry, hon Rajbally, I apologise. I made
a mistake. I have to first give the opportunity to the questioner.

Nkst L S CHIKUNGA: Ngiyabonga Mgcinisihlalo. Siyiyibonga imphendvulo yakho
lekhanyako Ndvuna. Umbuto lolandzelako utsi; Litiko Lekulungisa Timilo
lakakho, kukhona yini mbambambamba lenye indlela leseliyentile lengaba
siciniseko sekutsi basebenti labaceceshiwe abalishiyi ngebunyenti babo
Litiko Lekulungisa Timilo? Nangabe ikhona, iNdvuna ingasitekela yini ngayo;
nayingekho, litiko lona ikhona yini indlela lengenta labasebenti
labaceceshiwe bangalishiyi litiko? Nkhosi. (Translation of Siswati
paragraph follows.)

[Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Thank you, Chairperson. We are very happy about the
clear reply that the Minister has given us. The follow-up question is aimed
at finding out whether the Department of Correctional Services really does
have any provision for ensuring that trained workers do not leave the
department in great numbers. If it does, could the hon the Minister
expatiate on that; if it does not, does the department have in place any
other mechanisms to prevent the trained workers from leaving the
department? Thank you.]

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Minister, could you help us please
because there was no interpretation.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: I will help you by answering the
question.

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Thank you. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: But the Minister of Foreign Affairs
is saying, actually, that she can interpret for everybody. Would you give
her a chance to do that?

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Yes, we will do that if she is willing.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Please, I will. She is my elder
sister so I’ll give her a chance to interpret. Sister Nkosazana, can you
please interpret for them.

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: I prefer to speak in Siswati and not in
English. [Laughter.] I will interpret his English into Siswati!

UMPHATHISWA WEENKONZO ZOLULEKO: Mhlalingaphambili, ukuphendula uSisi Sindi,
amagosa awahambi kuba kukho izinto ezingalunganga ezenzeka kwisebe, lawo
ahambayo ahamba kuba efuna amarhiw’ aluhlaza, kuba imali ayifumanayo
incinci, ayilingani nemali ayifumana kwicandelo lamashishini abucala.

Kungoko sithetha neSebe leeNkonzo zoLuntu noLawulo, ukuba makulungiswe
amanqanaba entlawulo ukwenzela ukuba ahlale. Siyaphuma ke siye kuzingela
abantu esingabaqesha kuzo zonke iindawo. ISebe leeNkonzo zoLuntu noLawulo
ngoku liwanyusile amanqanaba entlawulo, noko ngoku linamanqanaba
amkelekileyo.
Ngoku siyaqalisa ukufumana oogqirha bengqondo, oonontlalontle, amanesi,
ukwenzela ukuba ancedise kumsebenzi wokululeka izimilo zamabanjwa. Umdla
owubonisayo ke, Mama uSindi, ndiyawuthanda kuba kudala umana undibuza lo
mbuzo.

Ndiyakuthembisa ke ukuba baye bengena ngokungena abantu abangamagcisa
kwizifundo ngezifundo kwiSebe leeNkonzo zoLuleko, kunjalo nje siyaqhuba
silungisa izimilo zabo bathe bona baze bavalelwa ezintolongweni zethu.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, in response to hon
Sindi, the officials that leave the employment of the department do not do
so because there are problems within the department. It is because there
are better prospects where they go. The money that private companies are
prepared to offer them is not what we offer, which is too little.

We have held discussions with the Department of Public Service and
Administration, precisely to review salaries so that we can retain them.
The Department of Public Service and Administration has subsequently
reviewed and increased salary scales. They are now at an acceptable level.

We have started with the recruitment of psychiatrists, social workers and
nurses to assist in the rehabilitation programmes of prisoners. I like the
interest you have shown in this matter, hon Sindi.

I can tell you that the Department of Correctional Services is inundated
with applications from various highly skilled people, and we are continuing
with rehabilitation programmes for inmates.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. Before I get to our Minister of
Correctional Services, I want to give a small message to our Minister of
Safety and Security:

Ngqongqoshe, ngike ngabona isithombe sakho laphaya emkhukhwini futhi ngike
ngakusho lokho nayizolo. Sihle kakhulu leso sithombe sakho kodwa basifake
emkhukhwini. [Uhleko.] (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[Minister, I saw your portrait there in a shack, and I did say this even
yesterday. That portrait is very beautiful but they have unfortunately put
it in a shack. [Laughter.]]

You are too handsome and smart to be in such an environment! Thank you very
much. [Laughter.]

To the Minister of Correctional Services, I would like to ask you, sir,
whether these officials that are employed on a 7-day week basis, work
shifts, or do they have a break in between, or does somebody come and
relieve them? Thank you.

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Could I just intervene here to say that
the hon Minister of Safety and Security now has somebody else to ask to
tea.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Certainly, the tea club is growing.
He has to invite lots of people to the tea, including me; and I will tell
you why he has to include me.

An Hon MEMBER: It’s because he admires you. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: No, it’s not because he admires me -
which he does, of course - but because I stand in for him when he is away.
And, the issue that the hon Rajbally is raising was raised with me
yesterday and I responded to it. But I must say that the Minister of Safety
and Security is blushing now because of what Mam Mkhize is saying. You can
imagine him blushing, but hon Rajbally did say that his photo looks lovely
and wonderful in Bayview Police Station. It’s not really “umkhukhu” [a
shack] but an old police station. She raised it with me yesterday, and I
raised it with my blushing friend here. So, I should be invited to tea as
well so that I can explain this.

Yes, the 7-day week establishment does work in shifts. People do a shift
that goes probably from the morning to about 4:00, and it’s lock-up time at
about 5:00 or 5:30, which gives offenders more time in the programmes. And,
then the first watch comes in and goes up to 11:00; then the second watch
comes in till the morning. That’s the shifts that they work. But it gives
them more than enough time to be able to be with their families because of
the stressful nature of correctional services.

Mr J SELFE: Thank you very much indeed, Madam Chair. On a recent visit to
Modderbee Prison, the portfolio committee was told that there were only six
social workers on the staff, of whom three were on maternity leave. These
social workers served nearly 6 000 inmates. Each inmate is required to have
a social worker’s evaluation before that inmate can be considered for
parole. Now, one can understand what sort of problems this gives rise to.
And, there is a shortage of professionals in every single correctional
facility.

I saw the Minister speaking to the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration a bit earlier this afternoon, and I am assuming that he is
now working out the deal to delink professionals from the Public Service
salary scales.

However, there is another step, which the Minister may take, and I would
like him to comment on that. To what extent is the Minister exploring
partnerships with private professionals so that these private professionals
can come in to relieve some of the problems with the shortages of
professionals?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Let me start with the last question.
Because of the problems and challenges that face us when we get these
professionals, or don’t get them, we already have partnerships in place.

In some of the prisons we use doctors who have clinics around there to come
in and assist with the work that needs to be done. We do the same with
other areas of our lives. We also use psychologists. So, we do have that
kind of a partnership with them. But, we would prefer to have them employed
full-time by Correctional Services so that they can continue their work
without any impediments.

Secondly, we cannot delink their salaries from the salaries of the public
sector. That would be wrong, but we are trying our best to make sure that
at least we match, if not totally. We bring them up to speed with what they
get from the private sector. We have tried to do that.

When you saw me talking to my colleague, Geraldine, I was not making a deal
with her. I am not in the business of making deals with my colleagues. I
either talk to them very nicely or – you know I am a very shy person - I
write them letters. I know that sometimes I threaten to sit on them but I
don’t do that. [Laughter.] You don’t see any one of them here that is flat
because I have sat on them. So, you can see that they are all fine.

With regard to the Modderbee Prison visit, you are quite correct. I got the
report on the Modderbee Prison visit and I must commend the portfolio
committee led by Mr Dennis Bloem for the amount of visits that they do to
all these correctional centres. It really assists the department and me in
the work that we do.

Social workers are a problem. We are trying our best to get more and more
social workers and I think we are starting to get there at the present
moment. We need more because of the numbers of offenders that we have. But
step by step we are getting there. [Time expired.]

        Allegations by woman of rape by SAPS members while in custody

104.  Mrs J A Semple (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:


      (1)   Whether, during the period 1 January 2003 up to the latest
            specified date for which information is available, any women in
            SA Police Service custody have claimed that SAPS members raped
            them while they were in custody; if so, how many;


      (2)   whether these claims were investigated; if not, why not; if so,
            how many SAPS members were found guilty of raping women in
            their custody;


      (3)         whether these police officers were dismissed from the
            service as a result of their conviction; if not, why not; if
            so, what are the relevant details?                      N1762E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Chairperson, in the past two and
half years, there have been 13 women who claimed to have been raped by
members of the SA Police Service while in their custody. In one case where
such an allegation was made, the member was found guilty in a court of law
and has since been dismissed from the service. Thank you, Madam
Chairperson.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Chairperson, I’m sure the hon Minister would agree with me
that any incident of rape committed by a SAPS member is one too many. It is
essential that vulnerable members of our society, particularly women, can
look to SAPS for protection and know that they will be safe, whether they
are in custody or not. Can the Minister tell the House whether any
psychometric testing is done on potential SAPS recruits to see if they have
tendencies towards violence against women? Has any research been done to
see if this testing is effective and reliable? Thank you, Chairperson.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Chairperson, yes, psychometric
tests are indeed done when we recruit police officers. In fact, the
recruitment process has changed somewhat from what previously we used to
do. What we do now is that we take in people and they get trained. Of
course, psychometric tests are part and parcel of that training. It is only
after they have completed their training that they are then recruited into
the police force. Therefore, chances are that during the training we are
able to identify people whose conduct will not be conducive to conduct
relevant to work as a peace officer, which members of the SA Police Service
are. We have not done any assessment to check whether indeed those
psychometric tests are foolproof. But we do conduct these psychometric
tests.

Finally, I must say that it is unacceptable that any member of the SA
Police Service will commit such a crime. They ought not to commit any
crimes because they are law-enforcement officers. It is worse when they
commit those kinds of dastardly crimes against people they are supposed to
protect. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

Mr S N SWART: Thank you Deputy Chair. Minister, arising from your reply -
you indicated that there were 13 cases - is it correct to assume that those
cases are still being investigated and that the members have been
suspended? Secondly, I’m sure that you are aware of the possibility of
civil claims arising from damages that could have occurred in these
situations. Are you aware of any civil cases for damages that raped women
have instituted against you as the Minister of Safety and Security who
carries liability for acts that these officers had committed? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Chairperson, the answer to that
question is yes. But unfortunately I did not prepare for that kind of
follow-up, otherwise I would give details. I am unable to give details. But
it is correct that some of these cases are still under investigation. It is
true that there are some people who are suing for having been defiled by
some members of the SA Police Service. Unfortunately, I don’t have the full
details with respect to this. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, with Correctional Services, female correctional
officers are trained and employed to work with female prisoners. One must
understand that this is because these incidents need to be prevented. My
question is: Why doesn’t the Department of Safety and Security use the same
strategy in terms of employing female policewomen to work with female
prisoners and to let them do that most of the time so that they have
limited exposure to the male police officers to ensure that these kinds of
crimes to do not happen?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Chairperson, it is not quite the
same thing. In corrections you are talking about people who are detained in
those correctional facilities. But with the police, you have cases like the
one in KwaZulu-Natal last year when this person came into the community
safety centre and reported that people were following her and that she
feared for her life. The police who were on duty at the time -
unfortunately they were males - decided that they were going to escort her.
And she was raped. So, the experiences are different. Therefore, it’s not
possible that at all times you will have female members of the SA Police
Services who will be on hand to deal with members of the public who are
female. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

       Increased numbers of vehicles and personnel at police stations

91.   Ms S Rajbally (MF) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      Whether police stations in all provinces have been provided with more
      resources with regard to (a) vehicles and (b) personnel so that the
      safety of communities and emergencies are more speedily attended to;
      if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        N1749E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I wanted to go beyond simply saying,
yes, but I don’t know what else I can say. We have vehicles and we have
personnel and so on that can respond to emergencies in the service of the
people. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you Minister, it is very encouraging to hear that. My
question is: Does your department have anybody to monitor as to whether
this situation prevails? Because many a time when we phone there is a
problem. You will find that the police say: “There is no vehicle available
at the moment. As soon as a vehicle becomes available we will come to
attend to your problem.” Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Yes, that is true. Even when we do
izimbizo and interact with people, this question is raised now and again,
regarding situations where the police indeed say, “Unfortunately, we cannot
respond to your cry for help because we don’t have a vehicle here.” At
times, indeed, it is true that at that moment when they reply to you they
don’t have vehicles because vehicles would have gone out to attend to other
operations.

But with respect to the supply, at all our stations there are resources and
there are vehicles. It boils down to, in many cases, the inability on the
part of some of our members to correctly administer the resources that they
have. Therefore, at times, they are unable to redirect the vehicles and
personnel that they have on the basis of the emergencies that they have to
confront. Thank you.

Ms A VAN WYK: Chair, Minister, we agree with you that part of the problem
is the management of available resources, not only at station levels but
sometimes even at provincial levels. We agree also that as far as we are
concerned, there are enough resources available and that it’s a question of
managing those resources.

We would like to know what is being done by the department to enhance the
management at provincial and station levels, so that those people who are
currently identified as not being able to sufficiently manage resources
under their control are given an opportunity to enhance their capability
and become better managers in terms of effectively utilising the resources?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: We are deploying senior police
management to various stations in the country. The first group went in from
1 June this year and therefore each one of the members of the senior
management services of the police is in charge of given areas. They go to
the stations and assist those who are responsible, that is station
commissioners, to deal with some of these questions that relate to how, in
the first instance, police have to behave whenever members of the public
come in to lay complaints until those persons leave the police station, and
how also to deploy the resources that the police have.

We believe that, because there is that kind of experience that we are now
making available on the ground, things are going to improve. This relates
to police stations where there were weaknesses in the past, because there
are police stations where the police are doing very good work. I am sure
hon members would have observed this while doing their constituency work
and would agree with me in regard to that. But in these instances where
there are weaknesses, that is how we have decided to handle the situation.
Thank you.

Adv Z L MADASA: Enkosi. Mphathiswa, bendisancoma ngokwehla kweziganeko
zokuphangwa kwezi nqwelo zithwala imali. Ngoku ndibona zivumbuluka
kwakhona. Nanku umbuzo wam: Ingaba oku kuxhaphaka kwezi ziganeko kwakhona
kunxulumene na nokunqaba kwezithuthi esebeni? Enkosi. (Translation of Xhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Adv Z L MADASA: Thank you, Minister, I appreciated the decreased incidence
of cash-in-transit robberies. But they seem to have reappeared. My question
is: Is it because of a scarcity of transport in the department? Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: That is very clever. You are trying to
get me to release here and now the crime statistics, and I am not going to
do that. They will be available on 21 September and you will see that . . .

. . . ezi ziganeko azinyukanga ngolu hlobo ulibalisayo. [ . . . there is
not such a significant rise in these events as you would want us to
believe.]

There is a very insignificant rise and, in fact, it will not be more than
10 but we will give you the numbers on 21 September. Thank you.
[Interjections.] Well, it depends on your ability to count - two is big.

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Deputy Speaker, Minister, what is being done to ensure
that vehicles, especially vehicles that are on inventories are being
utilised to their full potential because in many instances where the
vehicles are available there are sometimes SA Police Service members who do
not have driving licences to legally utilise those vehicles? What is being
done to ensure that at each station where there are vehicles there are the
necessary personnel with drivers’ licences, so that those vehicles can be
utilised to their full potential? Thank you, Deputy Speaker.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Unfortunately I don’t know of a
situation such as the one that you are describing. The fact of the matter
is that every shift that we have in the police will have people on it who
will be able to use all equipment available at that station during that
shift, be it the weapons or vehicles that are available. So I am not aware
of a situation where a vehicle would be available but with no police
officials to drive that vehicle. If there are police stations like that, I
am sure that, if not the station commissioners who are there, the area
commissioners will obviously attend to something like that. I don’t know, I
have not been told by anyone that such a situation indeed does exist. I
thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The time allocated for questions has expired.
Outstanding replies received will be printed in Hansard. Hon members, we
have had a wonderful and successful women’s parliament. Some of the leaders
with whom we were interacting are still around and some of them are with us
in the gallery.

I would like to take this opportunity to mention some of those leaders. We
have Mrs Mokaba in the gallery, the mother of the late Deputy Minister
Peter Mokaba. [Applause.] Thanks, Mama. We have Mama Vuyiswa Nokwe and we
have Miriam Mokoena, the wife of the late Batjhana Mokoena. [Applause.] We
also have Mrs Peterson here with us.

I really want to make this appeal to members: Let us have the co-operation
we had with the women’s parliament. All parties sent their veterans to
participate and it was quite a wonderful exercise.




              APPOINTMENT OF MR K O BAPELA AS HOUSE CHAIRPERSON


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That, in the light of the position of House Chairperson occupied
   by Mr N P Nhleko becoming vacant due to his resignation as a
   member of the National Assembly, the House appoints Mr K O Bapela
   as House Chairperson with effect from 1 September 2005.


[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is an indication that there are no
objections.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned 17:06.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


            i) Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction
               published in Government Gazette No 27981 of 30 August 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         1 September 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission (IEC)
        on the Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Fund for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 67-2005].


    (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Public Protector of South
        Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

2.    The Minister of Public Works

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Department of Public
        Works for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 175-2005].

3.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products Export
        Control Board (PPECB) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

4.    The Minister of Communications

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
          Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA) for 2004-2005,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 106-2005].

5.    The Minister of Education

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African
          Qualification Authority (SAQA) for 2004-2005, including the
          Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
          2004-2005 [RP 154-2005].

6.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     a) Report and Financial Statements of The Playhouse Company for 2004-
        2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005.

     b) Report and Financial Statements of Iziko Museums of Cape Town for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 53-2005].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South Africa
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
        Republics for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 127-2005].


     e) Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of South
        Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 145-2005].


     f) Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language Museum
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005.




National Assembly


 1. The Speaker
     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 66-2005].



COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker of the  National  Assembly  and  the  Chairperson  of  the
    National Council of Provinces, as co-chairpersons, presented the  First
    Report of the Joint Rules Committee for 2005, dated 25 August 2005:
     1. In Joint Rule 1(1):


        Interpretation


        To insert the following definition in the appropriate alphabetical
        position:


        “Act” means the Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and
        Provincial Legislatures Act, 2004;


   2. In Joint Rule 32:


      General Powers (of joint committees)


      To insert the following new Joint Rule 32(3) and (4):


      (3)   Subject to the approval of the Speaker and Chairperson, the
           Secretary may pay to witnesses summonsed in terms of section
           14(1) of the Act or rule 32(1)(a) of the Joint Rules a
           reasonable sum for travelling and attendance time and for
           transport expenses actually incurred.


      (4)   Prior to a witness giving evidence before a House or committee,
           the member presiding shall inform the witness as follows:


           “Please be informed that by law you are required to answer fully
           and satisfactorily all the questions lawfully put to you, or to
           produce any document that you are required to produce, in
           connection with the subject matter of the enquiry,
           notwithstanding the fact that the answer or the document could
           incriminate you or expose you to criminal or civil proceedings,
           or damages. You are, however, protected in that evidence given
           under oath or affirmation before a House or committee may not be
           used against you in any court or place outside Parliament,
           except in criminal proceedings concerning a charge of perjury or
           a charge relating to the evidence or documents required in these
           proceedings.”

   3. In Joint Rule 160:


        Referral of Bills to JTM


        To insert the following new Joint Rule 160(5A) after Joint Rule
        160(5):

        (5A) The JTM must also make a finding whether a Bill pertains to
             customary law or customs of traditional communities in
             accordance with section 18(1) of the Traditional Leadership and
             Governance Framework Act, 2003.


   4. In Joint Rule 163:


      Reclassification of Bills


      To insert the following new Joint Rule 163(3):


        (3) The JTM may change the classification of a Bill in respect of
           whether the Bill pertains to customary law or customs of
           traditional communities in accordance with section 18(1) of the
           Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003, and
           amend its finding in terms of rule 160(5A).


   5. In Joint Rule 167:


        Process in committee
        To insert the following new Joint Rule 167(3)(i):


        [(3) The committee--]


              (i)      may report to the House in which the Bill was
                 introduced if the Bill was classified as being subject to
                 section 18(1) of the Traditional Leadership and Governance
                 Framework Act, 2003, only after 30 days have passed since
                 the referral to the National House of Traditional Leaders
                 in terms of Assembly Rule 332 and Council Rule 255.


    6.      In Joint Rule 216:

        Fast-tracking


        To insert the following new Joint Rule 216(7):

    (7)     This rule does not apply to a Bill classified as being subject
        to section 18(1) of the Traditional Leadership and Governance
        Framework Act, 2003, which is still before the House where it was
        introduced for a period of 30 days since the referral to the
        National House of Traditional Leaders in terms of Assembly Rule 332
        and Council Rule 255.


    The Committee recommends accordingly.

Report to be considered.




--------------------                         -------------------------------
--------
      B MBETE, MP                       M J MAHLANGU, MP
SPEAKER:                     CHAIRPERSON:
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY                       NATIONAL COUNCIL OF  PROVINCES


National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker of the National Assembly presented the  National  Assembly
    Supplementary Report to the First Report of the Joint Rules  Committee,
    2005, dated 25 August 2005:

    The Joint Rules Committee considered a report of the Joint Subcommittee
    on the Review of Rules on 3 June 2005. In addition to amendments to
    certain Joint Rules, amendments were proposed in respect of National
    Assembly Rules. These amendments were agreed to by the Joint Rules
    Committee of which the Assembly Rules Committee is a component. The
    following amendments to the National Assembly Rules were agreed to and
    are recommended to the House for adoption:


    1.      General Powers (of committees)


    After Rule 138, to insert the following new Rule 138A:

        138A.    Prior to a witness giving evidence before a House or
              committee, the member presiding shall inform the witness as
              follows:

              “Please be informed that by law you are required to answer
              fully and satisfactorily all the questions lawfully put to
              you, or to produce any document that you are required to
              produce, in connection with the subject matter of the
              enquiry, notwithstanding the fact that the answer or the
              document could incriminate you or expose you to criminal or
              civil proceedings, or damages. You are, however, protected in
              that evidence given under oath or affirmation before a House
              or committee may not be used against you in any court or
              place outside Parliament, except in criminal proceedings
              concerning a charge of perjury or a charge relating to the
              evidence or documents required in these proceedings.”


     2. In Rule 249:


        Process in committee (of Bills)
        To insert the following new Rule 249(3)(i):


           [(3) The Committee-]


           (i)   may report to the Assembly on a Bill introduced in the
              Assembly and classified as being subject to section 18(1) of
              the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act,
              2003, only after 30 days have passed since the referral to
              the National House of Traditional Leaders in terms of rule
              332.


   3. To insert the following new Rule 332:


   4. Referral of Bills to National House of Traditional Leaders


      332.  (1)   The Secretary must refer a Bill to the National House of
             Traditional Leaders if
                 the JTM has made a finding that the Bill pertains to
                 customary law or customs
                 of traditional communities in accordance with rule 160 of
             the Joint Rules.


            (2)  The Secretary must inform the Speaker and the chairperson
             of the portfolio
                       committee to which the Bill was referred of the date
             of referral, which date must
                       be published in the relevant parliamentary paper.


   The Committee recommends accordingly.

Report to be considered.




--------------------
B MBETE, MP
SPEAKER


2.    Heading of Report


      The heading of the Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance,
    published in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 29
    August 2005 (p 1713), contained an error, in that it indicated the date
    of adoption as 17 August 2005. It should read:


         Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Agreement
         between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
         Government of Malaysia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and
         the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes, dated 26
         August 2005:

3.          Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on
    Report No 30 of the Public Protector of South Africa, constituted in
    terms of section 182(1)(b) of the Constitution, 1996, and section
    8(2)(b) of the Public Protector Act, 1994, dated 31 August 2005:


     The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered the
     matter on the Report of the Public Protector on an Investigation into
     an Allegation of Misappropriation of Public Funds by the Petroleum Oil
     and Gas Corporation of South Africa, Trading as PetroSA, and Matters
     Allegedly Related Thereto, reports as follows:

         1. The Committee is satisfied with the investigative processes
            followed and outlined in the report;
         2. Is satisfied that consultative processes had taken place between
            the Public Protector and implicated parties;
         3. And supports the key findings and recommendations contained in
            the Report.


       The Committee, in terms of its oversight function over the Central
       Energy Fund (CEF), undertakes to follow up on the processes PetroSA
       has in place to ensure that the outstanding amount owed by Imvume is
       recovered.


  Report to be considered.


