---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 16 November 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-11-16
---

WEDNESDAY, 16 NOVEMBER 2005

                                    ____





              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:01.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr M A MZIZI: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move, on behalf of the IFP:

   That the House-


   (1)      notes with shock that elderly people hide behind the web of
        drunkenness and commit hideous crimes. It is alleged that a drunk
        woman pushed an 11-year-old girl into her teenage son’s bedroom and
        instructed him to rape the child. The police acted swiftly and
        apprehended the 18-year-old boy;


   (2)      commends the police’s quick action in apprehending the suspect;
        and


   (3)      further recommends that the mother of the boy should be arrested
        and face the wrath of the law.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Before we proceed,
we would like to welcome the national Minister of Education, hon Pandor, to
the House. Please feel welcome, and thank you for being here this
afternoon.

Ms H LAMOELA: Madam Chair, I refer to recent press reports in regard to
Matriek Ongeletterd in Die Burger of 14 November 2005, and therefore give
notice that at the next sitting of the House I will move that-

   (1)      the Minister ensures that government reviews the school syllabus
        on literacy and numeracy as a matter of urgency;


   (2)      ensures that standards are maintained and that the matric
        certificate is a credible qualification recognised by both employers
        and institutions nationally and internationally.

 DELMAS MUNICIPAL MANAGER ACCUSED OF ENRICHING HIMSELF FROM TYPHOID OUTBREAD

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, I move without notice utter:

  That the council -


  (1) notes that the Delmas municipal manager, Mr Tefo Kadi, has been
       accused of trying to enrich himself from the typhoid outbreak in the
       area;


  (2) notes that this municipal manager has reportedly claimed R43 000 in
       overtime payment for the extra hours he worked during the outbreak of
       typhoid in September;


  (3) notes that the DA local leader, Barry Chamberlain, has written to the
       Mpumalanga local government and housing MEC, Mr Jabu Mahlangu, asking
       him to investigate and rule on the matter; and


  (4) now calls on this House to condemn outright his actions as a shameful
       attempt to benefit from the sad plight of so many, actions that are
       extremely shameful for any person to contemplate, let alone a so-
       called servant of the people.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Is there any
objection to the motion? Hon Chief Whip, are you objecting?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Yes.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): In the light of the
objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice
will now become notice of a motion.




   RESPECT FOR DEMOCRATIC VALUES ENSHRINED IN CONSTITUTION TO BE UPHELD IN
           PARTY SELECTION PROCESS AND APPOINTMENT OF COUNCILLORS


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to move
without notice:

   That the Council–


   (1)      acknowledges the constitutional role entrusted to it in terms of
        section 139 of the Constitution of the Republic  of  South  Africa,
        1996;


   (2)      recognises that municipalities are at the forefront of  delivery
        of services and thus reconstruction and development of our country;


   (3)      condemns any action which seeks to undermine the free expression
        of the will  of  the  people  in  the  party  selection  processes,
        including intimidation through the use or threat of violence;


   (4)      calls upon all our people in their  approach  to  the  selection
        process to put the interests of the Republic of South Africa before
        the interests of individuals;


   (5)      urges all political parties and local communities to present  as
        candidate councillors people they are convinced are truly committed
        to serve the people  of  South  Africa,  which  commitment  can  be
        demonstrated through  the  respect  for  the  following  democratic
        values enshrined in section 195  of  our  Constitution:  efficient,
        economic  and  effective  use  of  resources;  high  standards   of
        professional  ethics,  accountability  and  impartiality   in   the
        delivery of services; and


   (6)      therefore resolves to embark on a public campaign to promote the
        achievement of the objective of good councillors for  developmental
        municipalities.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Chairperson. As there is no speakers’ list, I shall now put the question.
The question is that the motion be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with
in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all the delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their
provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make declarations of vote if they so wish.
We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour of, or against, or abstain from
voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports the motion.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Re a amogela. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Kapa Bokone e ya dumelana. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke a rona. [North West supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr P C MCKENZIE (Western Cape): Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                        EDUCATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, it is indeed a great honour once
more to have the opportunity to speak in the House. I would like to begin
by indicating to hon members that with respect to this Bill and its
objectives, there is no going back.

The Education Laws Amendment Bill of 2005 supports action on a number of
important issues that confront the sector today. The Bill introduces three
important changes to current law in school education, changes that we
believe will assist us in promoting and accelerating positive progress in
education.

The first change concerns school fees, which, in terms of the current law,
are obligatory to parents. On commencement of the Act, public schools will
be prevented from charging parents any registration, administration or
other fees in addition to agreed school fees.

Public schools will not be allowed to charge differentiated school fees
within the same grade based on curricula or extramural curricula criteria.
A parent’s body’s resolution to charge school fees will have to provide for
a school budget that takes into account the estimated cumulative effect of
school fee exemptions and the historical trends of nonpayment of fees at
the school concerned. So, budgeting will have to be done far more
carefully. The Minister of Education will be empowered to declare schools
to be no-fee schools based on a national index of poverty of the
communities served by the schools.

Primarily, then, this Bill enables the abolition of school fees in our
poorest schools. This, I believe, is the most significant aspect of the
Bill. Yet between the introduction of the Bill in the other House and the
passage of the Bill in this House, various stakeholders have declared,
either at the public hearings of the Human Rights Commission into the right
to education or on the coat-tails of this event, that this important aspect
of the Bill is a debacle or a farce, despite, for some of these
commentators, the public support that they gave to the Bill during
parliamentary hearings.

I believe the abolition of school fees in our poorest schools is not a
debacle or a farce. It is the fulfilment of a promise made in the Freedom
Charter and a commitment the ANC gave on becoming the democratic leadership
of this country. Moreover, the abolition of school fees for compulsory
schooling is a growing trend worldwide and part of our participation in
Unesco and the UN’s drive to meet its millennium goals.

In fact, those researchers who are asking why we do not have free primary
schooling universally in South Africa are posing the right question,
because in most African countries children attend primary school for free
where it is compulsory. Yet, we continue to have a system of user charges
that create fairly unequal conditions for many of the children who attend
our schools.

We believe, therefore, that the abolition of school fees is part of what is
a growing trend all over the world and is part of what Unesco and other
international organisations have said is an important step that needs to be
taken in meeting the Millennium Development Goals that were agreed to at
the United Nations.
Hon members would know that most of the provincial education budget tends
to be spent on personnel costs. In the past, this has meant that recurrent
spending has been crowded out, or rather that spending on personnel has had
first call on our budgets.

Many people comment on the fact that, in their view, not enough resources
are going to education, whilst they also recognise that South Africa makes
a significant amount of its national budget available to education. Yet,
when they comment, they don’t actually examine how the budget is being
utilised. When over 80% of it is going towards personnel costs, very little
is left with which to do other things. This is part of a challenge that we
must address.

One of the things that we have found is that many of our provinces fail
each year to meet the norms we set for recurrent expenditure, and the gap
in funds has to be met by schools through the charging of school fees.

When you can’t employ a secretary because you are paying the teacher the
bulk of the provincial budget, it means the school then has to charge user
fees in order to be able to employ a secretary or an administrative clerk.
This is a problem for utilisation of the national Budget.

Now, what we know from very clear evidence, which every member in this
House has access to, is that at four fifths of our schools – four out of
five - the fees might be very small. In some schools, I have discovered,
they are only charging R50 a year. So, for me, it’s easy - only R50, we
would say, as members of Parliament. So, small in absolute quanta terms,
but a crushing burden for most parents in our country, and this is what we
must respond to. There are many families that can’t afford even that kind
of sum, which appears small to us.

So, given the reality we find, given the burden on the poor, given the
inability of parents to actually execute in terms of an obligation to pay
fees, we have decided to abolish school fees in the poorest of our
communities, beginning with the poorest 20%. [Applause.] And that is what
this Bill achieves. It gives our government the power to abolish school
fees in the poorest 20% of schools in South Africa.

Madam Deputy Chairperson, you would agree with me that this cannot be
called a debacle, it cannot be called a farce; this is a victory in our
struggle to provide better education and access for all the children in our
country. Therefore, I repeat, there is no going back.
Last year provinces spent R3,7 billion on recurrent expenditure. That money
was just not enough to meet the norms that we published as national norms
of funding at the national level. Our minibudget in the last month,
published by the Minister of Finance, gave the provincial equitable share a
significant injection of funds.

From 2006, therefore, we will be able to declare 20% of schools fee free,
because provinces will have over R4 billion to allow this to happen. The
additional funds have been announced in the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement. Members have copies of the budget review documents, and
therefore they know that an additional amount of over R30 billion for
social services has been available. It is this funding which will support
provinces in implementing the norms that we have published.

These, I am pleased to say, are not figures that I am merely pulling out of
my hat. They have been presented to our Parliament by our Minister of
Finance, and we now know how much more money is available to the national
fiscus to allow us to achieve this objective from 2006 and in future years.
We will be able to execute next year. All we should do is say to the
provinces that we expect them to act in this regard.

In fact, in my view, it doesn’t require the publication by the national
Minister of the no-fee schools. Provinces should already be alert to the
fact that they will be receiving greater amounts of funding. Therefore
they, essentially, should already be doing their review work to say which
schools are the ones that fall in the 20% and will therefore be declared no-
fee schools. This is so that we know what to expect as parents when we
bring children through to our schools next year.

It is true, as has been reported in a number a newspapers, that I do not
yet have the legal framework to declare fee-free schools, but as I say, I
have already announced - unquestioned and without any doubt – that the
funds will be available and the provinces can act. The funds will be
available. [Applause.] So whether the Minister can declare or not is
actually immaterial. What we need is for the provinces to execute what is
an accepted model.

There is more money. No school will have less money next year than they had
this year. Instead, if all goes according to plan, schools that were having
the kind of difficulty I referred to - where the absolute fund might be
small, but the ability to pay is extremely limited - in terms of next year,
what we should have for the first time is more schools having funds for
recurrent expenditure. Schools should have more money than they have ever
had before, if we execute through provinces appropriately as government
intends.

There will be more funding. It is for our provinces to ensure that it
reaches our schools on time, that they allocate effectively according to
the national norm and that they allow our schools to support our children
to learn and our teachers to teach. There is, I repeat, no going back.

In my view it is crucial that we act in 2006, because members are fully
alert to the fact that recurrent costs - such as uniforms, textbooks,
stationery and other nonpersonnel and noncapital costs, and, of course,
this is what I mean by recurrent; I’ve used the term recurrent and some
members are frowning - are often prohibitive. They do pose a challenge and
a burden, and are a barrier to many children in our school system.

I could tell members of the numbers of children who are turned back from
schools because they don’t have the right colour shoes in accordance with
the school uniforms. Now we will be providing funding for the school to
actually be able to assist those children to acquire that uniform. That is
what the declared amount of funds is intended to assist with. [Applause.]

What I am hoping for, if we are thinking and monitoring as members -I see
my time is running out - is that the members of Parliament will engage this
20% of schools and actually say to them: “Are you supporting local
community production of reasonable uniforms; are you ensuring that the
children have access; have you got a uniform policy that is affordable, or
are you continuing to make children have the most expensive blazer, the
most expensive tie and so on?” We should take an interest in seeing how the
law is implemented in practical terms so that all our children benefit.

The abolition of these fees will breach that barrier, which has often been
imposed on poor children, and will set us on what I see as the beginning of
the road to free and compulsory education in South Africa. This is
something that we must achieve for our children.

The net effect of the Bill is to improve funding for schools; it makes it
easier for parents to apply for exemption; and it creates the possibility
for targeted interventions that enhance the quality of resources available
for education and extracurricular activities.

Having additional funding for these recurrent areas of costs means that
schools can now determine if they want to buy more library books, have some
equipment for art, etc. They will have those funds available once these
norms are operational. It’s a bold step towards free education for the
poor. It needs to be welcomed, it needs to be applauded and it needs to be
supported. There will, of course, be implementation challenges, but I
believe this should not weaken our resolve to overcome the problem.

I believe that if somebody has a well-considered, well-researched and
better solution, they must please come forward and let us know, because
this is something that we must do. But until you have the research, until
you have the better model, please stop the populist rhetoric which takes us
nowhere. And please stop the pessimistic media statements, which don’t
assist us, from those who predict failure for South Africa all the time.
There is no going back.

There are several other changes, which we will support as schools – the
issue of disciple and ensuring that our schools and the governing bodies
can act against ill-disciplined children and act speedily because this has
been a problem. Our processes have been too slow. We will now have them
acting in a much faster way and ensuring that children who are, indeed,
very ill-disciplined and are a danger in the school can be dealt with
speedily. Clearly, not all matters of discipline can be addressed by
legislation - families and communities need to begin to play a part - but
this legislation does assist us to do what we can.

The final change relates to procedures for recommending candidates for
employment as teachers. I hope that hon members will support the entire
piece of legislation and the very positive proposals that it makes. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We thank the hon
Minister of Education for her comprehensive and informative debate. Thank
you, hon Minister.

I now call upon the hon B J Tolo, chairperson of the Select Committee on
Education and Recreation, to continue the debate.
Mr B J TOLO: Deputy Chair, hon Minister and hon members, I think we agree
that there shouldn’t be any going back in terms of this legislation. We are
going to do everything in our power, as members of this legislature, to
support the department to see to it that there is no going back.

A country that does not invest in the grey matter enclosed in the skull of
a child is a country that is not serious about its future. It is a country
that will permanently remain trapped in poverty and underdevelopment. It
will incessantly beg for fish instead of learning how to fish.

We can consider ourselves very fortunate to belong to this great country
that takes the education of the nation, and particularly that of children,
very seriously. The education laws that this Parliament passed since the
epoch-making event the liberation of our country in 1994, are unsurpassed
in the history of this country.

The Education Laws Amendment Bill before this House today will take our
education system to even greater heights. The amendments we are effecting
to the South African Schools Act of 1996 and the Employment of Educators
Act of 1998 will change forever the education landscape of our country.

We all know that from time to time there are problems of misconduct by
learners in schools. The manner in which these are dealt with by different
schools poses some problems. The Bill before us today brings some certainty
as to how these problems can be dealt with in the interests of both the
school and the learner. It also outlines the timeframes within which the
head of a department of education in a province should consider
recommendations of the governing body referred to him or her with regard to
disciplinary problems. We are convinced that these provisions in the Bill
will go a long way in balancing the interests of both the child and the
school.

The cost of education is very high in our country, especially for the
majority of our people who are poor. It is therefore imperative to relieve
the poor parents from the trauma of having to worry about the school fees
of their children. It is also a contradiction in terms if we speak of
compulsory education for our kids up to the age of 15, whilst the
conditions are not conducive to that type of situation.

We commend the Department of Education for introducing this Bill. In this
Bill provision is made for no-fee schools on the basis of the national
quintiles. This will allow for greater access to education. Through this
Bill the Department of Education is truly opening the doors of learning to
the poorest of the poor, as these doors have hitherto been only half open.

We must also hasten to say that this will only be realised if a school is
receiving more than the adequacy benchmark level from the provincial
department of education. It is hoped that the above policy will benefit
schools falling within quintile 1 and quintile 2 for starters.

The rest of the schools, in quintile 3 to quintile 5, will still have the
right to charge school fees, but such school fees will only be a top-up on
what the school shall have received from the provincial department of
education to put it at a level where a school would have been a no-fee
school.

It has also become clear that certain schools, when determining their
annual budget, do not take into consideration the fact that some learners
will be exempted. They draw up their budgets as if every learner will be
able to pay school fees. The Bill before us compels schools to draw up
realistic budgets, which will exclude those who apply for exemption. It
also prohibits schools from charging other fees, over and above school
fees, during the course of the year.

We all know that despite the fact that the South African Schools Act is
unequivocal about exemptions from school fees, there are some schools that
either pretend not to understand this policy or simply ignore it. We have
read in newspapers how dwellings of parents who could not afford to pay
school fees were attached and sold by schools to recoup their money.

This Bill confirms the right of schools to use the law to enforce the
payment of school fees by parents who do not qualify for exemptions. This
Bill provides that this can only be done when there is written proof that
such parents were duly notified, and that three months after the
notification the parents had still not responded positively.

It also provides that, in the process of doing so, the dwelling of the
parents may not be attached, and that the school may not in any manner
sanction the learner of such parents. This therefore makes it very clear
that even if there is litigation between the school and the parents of a
learner, the learner’s inalienable right to education cannot and must not
be tampered with.

In our genuine attempt to bring democratic governance into schools, we
devolved too many powers to the school governing bodies. The unintended
consequences are that some of the schools use these powers to block
transformation in the schools. The Employment of Educators Act provides
that the school’s governing body must recommend to the provincial head of
the department a teacher to be appointed if a vacant post exists.

The reality is that some governing bodies have recommended only one person
to the head of the department, and he or she in turn had no alternative but
to appoint the recommended person. In essence, it is the governing body
that appoints, rather than the head of the provincial department of
education. For this reason, 11 years into our democracy, we still find
situations in which, even if you have more than 90% black children in a
school, 100% of the teachers are still white.

In some rural areas a school’s governing body will appoint a teacher who
comes from that particular locality, even if that teacher does not know the
subject for which that vacant post exists. This situation cannot be allowed
to continue forever.

It is for that reason that this Bill becomes an instrument to change the
situation. The situation in this amending Bill is that it must be the
department of education that appoints teachers, and not indirect
appointment by the school governing body.

We are aware that there are some people, or parties, who want to oppose the
provisions of this Bill. We want to remind them that he who pays the piper
calls the music. It would also help them to know that in many countries in
the world, including our neighbour Botswana, a teacher applies for
appointment not to a school, but to the department of education, which
employs teachers and deploys teachers to any school in the country where
there is a need for such a teacher.

It is therefore our considered view that the provisions of this Bill before
us are moderate and necessary if we are serious about deracialising our
schools and the appointment of competent teachers to teach our children.

Our school system has too many temporary teachers. Some remain in these
posts, which are part of the education establishment and therefore funded,
for many years. Such teachers cannot plan their own lives, as they cannot
go to a furniture shop and buy furniture on hire-purchase. None amongst
them can apply for a housing loan. Such teachers are therefore not happy,
and to expect maximum productivity from them is to expect water from a
stone.

With the passage of this Bill, the lives of such educators will now change
beyond recognition, as the heads of the departments in the provinces are
now given powers to appoint temporary teachers on a permanent basis, after
consultation and not in consultation with school governing bodies. To us
this is very clear that the Department of Education is very sensitive to
the plight of the teachers out there.

In conclusion, we want to thank the Department of Education for bringing
these amendments to the House. We have no doubt in our minds that these
amendments will bring the necessary stability to the education system of
our country. We eagerly await positive outputs as a result of this
legislation.

Finally, we want to call upon the treasury departments of all the nine
provinces to budget adequately for the provision of education. We are aware
of the conflicting challenges that the provinces face, but we are saying
that the best investment is investment in education.

It will be a sad day for this country if all these policy positions are not
embraced and funded by the provinces. This Bill will not be worth the paper
it is written on if it is not implemented. We commend this Bill to this
House. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Sihlalo, uSomqulu weNkululeko uthi iminyango yezemfundo
izovuleka. Nangempela avulekile amasango ngenxa yokuthi uma kushicilelwa lo
Mthetho obhekene namalungelo abafundi obizwa phecelezi, South African
Schools Act, zonke izingane zizokwazi ukuthi ziye esikoleni.

Lo Mthetho esihlangene ngawo uhlongoza ukwelekelela abazali noma izingane
ezingenabo abazali futhi ezingekwazi ukukhokha ukuze nazo zikwazi ukuya
kothola ulwazi ezikoleni, ikakhulu izikole zomphakathi, ngaphandle
kokuhlukunyezwa ngenxa yokweswela imali. Wonke umzali ozele ingane lapha
emhlabeni kumele abambe iqhaza ekufundiseni ingane noma izingane zakhe
ukuze zifunde kahle zibe ngabaholi bakusasa.

Sizishayela ihlombe izinyathelo ezithathwe nguNgqongqoshe wezeMfundo
zokuqinisekisa ukuthi abazali abadla imbuya ngothi, abangakwazi ukukhokha
izindleko zesikole, nabo abaphoqekile ukuthi bakhokhe futhi kufuneka
bangesabi ukuthi izindlu zabo zizodliwa noma izingane zixoshwe esikoleni.
Ingane yona ngeke inqatshelwe ukufunda nokudlala imidlalo yesikole. Futhi
ingane ngeke inqatshelwe ukunikezwa iriphothi noma incwadi yokushiya
esikoleni.

Ngqongqoshe, izikole eziningi, lezi esizibiza ngokuthi ama-section 21,
ziyenqaba ukunika abantwana izincwadi zabo zesikole uma bengakhokhile.
Njengoba unyaka uphela nje iningi lezingane ngeke liwudle uKhisimuzi ngenxa
yokuthi abazali bazobe bengawanikezwanga amariphothi noma isikole siyobe
salile ukunikeza incwadi yesikole. Ngithemba-ke ukuthi wonke amalungu
esishayamthetho lapha eNdlini yoMkhandlu azokwazi ukunceda abafundi
nabazali abangawazi kahle amalungelo abo mayelana nalokhu, njengoba
sesihamba siya kosebenza emakhaya.

Kokuphathelene nempahla yesikole, sesadlula isikhathi lapho ubani nobani,
ikakhulu omagimbela kwesakhe, bebenza khona umathanda bedayisa impahla
yesikole ngaphandle kwemvume kaNgqongqoshe wesifunda. Ngisho nentengo uma
ngabe yehlesiwe kuzokwazi ukuthi nanoma ubani akwazi ukubamba iqhaza ukuze
impahla yesikole ingebiwa nanoma kanjani.

Ukuqashwa kothisha kungenye futhi ingxenye kulo Mthetho okuzanywa ukuthi
ilungiswe ukuze imikhandlu yokuphathwa kwezikole ingenzi umathanda ngokuthi
iqashe abangani bayo, kepha iqashe labo okufanele ukuthi baqashwe. Ngawo lo
Mthetho sithemba ukuthi sizokwazi ukuthi sibone othisha bengalokhu
beyilokhu esikubiza ngokuthi “othisha besikhashana”. Nabo kufuneka baqashwe
kahle njengawo wonke umuntu ukuze bakwazi ukuya kozithengela izimpahla
ezitolo, bakwazi ukuthenga izindlu noma bakwazi ukuvula izikweleti.

Uma sengiphetha, ngifuna ukuthi: Siyabonga Ngqongqoshe ngalo  Mthetho  ngoba
abazali abaningi bebengawazi amalungelo  abo.  Manje  sebeyawazi  amalungelo
abo. Ngikhumbula ngaleziya zinkathi mina  nelungu  uGoeieman  sisengamalungu
kakhongolose  wabafundi.  Sasilwela  ukuthi  singakhokhi  izimali  zesikole.
Ngithemba-ke Ngqongqoshe ukuthi  kule  minyaka  ezayo  sizobona  kuzo  zonke
izikole izingane zingasazikhokhi izimali zesikole. Ngisho nabo othisha  labo
abenqaba  ukunika  izingane  amariphothi  azo  nabo  bazokwazi   ukujeziswa.
Ngalawo mazwi ngithi ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Chairperson, the Freedom Charter says that  the  doors  of
learning  shall  be  opened.  Indeed,  doors  are  open,  because  this  Act
concerning the rights of learners, the South African Schools Act,  has  been
passed. All children will be able to go to school.

This Act that we are discussing seeks to help parents  or  orphans  who  are
unable to pay school fees. The children will be able to  go  to  school  and
require knowledge without being discriminated  against  on  the  grounds  of
their financial situation, especially in public  schools.  Every  parent  in
this country must participate in educating his or her child or  children  so
that they are able to get an education and become the leaders of tomorrow.

We salute the decision taken by the Minister of Education to see to it  that
poor parents who are unable to pay school fees are not obliged  to  pay  and
that they need not live in fear of having their  houses  repossessed  or  of
their children being dismissed from schools. A child would  not  be  refused
the opportunity to receive schooling and to play  school  games.  They  will
not be refused school reports or school transfers.

Minister, schools that we call section  21  schools  are  refusing  to  give
children books if they have not paid their school fees. As the year ends,  a
lot of children will not be  celebrating  Christmas  because  their  parents
will not have their school reports or school transfers. I hope that all  the
members in this House will be able to help learners and  parents  who  don’t
understand  their  rights  concerning  this  as  we   are   going   to   the
constituencies.

Concerning school material, those days when everybody, especially those  who
were greedy, who used to  do  what  they  liked  and  sold  school  material
without permission from the provincial Minister, are  over.  If  the  prices
are reduced, everybody will be able  to  participate  and  see  to  it  that
school material is not stolen.

Recruitment of teachers is the other part of this Act that we are trying  to
amend so that  the  school  governing  bodies  won’t  do  as  they  wish  by
recruiting their friends, but recruit those who  deserve  to  be  recruited.
With this Act, we hope that we won’t see  teachers  becoming  what  we  call
“temporary teachers”. They must be recruited like anybody else so that  they
will be able to buy goods in shops, buy houses or open credit accounts.

In conclusion, I would like to  say  thank  you,  Minister,  for  this  Act,
because lots of parents didn’t know their rights.  They  know  their  rights
now. I remember those days when Comrade Goeieman and I  were  still  members
of the Students’ Congress. We were fighting for free education. I hope  that
the Minister will see to it that schoolchildren don’t  pay  school  fees  in
the future. Those teachers who don’t want to  give  children  their  reports
are going to be punished. Thank you.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Mazibuko. We are sorry about that. We now call upon the hon Mr Thetjeng.

Mr O M THETJENG: Thank you, Chairperson. I hope there is power.

Chairperson, hon colleagues and members of the public, changes in a society
that has been bedevilled by discriminatory laws. These changes must always
be for the good of the citizens, particularly laws that are to govern their
livelihoods in matters that affect their education.

Education becomes the cardinal aspect of every nation in the world for
development in areas such as economy, technological advancement and so on.
When a government does something positive, it needs to be commended and
showered with praise. And if it does something out of this world, it must
be condemned and put in line with what the stakeholders want, because we
serve them.

We support the concept of the fee-free schools. We all know that there are
a large number of parents who cannot afford to pay school fees, owing to
unemployment which is spiralling on a daily basis. We all know that some
politicians are in denial about the unemployment rate that is increasing
every day, and yet we see it in our communities. It is even affecting those
who have been through tertiary training in that they are not employed
today, but have had training.

A fee-free school must then be provided with the necessary resources to run
its affairs, because the fees were used to supplement what government could
not provide. There should not be compromise as we have seen with some of
our poor schools that have been operating without books for learners.

The DA has always maintained that our labour laws are rigid, not user-
friendly, and stereotyped. The procedures for the employment and dismissal
of employees are very cumbersome. The argument presented that it takes too
long to employ teachers owing to procedures stipulated in these laws is
correct, and we commend that realisation.

The introduction of clause 7 in the Education Laws Amendment Bill confirms
the position of the DA in as far as the rigidity of these laws is
concerned. They have come back to haunt the ANC-controlled government.
[Interjections.] We have always proposed that these laws be reviewed, but
who would listen?

The measures introduced give one individual – who is the head of the
department and who is not to be present during the interview – the
authority to arbitrarily choose from the three names presented the one of
the person who is going to be employed.

The governing bodies are in a better position to decide and employ the best
candidate irrespective of race, colour, gender and other criteria that have
been included in the Statute Book. The best teachers are likely not to be
employed if their colour is not right according to this provision.
We just heard somebody here say that a school had 90% black kids and yet
100% of the teachers were white. It is not the colour that we are looking
for. It is the quality of the teacher that we are looking for that will
actually give our kids education. [Interjections.]

Adding salt to the wound, we heard this morning on Radio SA FM that schools
that have applied to top salaries of teachers . . .

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order!

Mr O M THETJENG: . . . [Inaudible.] . . . successful – that is in Gauteng.
Teachers are not paid very well, and those parents who are willing to pay
so that the salaries of the teachers can be topped up must be free to do
so. The governing bodies do not have to apply to the MEC for approval,
because the money to be used is from parents.

The ANC wants to control every aspect within the school, even those that
parents are using their own money to pay for and to top up teachers’
salaries. We cannot allow this kind of approach in which people want to
control everything that parents want to do. The proposal then is that the
head of department . . . [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order!

Mr O M THETJENG: . . . should apply an overriding principle in the
appointment of teachers, that is the ability to contribute to quality
education. That is what this country needs, and not what we have had.

The Bill erodes the principle of devolution of power. An hon member just
said that the governing bodies had too much power, and this is exactly what
this Bill is doing – eroding the power that parents and the governing
bodies have had in running the affairs of their children . . . [Inaudible.]

Business suspended at 14:47 and resumed at 15:35.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Members, may we have order!

Members, we are just waiting for the Hansard system to pick up the
recording after the power failure.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, you may
be seated. I now call upon the hon member Thetjeng to complete . . .
[Interjections.] Has he absconded? I then call upon ... May I have order,
please! Thank you. I then call upon the hon J N Vilakazi, of the IFP, to
continue the debate.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I don’t know whether the interpreting
service is available . . . [Interjections.]
Sihlalo ohloniphekileyo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe woMnyango nabasizi bakho,
imfundo iyisikhali kuwo wonke umuntu. Iyisidingo esingafanele nakancane
ukugqamisa abadla izambane likapondo kwabadla imbuya ngothi. Kuhle impela
uNgqongqoshe awuchibiyele lo Mthetho wemfundo wango-1996. Kuningi
osekonakala kuwo.

Sikuthulela isigqoko mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe ngalolu chibiyelo. Umntwana
ovela kwandlwana ufunda kanzima ehlukumezekile ngoba kuthi noma ethola
ithuba lokuya esikoleni aswele umfaniswano odingwa yisikole afunda kusona;
noma ethengelwa angabi nakho okokushintsha. Maqondana nemali yesikole,
kuthi ehlwempu kanjalo, uthisha wakhe afune imali yesikole la, enayo
engenayo kwabanye akuthi shu lokho, yize umthetho usho ukuthi
abangahlukunyezwa abantwana abaswele ngokuthi baxoshwe esikoleni,
babanjelwe imiphumela, noma ukuyofuna imali kumzali ohlwempu kwayena.
Ngokuchibiyela lo Mthetho, mhlayimbe kukhona okuzoxega okuyijoka elikhulu
kubazali abangenamandla okukhokha le mali yesikole. Siyethemba uNgqongqoshe
noMnyango bazoqikelela impela ukuqaphela isigaba 39(4) nawo wonke
amaphuzwana aso ukuze kungaveli olunye uhlobo lokuhlukumeza.

Isigaba 41 nezigatshana ezingaphansi kwaso esinika imikhandlu eyengamele
izikole amandla okuphoqa ukukhokhwa kwemali yesikole ngenkani kuseyikho
ukuhlukumeza lokho. Akekho umzali ongayeka ukukhokhela ingane yakhe enawo
amandla. Kusuke kukhona inkinga anayo. Lokhu kwenzeka ezikoleni zomphakathi
ontulayo. Empeleni, ijoka le mali yesikole eNingizimu Afrika kuyophela
ukuba libe yinkinga kuwo wonke umuntu othintekayo mhlazane imfundo iba
ngeyamahhala kuzo zonke izikole okungezomphakathi kuze kugcine
kumatikuletsheni, ikhokhelwe kuphela ezikoleni ezizimele. Kuyophela
umthwalo kubo bonke abazali lapho ngoba nakuwo lo mthetho kukhona lokhu
nalokhuya, izoqhamuka nenxokozelo nokunye nokunye.

Maqondana nemikhandlu yezikole, le mikhandlu engamela izikole eyaziwa ngo-
school governing bodies, kufanele iwazi umsebenzi ebekelwe wona futhi
iwenze ngokuthembeka, iyidlale indima yomzali engekho, ifundiswe futhi
umsebenzi wokwengamela izikole, ikakhulukazi ezikoleni ezisemakhaya.
Ezikoleni ezixube izinhlanga umkhandlu owengamele mawuxube nawo ukhombise
ukuthi isikole sixube izinhlanga, hhayi lokhu esikubonayo ezindaweni
esihlala kuzo nesiye sizihambele njengekomidi. Umuntu uye athole ukuthi
izingane zixubile kakhulu kodwa umkhandlu ube uwuhlobo olulodwa nje
kuphela, bese kuba khona oyedwa nje wokubika ukuthi, cha, nathi siyazama.

Ukujezisa umntwana uma onile akube nesifundo phakathi, kumakhe umntwana
ongumfundi. Akudede ekubeni ukujezisa okuzokwakha inzondo, ulaka namagqubu.
Ukujezisa okuhle ngokumakhayo umfundi kunokuba kumhlukumeze emphefumulweni
nasengqondweni, njengokuvimbela ingane ukuba ihambele izifundo zayo.
Kungukujezisa okunesihluku lokho, akufanele ukwenziwa. Ukubopha ingane
ingaphumi esikoleni kanye nezinye izingane, lokhu okuthiwa yi-detention,
kudala ubutha nenzondo futhi akumakhi neze umfundi.

Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe, indlela yokujezisa umntwana makube yileyo
esemthethweni. Sihlale sizwa okunganambitheki kahle lapha ekujezisweni
kwabafundi, kuze kungenelwane ezinkantolo kube njeya. Akufanele ukwenzeka
lokho endaweni yemfundo.

Ukuqashwa kothisha okuthiwa abesikhashana akulungiswe impela. Kukhona
uzakwethu oseke waphawula ngalokhu. Kubuhlungu kakhulu ukuzwa ukuthi
uthisha usefundise iminyaka engaka engowesikhashana. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, hon Minister of Education and officials from the
department, education is the key for everyone. It is a necessity that
should not expose those who live in abject poverty to those who live in
ostentatious riches. It is indeed very good that the Minister intends
amending this 1996 legislation. A lot of things went wrong with that.

We take our hats off to the Minister for this amendment. Children from poor
families have always been suffering because you would find that even if
they get a chance to go to school, they do not have money for school
uniforms, and those with uniforms do not have another set. Regarding school
fees, you find that teachers demand school fees from destitute parents;
some are even chased away from schools, which is of course illegal, and
their results are withheld and destitute parents are nagged about school
fees. With this amendment, we trust that a certain yoke will be removed
from the poor parents who cannot afford school fees. We hope the Minister
and the department will look closely look at section 39(4) and other points
listed there so as to eliminate all room for any kind of harassment.

Section 41, and its subsection, which gives school governing bodies the
right forcefully to impose school fees still forms part of this harassment.
A parent who can afford to do so will always pay for his or her child,
unless he or she has another problem. This happens particularity in needy
communities. In fact the yoke of school fees will only be removed from the
parents once free education is introduced up to matric level in all public
schools. That will be the day when the load is taken off the parents,
because even in this very legislation there is still this and that, which
will surely be met with a hubbub from other concerned groups.

Regarding the school governing bodies, these councils should know exactly
what they stand for and should perform their duties faithfully, and play
the role of a parent in the absence of a parent, and they also should be
taught how to govern schools, especially the ones in rural areas. In
multiracial schools the school governing bodies should reflect the races at
school and not what is currently happening in certain schools that we as a
committee visited. One would find that the school is multiracial, but the
school governing body is comprised of a certain race only and perhaps one
member from the other races would just be included for the sake of
inclusion.

On the question of punishment of learners at schools, there should be a
lesson in it, and should mould the learner. Punishment of learners should
not breed hatred, anger and grudges. Good punishment is the kind that
moulds the learner, not the kind that will harm the learner emotionally and
psychologically, like barring the learner from attending classes. This is
abusive punishment, and it should not be allowed. Detention also creates
hatred and abhorrence and it does not mould the learner at all.

Hon Minister, only legal ways of punishing learners should be used. We
always hear distasteful stories regarding the punishment meted out to
learners; sometimes matters would even end up in court. This should not
happen in the sphere of education.

The question of temporary teachers should also be reviewed. One of my
colleagues has just commented on this. It is really disconcerting to hear
that a certain teacher has been teaching for so many years, only to find
that he or she is still regarded as a temporary teacher.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon member, your
time has expired.

Nkk J N VILAKAZI: Thina be-IFP sithi: phambili. Siyawesekela kakhulu.
Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] [We, the IFP, say: Forward. We support it
wholeheartedly. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: May I just indicate that while we had the
blackout we had a quick meeting with the Whippery, and agreed that we would
cut the time of all speakers up to the last Order of the Day. So, as a
speaker, the presiding officer will announce your updated time. We are
still trying to make copies available to all members. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon Chief
Whip. I now call the hon Qikani to continue the debate, please. Yes, hon Mr
Watson?

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, we are all confused. I request that you allow Mr
Thetjeng to complete his speech, as was agreed.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): He had his time.
When I called his name he wasn’t in the House. Thank you. May we now
continue with Mrs Qikani.

Mrs A N D QIKANE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members . .
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order please! Yes,
hon Chief Whip?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: With due respect, I am not disrespecting
your ruling, I propose that as a courtesy - I know you are a very generous
presiding officer - you allow Mr Thetjeng a minute to round off.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I have already made
my ruling, thank you, Chief Whip. We will . . . [Interjections.] . . . the
debate. You may continue, hon member.

Mrs A N D QIKANE: The amending Bill before us addresses various matters
such as the procedure for the appointment of educators and the procedure
for the expulsion of people from school. These are important matters that
time will not allow me to address, suffice to say that government has to
tread very carefully and that there is a fair balance between the right of
a school and those individual people or educators.

We need to express our reservations about the reduction of powers for
governing bodies when it comes to the appointment of teachers. Democratic
participation in schools through governing bodies is a valuable feature of
our education dispensation.

However, by far the most important aspect of the Bill before us is the
financial scheme being introduced to protect and promote the education of
people from poor households. We therefore all agree that poverty should not
be a barrier to public education since that
would be an utter contradiction of our commitment. We all realise that
poverty is a barrier to education.

Xa ndiza kuyeka Sihlalo, ndicinga ukuba thina bantu badala kufuneka
siwunike umyalelo. Xa besilapha uye wabaleka umbane kusathetha uMnu
Tethjeng. Loo nto ithetha ukuthi kukho okunye okungafanelekanga mhlawumbi
ebekuthetha apha endlwini okanye mhlawumbi akafanelekanga ukuba abe ukule
ndawo akuyo. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[In conclusion, Chairperson, I think we, the elderly, have to give an
order. When we were here, there was a power failure whilst Mr Thetjeng was
on the floor. That means he was saying something that was not good, or he
is not supposed to be where he is. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, I am sure you are aware
that revised time slots are being given to all the people who have come to
speak. So when this little thing rings here, you must know that it is
saying “Order!” on my behalf and that you must go back to your seat. It
will remind you. Thank you.

Ms N NOEL (KwaZulu-Natal): Thank you, Chairperson. Greetings, hon Minister
and my colleagues here, from a very wet but very upbeat KwaZulu-Natal. The
KwaZulu-Natal education portfolio committee meticulously and responsibly
studied the Education Laws Amendment Bill clause by clause. We were given a
thorough briefing by the legal officer, and by Dr Lobiso, the CEO.

I have been mandated to report the following. This is the memorandum to all
members of the National Council of Provinces matters standing committee
from the acting chairperson, education portfolio committee on the Education
Laws Amendment Bill:

  Dear Chairperson and hon members, kindly be advised that the education
  portfolio committee of the KwaZulu-Natal legislature met earlier today on
  the 4th of November 2005 on determination of the final voting mandate in
  respect of the Education Laws Amendment Bill, B23D-2005. The following
  parties were present: ANC, IFP and DA. The ANC and the IFP approved and
  supported the Bill, but the DA opposed it.

That is no problem. They oppose everything as a matter of principle to
justify their existence.

As the Bill enjoyed majority support, the decision of the committee was to
support the Bill.


In terms of the National Council of Provinces we do have the vote for the
KwaZulu-Natal legislature. The provincial standing committee on the
National Council of Provinces matters met today and agreed to mandate the
KwaZulu-Natal delegation to the National Council of Provinces to support
the Education Laws Amendment Bill.

The delegation is further mandated to consider any additional amendments,
providing that the amendments do not alter the essential elements of the
Bill and that consensus is reached on the proposed amendments of the
KwaZulu-Natal delegation. Well, as I am the only one here from Natal, there
isn’t a problem.

I have also brought the memorandum of the decisions we have made and our
interpretation of the Bill, but I won’t have time to read it with the
cutting down of the times. I will leave this here to be tabled.

But three very important things came out that we approved of: firstly,
scrapping school fees in poorer schools. This is a long overdue relief to
poor parents, especially those who have more than one child at school;
secondly, disciplinary matters: discipline can now be acted upon more
speedily through clearly defined channels; and, thirdly, the clarification
of the appointment of teachers is also very welcome. Regularising the
temporary teacher situation is also long overdue and very welcome. I
repeat: KwaZulu-Natal supports this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I now call the hon J O Tlhagale.
[Interjections.] Oh, he is not here. I now call the hon Van Heerden. Twee
minute, doktor. [Two minutes, doctor.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, thee FF goes along with many of the
positive things involved in this Bill, particularly the whole question of
the no-fee threshold and also the question of the curtailment of the
disciplinary proceedings by the governing body. We do support that. There
are also some other elements that we can support. But we experience this
as, again, curtailment of the powers of the governing bodies.

Mr Thetjeng also to referred to that, and because of that the FF
unfortunately cannot, in spite of the positive elements in this
legislation, support the Bill.

Ons sal dit helaas moet teenstaan. Baie interessant is ook dat dit lyk asof
daar ‘n verdeling in ANC-geledere is, wat ons in hierdie debat ervaar het.
[Unfortunately we shall have to oppose it. Interestingly enough there also
appears to be a division in the ANC ranks, which we experienced in this
debate.]

Mr Tolo said that the Department of Education must now appoint teachers,
and not school governing bodies. Yes. But what did Ms Mazibuko say? She
spoke, I think, Xhosa, but the translation goes as follows:

“Ouers moet deelneem om hulle kinders te leer.” Ouers moet deelneem om
hulle kinders te leer. Dit strook met wat die VF Plus wil hê. Die VF Plus
wil ook hê die ouers moet ook deelneem, en ons is dankbaar dat daar stemme
soos me Mazibuko s’n in ANC-geledere opgaan wat ons en dan . . . Ek huiwer
om my met die DA te assosieer, maar hulle het tog hier ook by monde van mnr
Thetjeng dieselfde sentiment uitgespreek, naamlik dat die beheerliggame se
magte nie geërodeer moet word nie, met dien verstande dat die beheerliggame
se magte inderdaad uitgevoer word soos dit hier in klousule 7 uitgespel
word met verwysing na artikel 6 van die wet. Daarmee kan ons akkoord gaan.
Maar die VF Plus kan helaas as gevolg daarvan ongelukkig nie die
wetsontwerp steun nie. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[“Parents should participate in the tuition of their children.” Parents
should participate in the tuition of their children. That is in line with
what the FF Plus wants. The FF Plus also wants the parents to participate
as well, and we are grateful for the fact that voices such as that of Ms
Mazibuko are being heard in the ranks of the ANC, and then . . . . I
hesitate to associate myself with the DA, but they nevertheless also
expressed the same sentiment here in the words of Mr Thetjeng, namely that
the powers of the controlling bodies must not be eroded, provided that the
powers of the controlling bodies are in fact carried out as set out here in
clause 7 with reference to section 6 of the Act. We can agree with that.
But, as a result, the FF Plus unfortunately cannot support the Bill. I
thank you.]

Ms J WITBOOI (Western Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, it
is my honour and pleasure to rise in this House to indicate the Western
Cape’s support of our government and Minister Naledi Pandor’s efforts in
opening the doors of learning for all our children.

The Freedom Charter calls for the doors to open. And after 11 years of
democracy, we must ask the question: How open are the doors really?

The DA and Ms Helen Zille have accused the Minister and the ANC government
of wanting to take away the powers of school governing bodies because the
government is power-hungry.

Me Zille is natuurlik die voormalige LUR vir onderwys in die Wes-Kaap, en
baie onthou haar vir haar knap bestuursvernuf, maar ongelukkig het sy haar
vernuf ingespan om net na die belange van welgestelde skole om te sien.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Terwyl daar skole is wat transformasie heeltemal aan die
boesem geneem het deur kinders van oorwegend bruin en swart agtergronde in
te neem, en steeds goeie resultate lewer, is daar nog skole wat selektief
te werk gaan onder die dekmantel van die handhawing van standaarde.
Opvoeding is ‘n basiese mensereg wat beskikbaar behoort te wees aan alle
kinders, nie net dié groep wat dit kan bekostig of wat akademies of
andersins goed presteer nie. Ál ons openbare skole behoort aan ál ons
gemeenskappe: bruin, wit en swart. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Ms Zille, of course, is the former MEC for education in the Western Cape,
and many will remember her for her capable management ingenuity, but
unfortunately she employed her ingenuity only to see to the interests of
well-to-do schools. [Interjections.] While there are schools that have
wholeheartedly embraced transformation by taking in children from
predominantly coloured and black backgrounds and still produce good
results, there are still schools that operate selectively under the pretext
of maintaining standards. Education is a basic human right that should be
available to all children, not only to the group that can afford it or that
performs well academically or otherwise. All our public schools belong to
all our communities: coloured, white, and black.]

I believe that the Education Laws Amendment Bill seeks to strike a balance
between the rights of communities to have a say in the education of their
children and the right of the employer to affirm its position and duty.

The proposed amendments are important for transformation and equity-redress
purposes. And I do not believe that they will, as some in the opposition
suggest, lead to the lowering of standards. The government cannot be merely
a rubber stamp for preferred candidates of school governing bodies, some of
whom are clearly very resourceful and creative in perpetuating inequality.

The DA’s suggestion that the powers of SGBs are being taken away is
misplaced. The SGBs never had the power to appoint. They merely recommended
to the heads of the department a preferred candidate. With the proposed
amendments, a school governing body will now be asked to provide a
shortlist of three candidates as opposed to one.

Ms Zille implies that because government wants to have a say in the
recruitment of its employees, it will then follow that only black people
will be appointed, which will automatically lead to the lowering of
standards and destroy the education system. This smacks of racism!
[Interjections.]

Ek wil minister Pandor ook prys vir haar waagmoed om stappe te doen om die
armste gemeenskappe se skole vry te stel van skoolgeld. Veral vir die
gemeenskap waaruit ek en baie ander van ons kom, sal dit soos manna uit die
hemel wees. Die Wes-Kaap steun hierdie wetgewing. [Applous.] (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I would also like to praise Minister Pandor for her courage in taking
steps to exempt schools in the most indigent communities from school fees.
Especially for the community from which many of us, myself included, come,
this will be like manna from heaven. The Western Cape supports this
legislation. [Applause.]]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you, hon Minister. We
all know that our Minister was out of the country doing some very important
work for us as South Africans, but that she made a point of being with us
here today. Hon Minister, we appreciate your presence here with us today.

Let me just start with Mr Thetjeng. I have very little time. Mr Thetjeng
made use of this particular podium to raise certain issues. We debated this
Bill in our committee. I want the House to listen very carefully. At no
stage did Mr Thetjeng say that he rejected this Bill, even Ms Lamoela for
that matter. Not even once did they say that they were opposed to this
Bill.

When we were busy with the negotiating mandate meetings, they were
presenting the mandates of their provinces in that particular committee in
support of this Bill. This is what they did at that level. [Interjections.]

Now, it is quite strange to find . . . [Interjections.] Am I protected,
Chairperson?

Now, what I’m trying to illustrate to this august House is the double
standards they have as the DA. We must be honest with ourselves. What is so
interesting about this Bill is that when I did the briefing in my province
in the Northern Cape, not a single member of the DA was present that day.

So, for them, this piece of legislation is not important. [Interjections.]
It’s our duty and responsibility to convey these messages to our respective
constituencies. They were not there. And for us, as the ANC, we say halalaa
to this Bill, because it brings relief to the poor of the poorest.
[Interjections.] We know the constituencies that we represent. We have very
poor communities out there. They are not poor of their own making, but
because of the previous regime. We have made an undertaking - we have
signed a contract with our people - to say that we will uplift their
standards and their way of life. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Order, hon member! Order! Ms
Terblanche, I will not allow that type of heckling. Heckling is allowed in
the House, but it must be orderly. Please continue, hon member.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Thank you, Chairperson. They think they can destabilise
me, but they won’t succeed. The fact of the matter is that they are opposed
to transformation. That is the bottom line. The hon Thetjeng was saying
that we are not interested in employing the best teachers, which is a lie.
He is misleading this august House. He wants us to keep the status quo,
where you have teachers that are lily-white, but the children are mixed.
What is that? We cannot allow these things to happen in our country. We
cannot allow these things to happen.

Be that as it may, I believe in four simple issues: the learners must
learn, the educators must educate, the governing bodies must govern, and
the employer must employ - and so shall it be. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Chairperson. I shall direct the
officials in the Education department to just get the hon Sulliman to
repeat the last four lines and put it up somewhere in every school in the
country: the teachers must teach, the learners must learn, the employer
must employ. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] Exactly. That is right.

I think it is important for us to repeat that the Bill maintains the
important and necessary improvements that we made early in our democracy.
The democratisation of school governance arrived with the introduction of
democracy in South Africa and not before, and we have maintained this.

The important role of school governing bodies in selecting quality
candidates and recommending them for appointment to the provincial
departments of education is maintained. I wish the hon members would
listen, because I am responding to them.
This partnership between school governing bodies - hon Thetjeng, hon
Thetjeng - the departments of education and professional teachers is
essential to providing quality education to our children. This is
maintained in the Bill.

The change introduced by the Bill is that instead of recommending only one
of the interviewed candidates, school governing bodies will be required to
present three in order of preference. That is the change. This has been
called the threat by hon Thetjeng and others to the powers of school
governing bodies. It is not a threat. School governing bodies will continue
to do what school governing bodies do the world over: short-list,
interview, recommend.

The difference is that now the head of department as the employer will
select the appointee from the list of three provided. Now the hon Thetjeng
in his comments implied that the school governing body would provide three
poor-quality candidates for the head of department to select from. The
challenge that governing bodies face is to ensure that they attract quality
candidates as a pool.

But I also think that part of what happens because we politicise
educational matters is that we tend to have a blind side from which we view
things. We don’t have a holistic perspective on the issues. As you have
debated here, and even the hon member as he debated, you assumed that we
were talking about a small proportion of the schools in our country. As
Minister of Education I am talking of all the schools in our country. So
the assumption that it is schools with a majority of white teachers that
would have to change is an erroneous assumption because, again, you are
blindsiding.

All our schools should have a diversity of employees in them. Our schools
should have persons with disabilities employed if they are quality
candidates for the particular posts. Our schools should have women employed
if they are quality candidates for the particular posts. Our schools should
have black candidates if they are quality candidates for the particular
posts.

The notion that we are targeting a component of our society is a
politicisation, which gives a wrong definition to what we are trying to
achieve. I really urge hon members to see the entire sector and not a part
of it. This business of viewing South Africa as a little clique rather that
an entire country really narrows your perspective as to what we must
achieve in education in South Africa. I resist that narrowing quite
strongly.

Having said that, let me say to the hon members: I thank all of you for
your participation in this debate. I would like to thank the hon
chairperson of the select committee, since this is probably our last debate
for the year, for the work that he has done and role that he has played in
leading the select committee and especially the work on this Bill.

I also would like to particularly thank those provinces that really gave
very serious attention to this legislation. I followed the debates in
Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal and some in Limpopo. I missed a number of the other
provinces, but I know that very serious attention has been given to this
legislation and I was very excited by that.

I am glad that in the main there is support for the Bill. All that I can
conclude from those who do not support this legislation is that, really,
they failed to seize the moment. They failed to realise that when
transformation faces them they should grab it with both hands in the
interests of the people of our country.

To limit oneself merely to the issue of the appointment of teachers and not
to look at the entire perspective of a fairly radical move to introduce
free education for children in South Africa, I find quite an amazing stand
to take. And to be seen as voting against such radical changes in education
is an unfortunate stand indeed. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Minister. I shall now put the
question. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their provinces’ votes. Are you all present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wishes to do so? None.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I will do so in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must indicate to the
Chair whether they vote in favour of, against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Vrystaat steun. [Free State supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Ms J WITBOOI (Western Cape): Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Nine provinces voted in favour. I therefore
declare the Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution. [Applause.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                            NATIONAL CREDIT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you very much, Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces and hon members. I do have great pleasure in
presenting the National Credit Bill to the National Council of Provinces.

The passage of this Bill through Parliament must be seen as a victory for
consumers and for the efforts of the government and its various tiers to
build an economy that meets the needs of all economic citizens of South
Africa.

This Bill is integral to our joint efforts to transform the economy from
one that serves the needs of the wealthy and excludes the poor to one that
harnesses the full potential of all the country’s people and resources.

Since 1994 the national government and the provincial governments have
worked together closely to make a difference in the area of consumer
protection, among other things. Together we have made great strides in
ensuring widespread consumer education and effective complaint resolution.
If this Bill is to have the desired impact, it is imperative that we
continue our combined efforts in the areas of enforcement and consumer
education.

It is for a very good reason that the Constitution provides that consumer
protection is an area of concurrent jurisdiction. Many consumer abuses are
perpetrated by businesses operating at a provincial or local level.
Provincial governments and their consumer protection agencies are best
placed to deal with these matters, given their proximity, knowledge of
these businesses and ability to mediate between parties where necessary.

Furthermore, provinces have built up significant networks and relationships
which assist them with promoting outreach to consumers and that the
important messages regarding consumer protection are heard by all.

Provinces have been involved in the regulation of the credit market since
1994, foremost through the administration and enforcement of the Credit
Agreements Act of 1980. Provinces and provincial legislatures are therefore
fully appraised of the fact that the credit market that has developed over
the past decade is inappropriate for the present economic and social
context of South Africa.

It is a market that both reflects and reinforces existing disparities in
South Africa and is characterised by lack of transparency, limited
competition, high cost of credit and limited consumer protection. For all
these reasons, it is imperative that we as government, collectively take
proactive steps to regulate this industry, as represented in the National
Credit Bill.

The National Credit Bill will replace the current Usury Act, the Credit
Agreements Act and the Usury Act Exemption Notice, and will ensure a
consistent approach to interest rate regulation and the limitation of
arbitrage and circumvention. It will apply to all credit transactions and
to all credit providers.

However, any regulation of the credit market must recognise that there are
differences between a pawn transaction, a mortgage and a credit card or
overdraft facility. These differences relate primarily to disclosure and
the treatment of accounts and contracts.
The Bill has several objectives: to address the historical legacy of
systematic discrimination against the majority of the black population by
improving and increasing access to credit at reasonable rates from
reputable credit providers, and increasing the availability of alternative
finance at reasonable cost for small enterprises and housing finance; to
make the credit market function more cost-effectively and competitively by
promoting a fair, competitive and sustainable credit market; to improve the
understanding and knowledge of the market by informing and educating
consumers to enable them to make better choices; to ensure that increased
access to credit will not lead to overindebtedness; to ensure protection
for consumers and secure redress for unacceptable practices; to ensure
compliance with regulatory requirements; and to provide for the necessary
co-operation between national and provincial government, as well as
industry, consumers and protection agencies to ensure a coherent and
integrated regulatory framework.

The National Credit Bill heralds a new era for consumers by entrenching and
giving effect to a number of consumer rights, including protection against
discrimination in credit granting; the right to reasons for credit being
refused; the right to information in plain and understandable language; the
right to have information acquired, held and reported by credit bureaux to
meet national norms and standards, and to have records of debt adjustment
expunged; and the right to have information held by credit bureaux and the
National Credit Register, to be notified when prescribed adverse
information is reported, to demand investigation of disputed information,
and correction of erroneous information.

As a direct result of the discriminatory practices in a dysfunctional
credit market and our history of economic and social oppression, many
consumers were effectively locked out of the credit market.

Consequently, a number of community stakeholders called for the Bill to
include a general amnesty for blacklisted consumers. In order to meet the
calls, a process has been introduced into the Bill that will aim at
ensuring that only correct information will be held with credit bureaux and
will also result in the removal of certain information from the consumer
credit records currently held by credit bureaux.

Thus, the Bill determines that the Minister of Trade and Industry must
publish regulations prescribing the nature, timeframe, form and manner in
which consumer credit information held by credit bureaux must be reviewed,
verified or removed within a period of one year after the regulations are
promulgated.

In addition, the Bill entitles the consumers to one free copy of their
credit information records per year. Regulations will only be published
after consultation with affected stakeholders, and due consideration of the
predictive nature of certain types of consumer credit information and the
socio-economic impact on consumers of the removal of such information.

The Bill provides for different institutions to ensure proper
implementation of the provisions of this Bill. Since national government
and provincial governments have concurrent jurisdiction with regard to
consumer protection, co-operation and co-ordination between these levels of
government are crucial to the success of the Bill. The Bill specifically
provides for shared responsibility for education, dispute resolution,
registration of credit providers and inspections.
Until provincial legislation has been enacted in a province establishing,
for that province, a provincial credit regulator as contemplated in the
Bill, the Minister of Trade and Industry may delegate to the relevant MEC
of the province all or any of the functions of the National Credit
Regulator to be exercised within that province. It is envisaged that among
these functions to be delegated will be the appointment of inspectors.

The National Credit Regulator and provincial consumer protection agencies
will play a vital role in ensuring enforcement and promotion of access to
redress at a provincial and local level, for without the required resources
and mechanisms to enforce the provisions at all levels of government, this
Bill will be ineffective and redundant. It is our responsibility to ensure
that this does not happen.

In addition to a National Credit Regulator, which will be adequately
resourced to ensure its ability to fulfil its mandate of registration of
national credit providers, credit bureaux and debt councillors, the
investigation of systemic market conduct problems and consumer education, a
National Consumer Tribunal will be established.

The tribunal will adjudicate contraventions of the Bill and ensure quick
and effective redress for consumers. The tribunal will deal primarily with
administrative and disciplinary matters, as well as the prohibited
activities of registered or unregistered entities. Tribunal decisions are
subject to appeal or review by the High Court. The role of the ordinary
courts is confirmed in the Bill in that the courts will hear matters
related to, among other things, the interpretation of law and legal
principles, the amendment or suspension of contracts, and the sanctioning
of offences.

The Bill encourages the utilisation of alternative dispute resolution prior
to going to court, as the latter course of action might be inaccessible,
expensive and adversarial in nature. In addition, debt councillors will
assist consumers to reorganise their debt and work on a financial plan that
would suit both the consumer and his or her creditors. They will empower
consumers by providing financial, debt and credit management skills.

Chairperson, may I conclude by expressing my appreciation for the manner in
which the select committee conducted the deliberations on the National
Credit Bill. The in-depth probing of all the issues by the respective
provincial legislatures and by the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign
Affairs contributed significantly to a well-considered and balanced piece
of legislation.

The manner in which the Bill was interrogated and the ensuing debate
between the different arms of government illustrated the level to which our
democracy has matured and reconfirmed the value of the constitutional
principles of co-operative governance. The fact that such a wide range of
stakeholders participated in the processes of engagement, led by the
respective provincial legislatures, and the general support expressed for
the Bill from across the board was heartening. It underlines the success of
the thorough and widespread consultation process embarked upon by the
Department of Trade and Industry.

This Bill will undoubtedly facilitate the creation of a fair, balanced and
transparent credit market, which in turn will contribute towards a
transformed and adaptive economy that is characterised by a higher level of
economic growth that generates employment and reduces levels of
inequalities.

I commend this Bill to the National Council of Provinces. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues and comrades,
for those of us who assisted with the Bill, we are happy to say: “At long
last”. We say this because our people will now be able to exercise their
minds, knowing what is right for them.

Manditsho kwangoku ukuba onke amaphondo ahambisana nawo lo Mthetho uYilwayo
ngakumbi emva kwezihlomelo, ezingezininzi phofu, Mphathiswa, esiye sazenza
njengoko uphantsi kwecandelo 76. [Minister, let me state that all provinces
agree with this Bill, particularly after the few amendments made to section
76.]
The Bill that we dealt with contains information for members seated here as
well. You will now be able to know why credit was declined and be able to
correct that. Let me say, though, that:

Asithi izikweliti zenu ziza kucima kodwa indlela yokuhlawula amatyala iza
kuba yindlela elungelelanisiweyo ukuze nawe ukwazi ukuhlawula amatyala
akho. Lo Mthetho uYilwayo ukwalungiselela ukuba isileyiti sakho sicoceke,
uqale ngokutsha, ukwazi nokuzikhupha koomatshonisa. Siyazi ukuba abantu
baboleka apha beza kuhlawula phaya. Ngaloo ndlela umntu uphela ebolile
ngamatyala oomatshonisa.

Lo Mthetho uYilwayo ulungiselela ukuba kungabikho mkhethe kananjalo
uphucula namathuba okuqala amatyala. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[We are not saying that the Bill will write off debts, but it will help to
pay off existing debts. This Bill will help in paying off the existing
debts and to start anew. People would be able to free themselves from cash
loans. We understand that people have a tendency to borrow money to pay off
existing debts. This creates a vicious cycle and people end up owing cash
sharks huge sums of money.

This Bill eradicates discrimination and prepares a level playing field with
regard to credit prospects.]

One of the best aspects of the Bill is the fact that it will not legalise
door-to-door sales of credit.

Akukho mntu uza kuhamba ebuza ukuba: Uyafuna na ukuvula ityala apha?
Singakuboleka imali enga. [There is no one who would ask: Do you want to
open an account? We can give you this much.]

Also, the purpose of the Bill is to promote and advance the social and
economic welfare of all South Africans in a fair, transparent and efficient
manner.

Also contained in the Bill is that a credit agreement is not allowed if the
consumer is a minor or mentally unfit. When you move around all the
paypoints you will always see that there are people who are waiting for all
those people – “mashonisas” [moneylenders], burial societies and all those.

Consumers will be educated about credit and their rights, and they will be
provided with protection from deception, unfair or fraudulent conduct by
credit providers and the credit bureaux.

Other members will deal with what the Bill seeks to achieve, but I want to
ask our provinces, when this Bill has been signed into law, that more road
shows and public education be done so that the majority of those this Bill
wants to assist are informed.

Ngelishwa ke, Phathiswa, lo Mthetho uYilwayo awuthethi nto ngemigalelo
noomasingcwabane. Apha phandle siyafa ngabantu abaziimbulu abathi hlamba
uwavile. Bendingathanda ke, Mphathiswa, ukuba ngenye imini uyijonge le
ndawo. Yenye yeendlela abantu abenza ngazo ookopolotyeni babo nakubeni
ingengabo zisemthethweni.

Xa ndigqibezele, Mphathiswa, ndifuna ukuthi, eyona nto ibalulekileyo
yeyokuba umntu ngoku unelungelo yaye ukhuselekile ukuba xa ethe akaneliseka
yinto abeyithengile, angayiphindisa, ubuyekezwe imali yakho futhi
ungahlawuliswa. Njengabantu abamele abantu, masiye kubo sibaxelele ukuba lo
Mthetho uYilwayo uza njani nemeko yokuphucula ubomi babantu nanjengoko
sisazi ukuba apha kwa-ANC sinesivumelwano nabantu. Enkosi, Sihlalo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Unfortunately, Minister, this Bill does not include social clubs and
burial societies. This world is full of scoundrels who mislead people. I
would like the Minister to look at this matter in future. This is another
way in which people establish illegal corporations.

Finally, Minister, I want to say what is important is that everyone knows
his or her rights and get protection against deception. When a customer is
not satisfied with a product, he or she has a right to exchange it and get
a refund without being charged. As people’s representatives, let us go back
to the people and explain how this Bill is going to improve their lives,
that is the accord between them and the ANC. Thank you, Chairperson.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Hon Chairperson, the DA believes that although the
intention of this Bill is admirable, this legislation could plunge the
country’s credit market into something along the lines of what we have in
labour: creating an overcomplicated, interventionist, bureaucratic
institution.

While we support the Bill, we do so subject to monitoring its effects very
closely and sounding a warning about its unintended consequences. We intend
to move for amendments the moment the problems we have predicted will be
caused by the Bill begin to manifest themselves. Perhaps then the
government will be more open to listening to our proposals.

Our most fundamental point is that the Bill substantially increases the
risk involved in granting credit by taking away lenders’ ability to discern
who will and who will not be likely to default. The only thing possible
lenders will have to go on to secure their business will be the collateral
owned by possible borrowers. This will push up the cost to compensate for
risk and will also raise the margin below which people are unable to access
credit lawfully. Those who need loans the most are often people without
much collateral. These people will be hit the hardest.

In other words, many people who are creditworthy now will no longer be, ie
the middle and lower-income earners, people with the slightest default
record and people without positive credit histories. These people, together
with SMMEs as credit providers and receivers, risk being disadvantaged by
this Bill.

In a word, our concern centres on the fact that the intended beneficiaries
of this Bill could end up being its unintended victims. As it stands now,
tens of thousands of SMMEs will be criminalised at the stroke of the
statutory pen, and millions of credit seekers will be driven from comfort
to underground sources of credit or none at all, and will be substantially
worse off.

The supposed case for regulation is made out in voluminous documents
proposed by the Department of Trade and Industry’s technical committee,
which are littered with unfounded assertions that there is a dysfunctional
market. Nowhere is a functional one defined and nowhere is the basis for
calling it dysfunctional explained.

It asserts, without evidence, that the cost of credit is too high, without
explaining what it should be or by what criteria the cost should be
established. In short, the Bill contains little that will reduce the cost
of credit and much that will increase it.

One of the core purposes of the Bill in its special section on its
objectives “is to increase access to credit for historically disadvantaged
people and SMMEs”, yet there is not a single provision which could possibly
have this effect, and, again, almost every clause is likely to have the
opposite effect.

There is no rational connection between the Bill’s objectives and its
provisions. The provisions made for reckless credit are open to abuse. We
are pleased to note that the Bill now allows the courts to mitigate this
potential area of concern.

Expunging of risk prediction data is likely to hurt the diligent poor. We
have noted that credit bureaux should not be held liable for verifying all
pieces of information they keep, especially considering the fact that
information is reported to them from retailers, lenders, banks and a wide
variety of third parties. The cost of verifying millions upon millions of
pieces of information is prohibitively high. However, upon request by the
consumer, credit bureaux should be required to take reasonable steps.

The Bill allows the National Credit Regulator the right to refuse
businesses’ legal recognition as registered credit providers on the basis
of inadequate commitments to BEE. The DA believes that this is a
particularly harsh, strident application of BEE and that the National
Credit Bill is not the right place to create this kind of legal provision.

The regulator could conceivably make use of its powers to prevent a family
business from selling on account if it believes that the business does not
show any commitment to black economic empowerment. In the case of small
businesses that are heavily dependent on amount-based sales, such as
pharmacies, this could effectively give the credit regulator the power to
put people out of business by the back door. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M J SIBIYA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, comrades, colleagues, ladies
and gentleman, it’s a pity that in this House there are hon members who try
to defend the indefensible. They use an argument that makes them look like
people who belong to a political party which, at best, by South African
political standards, can be referred to as an undemocratic misalliance.
Such a party does not exist in this country. Perhaps when one starts it
they would best belong there.

The Bill under discussion today is one of the milestones in the
transformation struggle by the ANC-led government. Its importance is
underlined by its key objectives, given as follows: one, to promote and
enhance consumer protection; two, to promote competition and transparency;
and three, to control overindebtedness and reckless lending.

The Bill is not only important but also significant and crucial in that it
also contains consumer rights, and it imposes requirements, criteria,
conditions and the procedure of registration in the consumer credit
industry. It will also go a long way to alleviate the humiliation and
frustration suffered by people within the low-income bracket, for it will
protect them against discrimination, and, in the event of applicants from
such a bracket being refused credit, reasons for such a refusal will have
to be given.

To me, giving refusal reasons presupposes that the applicant can analyse,
comment on or even challenge some of these. The right to information in a
plain and understandable official language is one of the most significant
aspects of the Bill in that applicants from all walks of life will have
access to all implications and costs, including the hidden ones by having
them revealed.

Let me indicate one of the things I have personally come across in terms of
hidden costs. You go to the mashonisa and you borrow R100. They tell you
your interest is 30% and your instalment perhaps is say R10 per month. They
will charge you 30% of that R100 that you borrowed, which means your
principal debt now becomes R130. When the next month comes, they deduct
R10. You remain R120 in debt, but they still charge you 30% of that R120,
and this time your principal debt becomes R136. At the end of four months
you find yourself having paid interest of 120%. This kind of information,
owing to this Bill, will have to be revealed. Thank you, Minister of Trade
and Industry. This is very good work that’s being done and we will support
you. [Applause.]
The government, through the DTI, by introducing this Bill, is also
enhancing one of the critical provisions of the people’s charter, which
says, in part: “All shall be equal before the law.” I say this, because in
my view and in the view of reasonable and democratically minded persons, I
suppose, it is only those who are equal before the economy who can be equal
before the law. The impositions contained in the Bill are a stern warning
to the unscrupulous rampant loan sharks that their ripping off of the poor
and the ordinary is definitely approaching its cul-de-sac.

The ANC-led government has committed itself to reducing poverty by half by
2014. Although money-lending institutions are not necessarily the cause of
poverty, clipping their wings through this Bill, as I see envisaged, will
definitely relieve the burden carried by the poor in servicing their debts,
especially if these had been defaulted on.

The demand in the Bill that moneylenders have credit bureau information
subjected to review, corrections, recording and removal within a specific
period, as outlined in chapter 4, part B, subitem 71, is one of the most
important psychological benefits . . .

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Your speaking time has expired, hon
member.

Mr M J SIBIYA: In conclusion, the ANC unreservedly supports the Bill and
urges this House to do the same.

Dames en here, dit sal definitief waardeer word . . . [Ladies and
gentlemen, it would definitely be appreciated . . . ]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Your time has expired, hon member. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Hon Minister, thank you very much, through the
Chairperson, for the elaborate debate on this Bill. Economic oppression is
worse than any form of oppression, because there is no ducking and diving
if one cannot improve his or her economic status. Here I refer to a healthy
economic state not motivated by greed or opulence.

Economic transformation requires one to have access to consumer credit, but
it should be well controlled and managed. The Bill desires to do just that,
but this has to go with a lot of education on how to budget and identify
items to source credit.

With regard to discrimination, coming from urban Bantustans, those are
townships, or rural Bantustans, those are rescued areas that meant that the
only people who could access credit were those who were considered to be of
a better standing. There was always the question of how you were going to
pay back that credit, and some shops had better quality clothing which was
viewed as being affordable to certain people from certain areas or from
certain classes. Now people from all sorts of areas can be taught about
credit access, control and management, because it’s not so easy to source
credit through property, cattle or goats, because that is controlled by the
family.

The question of cash means that your money is yours, and you find yourself
getting credit because you say: “I’ve got money in the bank or in my
pocket.” Education will prevent overaccessing credit to the degree of
becoming insolvent. This Bill, then, is going to be a wake-up call for us
all who are wooed into debt simply because credit is offered. As citizens
we have to be trusted to honour our promises to pay, but it’s not easy.

Education, education, education all the way will be appreciated so that the
very small print, which is not usually read, can be removed from our credit
agreements. Then our people will not be listed by the credit bureaux.

The IFP supports the Bill, and I thank you again. [Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, we have made
great strides in transforming the economy from one that served the wealthy
and excluded the poor to one that harnesses the full potential of all our
citizens and resources.

The National Credit Bill sets out to redress the historical legacy of
systematic discrimination against the majority of the black population by
improving and increasing access to credit at reasonable rates from
reputable credit providers. It increases the availability of alternative
finance at reasonable cost for small enterprises and housing finance. It is
a great pleasure to note that our government has indeed stepped in with
this powerful piece of legislation to protect consumers. South African
consumers are now looking forward to a single law that will cover all
credit transactions.

I would like to remind the House that especially the women of this country
will benefit from this Bill, as you are aware that the ANC-led government
has addressed all major policy issues to accommodate women. The barriers we
were facing as women were complex and structural. Women are very happy
today that this Bill aims to safeguard citizens from unfair and deceptive
practices in the credit industry, and to empower people to make informed
decisions.

We are really pleased that it introduces mechanisms for coping with too
much debt, for prohibiting the reckless granting of credit, and that it
creates a new regulator and dispute resolution body, because we were the
most affected.

Everybody has a right to apply for credit without being discriminated
against. However, this does not mean that people cannot be refused credit.
The Bill gives credit providers the right to refuse to extend credit to
people on reasonable commercial grounds, in line with customary rights and
underwriting practices. Therefore it would not be illegal for a bank to
refuse to grant you a home loan if the bank’s assessment is that you cannot
afford it.

Our people are going to benefit from this legislation as it also ensures
the protection of consumers and secure redress for unacceptable practices.

As a direct result of the discriminatory practices employed by credit
bureaux and as a result of the dysfunctional credit market, many consumers
were effectively locked out of the credit market. As a result, a number of
community stakeholders during public hearings called for the Bill to
include a general amnesty for blacklisted consumers.

After careful consideration it was decided to provide for a data
verification process and for the removal of certain types of information
from the consumer credit records currently held by credit bureaux. The Bill
entitles consumers to one free copy of their credit information records per
year.

Once again it is a relief for women, especially those in the rural areas,
to note that clause 63(1) talks about the right to receive information in
our own official languages, because we as women we were previously
disadvantaged. This Bill will undoubtedly facilitate the creation of a
fair, balanced and transparent credit market, which, in turn, will
contribute towards a transformed and adaptive economy, an economy that is
characterised by a higher . . . [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr G SNELL (Eastern Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, members of the
NCOP, I bring warm words of greeting from the Eastern Cape. The committee
that deals with economic affairs, the environment and tourism met on
numerous occasions to consider the Bill. The committee in its entirety
agreed that the principles contained in the Bill were principles that we
sought to uphold, and we therefore agreed that we would support the Bill.

Amongst these principles are those of stopping the unsolicited forwarding
of credit to members of the public; an interest rate that would not
prejudice the poor against that of the rich; looking at repossessions
linked to reckless credit granting; and ensuring that the poor, who are the
most vulnerable, and those that are the most vulnerable when it comes to
being employed in positions from which they can be retrenched at any
moment, do not become locked into credit and reported to credit bureaux and
for the rest of their lives are discriminated against when it comes to
getting access to credit.

This Bill should not be seen in isolation from government’s efforts to
reform the economy and to ensure that we level the playing fields between
the first and second economies, and for that, Minister, we wish to thank
you from the Eastern Cape.

The Eastern Cape also realised the importance of the content of Bill, and
the positive impact it will have on the lives of the people of the
province, the vast majority of whom felt first-hand the pain that was
caused by the previous regime when it came to credit granting.

It was decided to hold a workshop on the Bill for all members of the
legislature and for the various stakeholders within the province. This
workshop was incredibly successful and well attended. The portfolio
committee embarked on public hearings throughout the province that were
well attended. Varied and vast inputs came from members of the community.
The committee considered these inputs, along with the technical aspects
that were of concern to us, and submitted these to this portfolio committee
in our negotiating mandate.

One of the primary concerns that was raised in the public hearings
pertained to the role of national and provincial regulators. The existence
of provincial regulators may create problems as each may prescribe certain
norms and standards for the province, and this may be undesirable and
confusing for people operating in various provinces. This particularly came
from areas where the cross-boundaries are being dealt with at the moment -
in KwaZulu-Natal there was no consumer protector and in the Eastern Cape
there was. If people have to buy in Kokstad, for example, and then come
back to the Eastern Cape and something goes wrong with their product, what
recourse have they got?

Notwithstanding the provisions of clause 16, it was proposed that the Bill
must provide for the establishment of a dedicated consumer education advice
and information service. This would also ease pressure from the National
Credit Regulator and would ensure that consumers are more informed, as this
institution would be dedicated to this purpose only. Alternatively, it was
proposed that the national consumer advice . . . [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chair, hon Minister, hon members, the National
Credit Bill will go a long way to protect uninformed consumers from the bad
practices in the debt recovery and credit management sector.

The UIF believes that the amnesty of credit for blacklisted consumers is
justified so that we can bring these marginalised workers back into the
mainstream of the economy. Although their names will be erased from the
credit bureau, their obligation to settle debts will remain.

Whilst we understand the important information, collection, research and
analysis role of credit bureaux, the methods employed are sometimes
questionable. Not having to pay for your own credit profile is positive.

Many consumers will battle trying to delist, owing to errors and when debts
have been settled. To remove your name via legal processes from credit
bureaux is, in most cases, a costly exercise. Hence, the establishment of
the National Credit Regulator, which will oversee these bureaux, is
necessary, given their unscrupulous practices.

Linked to the above are debt administrators and debt councillors. These
entities and persons, in many instances, instead of assisting debt-trapped
clients, put them into further predicaments, either by not paying moneys
collected to creditors or charging excessive administration fees.

Credit insurance is not marketed enough and should be a compulsory part of
the signing of a credit agreement, as it protects first of all the consumer
in the event of unemployment and the seller. This is standard practice with
bond applications and must be extended to smaller transactions.

The national register of credit agreements is a key monitoring tool to
oversee the level of indebtedness, which is often related to reckless
credit provision, irrespective of whether higher interest rates are
charged. Fines should be imposed on reckless credit providers, as they
further entrench the poverty of consumers, many of whom fall into a debt
trap.

The UIF supports this Bill. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr Y GABRU (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, it’s a great
pleasure for me to participate in this debate this afternoon.

In my constituency office a stream of people come in every day who have had
some debt they have been unable to pay and whose debt has then been handed
over to a debt collector. What I have in front of me here is a very typical
example of that: the African Bank Limited handed over to an attorney an
unpaid amount of R2 200. Nineteen months later, despite the fact that R4
000 had been paid, there was still a balance of about R3 000. Let me just
repeat the facts very quickly: it was an outstanding amount of R2 000; two
years later, after R4 000 had been paid, there was still a balance of R3
000. I can go on and on and give you a whole host of these examples, as I
am sure everybody who has a constituency office can do.

There was some question about whether there is a dysfunctional market out
there. If that isn’t an example of a dysfunctional market, then I am not
sure what is.
We all know that these things happen, yet they continue to happen over and
over again. It seems to me that the reasons for this – and members have
made reference to them over and over again - are quite clearly, in this
case, to do with the whole question of unscrupulous debt collectors and
reckless credit providers. But it needs to be said that this also has to do
with the irresponsible behaviour of consumers.

It seems to me that one of the things that we will all profit from is if
the National Credit Regulator, which has to, according to its mandate,
embark on a programme of educating consumers.

I especially want to mention the question of funerals in some of our
communities. When there is a funeral, many of the people in our community
go to huge and unnecessary expense, and land up with a huge amount of debt.
I read recently that there were some people in my constituency who were
taking out huge loans to pay for their children’s matric balls.

I think and I am hoping that one of the things the national regulator will
do is to go on this campaign to educate people about dealing with credit in
a sensible way.

The other issue in my constituency office that I have to deal with over and
over again are small businesses not being able to get credit. That has been
mentioned here over and over again.
In the Western Cape portfolio committee we are absolutely convinced that
this piece of legislation, which has been extremely well prepared and is
very well researched, will go a long way towards resolving a large number
of problems that we are confronted with in our constituency offices on a
daily basis.

We unreservedly support the Bill. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, hon Ministers present and hon members, let me
start with first things first and say that we as the ANC support this Bill.
Secondly, I even heard in the last debate that some members of certain
parties do certain things that are morally wrong and that are, to a certain
extent, impractical.

The hon Terblanche won’t attend these meetings. [Interjections.] If she
attends the meetings, she doesn’t contribute. If she contributes it is only
to say things to protect the few. It’s morally wrong then for hon
Terblanche to come to debate here, because she has not engaged with the
department on this Bill, and she would have had all the clarification had
she attended the meetings. She would have been empowered quite a lot.
[Interjections.]

I will base my debate on consumer credit agreements, collection . . .
[Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, our Rules protect the speaker
and do not allow any other member to interrupt whilst the speaker is
speaking. And within these 16 days of activism, I take this very seriously
because this is discrimination in terms of the integrity of Mr Gamede.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mr Gamede, can you proceed with your
speech.

Mr D D GAMEDE: Thanks, hon Chair. It’s just to warn even the hon Minister
of Trade and Industry, because the one party is good at opposing. They’11
oppose even if you cough. You must be prewarned. [Laughter.]

I will base my debate on consumer credit agreements, collection,
repayments, surrender and debt enforcement. The Bill now provides in clause
90 that a credit agreement must not contain unlawful provisions.
Furthermore, clause 92(1) provides that a credit provider must not enter
into a small credit agreement unless the credit provider has given the
consumer a preagreement statement and quotation.

There are also provisions for prohibited charges that are covered by clause
100. For example, a credit provider cannot charge interest that would be
above or more than the capital amount.

As mentioned earlier on, a National Credit Regulator is being established
in clause 12 which would look at the maximum rates of interest, fees and
charges. This is also found in clause 105. Clause 106 provides for credit
insurance. However, there must be optional insurance.

An example given in our deliberations, and the hon Thetjeng was not at the
meeting, was of a lady - hon Terblanche! – who borrowed R50 000. She heard
it and then she left the meeting. She borrowed R50 000 and was forced to
take insurance cover for R250 000, and for three years she serviced the
debt. After three years she lost her job, and then couldn’t service the
debt. When she died it was found that she owed more than R250 000.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Terblanche, I really need
to bring it to your attention that you and your party are the ones that
accuse presiding officers of biased rulings. But you have proven yourself
to be the champion of disrupting other people when they are speaking. I
really plead with you, irrespective of how you feel about what somebody is
saying, that you listen. You have been persistently . . . I waived my
ruling. The Chief Whip made a point of order. You have been consistently
disrupting the speaker as he was speaking. Thank you. You can proceed, hon
member.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: What is your point of order?

Mr A WATSON: My point of order is that my member has been chastised whilst
the hon member in front turns around to start arguments, but only Ms
Terblanche is attacked by both you and the Chief Whip. I don’t think that
is fair. I think you should attack those who are causing the problem.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Would you take your seat, Mr Watson
you are extremely out of order. [Interjections.] I am not aware of that.
You could have brought that to my attention. Terblanche, I’ll . . .

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Hon Terblanche.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: . . . I’ll order you out of the
House. You continue with that and I’ll order you out of the House. Proceed,
hon Gamede.

Mr D D GAMEDE: Thanks, hon Chair. This is always what happens when there is
one senior hon member of the DA in the House. I hope they want to impress
him. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

After three years it was found that the lady owed more than what the
capital amount was originally. Now, in terms of the provision for the
consumer and the right to settle the agreement and thus reduce the
principal debt, clause 126 provides that a consumer may surrender goods by
giving written notice to the provider to terminate the agreement. Clause
129 provides that if the consumer is in default, the provider may propose
that the consumer discuss with the debt councillor or with the dispute
resolution . . .

The ANC supports this Bill. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you very much, Chair, and thanks
to all the members who participated in this very important debate. We would
like to thank you for the overwhelming support that we have received for
this groundbreaking piece of legislation, really.

There are particular matters that have been raised, such as the matter of
consumer education which is a very important part of an overall effort to
strengthen consumer rights in South Africa in the hope of promoting the
development of a consumer movement in South Africa.

The measures that are being taken are not just what are in this particular
Bill. Next year we are going to introduce the National Consumer Bill. You
would know that we have developed a consumer policy that develops a set of
standards for the kind of service we need to give to consumers by both
private and public sector institutions.

Other measures that are also aimed at protecting consumers reside with the
National Treasury. There is a series of pieces of legislation there that
relate to insurance and a whole range of others. All of these are aimed at
protecting consumers. Therefore, we will come up with more comprehensive
consumer legislation that will deal much more comprehensively with issues
of consumer education.

Also, we think that in doing this we should not only be looking at creating
new institutions, but that we must also be looking at working with existing
institutions – nongovernmental organisations, churches, local government,
provincial government and so on - so that we can really have a seamless
system that ensures that the issues of consumer rights, consumer education
and consumer protection are at the forefront at all times.

Let me also pick up on a few other matters that have been raised. Hon
Ntwanambi, regarding the point you raised about stokvels and imigalelwano
and so on: those matters are not being dealt with in the context of this
particular Bill, because this is a Bill that is aimed at regulating the
credit market - establishing a fair, equitable and sustainable credit
market in South Africa.

But we are also doing other work, both ourselves as well as the National
Treasury. We have introduced the co-ops legislation, which has been adopted
by Parliament. The Department of Finance has also introduced the Financial
Co-operatives Bill and a dedicated banks Bill.

So, those are some of the pieces of legislation in the context of which we
can deal with issues such as how we enable stokvels and imigalelwano that
are actually able to generate a lot of resources in the townships as well
as in the rural areas. How do we enable them so that they don’t necessarily
have to depend only on the existing mainstream banks? This is because that
undermines the whole purpose of their effort in trying to generate savings.

Hon Terblanche, I’m not quite sure what you were trying to do, because this
legislation aims to make sure that we can correct a massively distorted
credit market that exists in South Africa. And I don’t think we can build
prosperity on the basis of a credit market such as the one that exists in
South Africa today.

Let me just recap some of the features of the credit market as it exists in
South Africa today. Sixty-seven percent of the population receives less
than 6% of credit extended – 67% of the population! -  22% of SMMEs receive
financing, and only 7% from banks. The lowest income group faces the
highest costs when they borrow money. And you have a credit market that is
effectively split between the superincluded and the superexcluded.

These are the distortions that we are trying to correct. There is also a
variety of excesses in this credit market. There is reckless lending. I
don’t think that you can deny that there is reckless lending. We have to
deal with this phenomenon of reckless lending. We have to deal with
consumer abuses where these credit providers, in order to put themselves at
the frontline in terms of being paid, do things which really amount to
abuse.

So we can’t just sit idly by and allow such abuse to happen. There is a
series of abuse that happen, and the objectives of this particular Bill –
again, just to recap - is to promote competition and transparency by
treating all credit transactions equally while recognising different market
segments, to provide all consumers and some businesses with equal rights
and outline rules of conduct, to provide measures for overindebted
consumers and reckless credit extension, to provide for a central register
of consumer debt obligations, and to create a scheme for the regulation of
credit providers, debt councillors and credit bureaux.

Therefore, we seek, through this particular piece of legislation, to
correct those distortions and also to create a balance between the explicit
rights that consumers have as well as the responsibilities that they have,
because when you are seeking credit you also have a responsibility to
provide the correct information to the credit provider. Therefore, this is
not only about protecting the consumer, but also about imposing certain
obligations on the part of consumers themselves.

I think that if one were to just look at the recent history of South
Africa, one would find that the success and the rise, for instance, of the
Afrikaner community was not built on this type of credit market, but on the
basis of sound institutions, and sustainable and affordable credit. That’s
part of what underpinned the rise, the growth and the success of the
Afrikaner community in South Africa, and we must not forget some of those
experiences.

Therefore, some of the practices in South Africa today drive people deeper
into poverty. We cannot hope to achieve prosperity on the basis of a credit
market that drives people deeper into poverty. Because people find
themselves in those situations and because the credit is so expensive, they
are effectively locked out of affordable credit.

Somebody here did actually say that people borrow here in order to pay
there. People find themselves in a vicious cycle. You are not supporting
development; you are not promoting prosperity by doing that. You are tying
people into knots and driving them deeper into poverty. We have to be aware
of these things.

So, we are very mindful of the need to achieve a good balance between the
regulations that we seek to introduce as well as promoting efficiency of
the credit market.

I do really want to thank members for participating in the debate and for
their support. Again, it’s important to emphasise that this is about the
rights of consumers; it’s about the responsibilities of consumers; it’s
about access; it’s about broadening participation. But it is also about
ensuring that our institutions also do the things that will make access to
credit much easier for ordinary people. If I walk into a bank, I want to
have the confidence that there is somebody who can speak my language, who
can understand what my needs are, and who can understand what my
circumstances are. And that leads to sustainable lending, because by the
time we sign on the dotted line, I understand what obligations I’m taking
upon myself. And the credit provider also understands what level of credit
I am able to sustain as an individual because they understand my personal
circumstances.

So, our financial institutions must deal with the soft issues – the
cultural issues, the issues of ensuring that your frontline staff are such
that you are able to meet the needs of all South Africans across the
spectrum.

Chairperson, let me thank you very much. I see that I’ve run out of time.
Thank you. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question. The
question is that the Bill be agreed to. As the question is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’
votes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish.
Is there any province that wants to make a declaration of vote? None.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour of, or against, or abstain from
voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Steun. [Supports.]

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr Y GABRU: Western Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Minister of Trade and Industry,
we would like to take this opportunity to thank you for the kind of support
you have consistently provided to the National Council of Provinces, and we
hope that you are going to continue to do so in future.


                        FORESTRY LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Chairperson, this Bill authorises the Minister to
establish a trust in respect of state forests under certain circumstances,
to enable the Minister to pay lease money in respect of such state forests
into a trust account, and to provide for such money to be paid to certain
beneficiaries.

From the above, it is clear that the Minister, as the political accounting
officer for our constituency, is able to respond to the needs and demands
of societies. Arising from the above, it became evident that this lease
money may eventually have to be paid over to successful claimants of rights
in state forests as this need has arisen for the state to keep such money
in a trust account. Also the need exists for the state to continue to
receive and pay out lease money on behalf of some successful claimants by
means of a trust.

This demonstrates that this ANC-led government is the government of the
people and that it knows the interests of the people. Some processes, which
were more administrative, delayed the implementation of the progressive
policies. Hence it became imperative for us to manage some processes
politically.

To transform this country to a democratic one that accommodates all South
Africans and not the few as it used to, we need to change all policies that
are stumbling blocks to the delivery of services to our people. We, as the
ANC, are making a difference to ordinary people. We are the government of
the people. Hence we are implementing what the people want.

The purpose of this Bill is to clean up existing legislation within the
administrative competence of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry.
As this Bill does not have social and financial implications, it is more
convincing for the House to support this Bill. It addresses the past
imbalances created by the apartheid regime. We are committed to pushing
back the frontiers of poverty and to implementing the people’s contract of
creating jobs.
The previous forestry policies failed to reflect the value of the
resources, particularly the woodlands, and service provision was previously
limited to preserving closed canopy forests.

This Bill therefore seeks to redress these past imbalances. We are
rewriting history, and it is a long walk to freedom. We will be judged on
whether we achieve our mandate through the implementation of these
progressive policies.

It is imperative for us, as we pass these laws in this Parliament, to have
time to evaluate the impact these laws are having on society. If needs be,
we must repeal them, so let’s do so for the benefit of the country.

This move will enable people to participate in the economy they have been
denied participation in many years ago. This will also have a positive spin-
off for the country, as these communities will be producing entrepreneurs
in the mainstream economy. The establishment of a trust also releases the
officials to focus more on service delivery, rather than being busy on the
administration of the trust.

Both the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry and the Department of
Land Affairs will co-operate in making service delivery fast and efficient.
The Ingonyama Trust, which suffered as it did not have access to money and
only managed the land, will benefit by the introduction of this Bill.
In addressing the past imbalances and the legacy of apartheid, it is
imperative for us to encourage the structures that are dealing with land
restitution to be more democratic and transparent in their approach. The
institutions keeping finances of the beneficiaries must be accountable, and
the communities themselves must know how to deal with such structures. I
thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, hon member. I shall now
put the question. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. As the
decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall
first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present to cast their
provinces’ votes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province
wishing to make a declaration? None.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour of, against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo votes in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

MR Z S KOLWENI: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr Y GABRU: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                    (Consideration of Votes and Schedule)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Before I call the first speaker, I
would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the presence of the
Deputy Minister of Finance, the hon J Moleketi, who is in our midst this
afternoon as we deal with this important discussion and debate. You are
acknowledged, hon Deputy Minister.

Mr T S RALANE: Deputy Chair of Committees, Deputy Minister, I propose that
the House adopts the Adjustments Appropriation Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: That concludes the debate. Hon
members have been informed that there will be no questions asked of the
Minister or Deputy Minister. On the basis of that, I shall now put the
Votes in the order in which they appear on the Schedule to the Bill.

Vote No 1 - The Presidency - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, we do not have the privilege of the screens and the
lists of Votes. So would you please also name the Votes and not just the
numbers, if you can?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Certainly. Thanks for that. I think
the staff are busy addressing that problem, because we had an unexpected
disruption, an electrical disruption. So the staff are attending to that
accordingly.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, it is true. Not all of us have
the Schedule, but all the party Whips do have the Schedule. So there is no
party that can claim that they do not have the Schedule. Secondly, all
provincial Whips do have the Schedule.
I think we should just request the other members to bear with us for the
purpose of smooth sailing, in terms of this, because it is only a party
that can object. The party Whip is responsible, as a leader in that
particular party, and has been empowered with a copy as such. We hope
copies will be coming in the meantime. I see the hon Watson is seated next
to the hon Terblanche. I think, in the spirit that the people shall share –
although their party does not believe in that - we request that you learn
from the ANC and share.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, we will proceed with the
business of the day as if nothing had happened. We don’t have control over
the electrical disruptions and, I think, the issue of availability of these
papers should be addressed as we proceed. I think the explanation . . .

Mr A WATSON: May I just address you?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Are you interrupting my ruling?

Mr A WATSON: No, I’m not.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Take your seat first. Who should talk
first, you or me? I’m saying that we are going to proceed, because the
electrical disruptions were not of our creation, and we did not anticipate
them. The explanation by the Chief Whip is sufficient. Whilst we are
proceeding, the staff will circulate all these documents that will assist
members. You can make your point.

Mr A WATSON: My point was a simple request. We are used to the equipment
always being on, so we didn’t bring the lists with us. It is fair and well
to say that all the Whips have them - I also have one in my office - but I
asked, as a mere courtesy, that when, for instance, you say “Vote No 1”,
you also say what Vote No 1, namely the Presidency. I asked as a matter of
courtesy. I really don’t deserve to be chastised.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Your point is noted. Your point is
noted indeed. We will now proceed to Vote No 2.

Vote No 2 - Parliament - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 3 - Foreign Affairs - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Vote No 3 – is it agreed to? You are
not voting from the heart. This is a critical debate this afternoon.
Politically parties have taken positions. It is not my responsibility from
this Chair to respond to political parties, because on the list that I have
there are clear indications – recorded in writing – which parties are going
to object to which Votes. I think it is only fair that I must say when I
say, for instance, Vote No 5, to remind the parties. Everybody knows the
position his or her party is going to take on which particular Vote.

Vote No 4 - Home Affairs - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, we probably need to put our stance clearly. We
have indicated that we are not going to object to any Vote, but would make
a declaration - a blanket declaration - on all the Votes. I don’t know
whether we will have that opportunity at the end of the debate, or whether
we will have that opportunity at whatever time you would allow. That
declaration will encapsulate all the Votes. Thank you, Sir. Mrs Mchunu will
be doing that if that opportunity is given to the IFP.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: In terms of the order of proceedings,
hon Mzizi, your party is at liberty to make a declaration of vote on each
of the Votes if it so wishes.

Mr M A MZIZI: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Okay, no problem. I will give you an
opportunity for that.

Vote No 5 - Provincial and Local Government - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, whilst the sum of R351,7
million has been allocated in the Adjustments Appropriation Bill in respect
of provincial and local government transfers, no additional amount has been
allocated with regard to capacity-building in our local municipalities.
Millions of rands were spent in procuring the services of consultants by
the various municipalities, and very few skills were transferred to the
employees in the process.

More funding, including funding by the Department of Public Services and
Administration, must be provided to ensure that the necessary skills and
competencies are acquired by our municipalities through the provincial
governments.

The DA, however, supports the Vote on this occasion. I thank you.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, local government in this country has undergone,
and is still undergoing, transformation. In 1994 the glorious movement took
over 1 200 municipalities, which were racially based; the majority without
any tax base and therefore there was no income. They were dependent
entirely on their bosses. They were “baas boys” [“boss boys”];
unrepresentative.

We have now reduced them to 284, in terms of which the majority has a
revenue base; they are democratically elected; and politically and
administratively accountable to the people. We are the first to admit that
there are still challenges that exist in local government, as this sphere
of government is only close to five years old. Project Consolidate, which
is what has been raised by my colleague here, is there to ensure that
capacity is given to municipalities and that they are mobilised. I think
the Deputy President yesterday raised this very same issue.

At the same time, in terms of that capacity it has been agreed that there
is going to be mentorship to ensure that people are skilled, capacitated
and able to ensure that they deliver services that are efficient and cost-
effective.

The ANC supports this Vote. Thank you very much.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 6 - Public Works - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: In terms of my order of this I am
informed that the UIF is likely to make a reservation. I have gone through
the Rules and orders of this Council. There is no such thing as a
“reservation”, except a declaration of vote. However, I will afford the hon
member, given his experience in the House, the opportunity to explain
whether it is a declaration of vote or what. UIF? Oh, you support. You were
misrepresented here. Thank you, hon member.

Vote No 7 - Government Communication and Information System - put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 8 - National Treasury - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr A WATSON: Chair, may I just say that this declaration was going to be
given by Ms Robinson, our member on the finance committee, but she is not
feeling well. She obtained an urgent appointment with the doctor and left a
minute ago. This is our overall declaration, but we elected to do it under
this Vote, Vote No 8.

The total estimated expenditure of government tabled in the March Budget
amounted to R417,8 billion. The Bill provides for an extra R4,2 billion to
be allocated to the various Votes, but as a result of reduced debt costs of
R1,3 billion, a R2,5 billion reduction in the contingency reserve and a
projected saving and underspending of R2,5 billion, there is a net decrease
in the Appropriation Bill of R2,1 billion, resulting in the overall Budget
being reduced from R417,8 billion to R415,7 billion.

The DA supports the Bill overall as there is no further strain on the
fiscus or, ultimately, the taxpayer. However, comment on certain of the
individual Votes will be given when the House considers each of the Votes
and the schedule, as we have done with five Votes already.

I wish to state, however, that the DA is not happy with the process for the
introduction of the Adjustments Appropriation Bill. Adjustments are allowed
in circumstances set out in terms of section 30(2) of the Public Finance
Management Act. But the process does not allow either the Finance committee
or the relevant portfolio committee to interrogate either the savings and
underspendings, or indeed the adjustments and reallocations proposed in
this Bill, adequately enough. We will be calling for a review of the
process and, if need be, an amendment to the Public Finance Management Act.


[We support the Vote.]

Mnr D J BOTHA: Agb Voorsitter, agb Adjunkminister, die Nasionale Tesourie
is een van die weinige nasionale departmente wat tot dusver nie ’n
addisionele bedrag ontvang het in die aansuiwerings in netto bepalings nie.
Dis oorheersend as gevolg van die verminderde staatskoste in vergelyking
met ons oorspronklike Begroting in Februarie 2005.

Na beraming beloop die koste van ons staatskuld R1,276 miljard minder as
wat voorsien is in die Begroting. Die verminderde staatskuldkoste is nie ’n
afwyking nie, maar ’n resultaat wat gereeld waargeneem is die afgelope vyf
jaar. Dis ’n bewys dat die ANC-regering die land se ekonomie werklik kan
beheer en dat die DA moet inval by dié Begroting, en dat hulle nie hul eie
begrotings moet voorstel nie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr D J BOTHA: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, the National Treasury
is one of the few departments that has to date not received an additional
amount in the adjustment in net provisions. This is overwhelmingly as a
consequence of the decreased public costs in comparison with our original
Budget in February 2005.
According to estimates the cost of our public debt amounts to R1, 276
billion less than was provided for in the Budget. The decreased costs of
public debt are not a deviation, but a result that has been observed
regularly during the past five years. It is proof that ANC Government can
really control the country’s economy and that the DA should fit in with
this Budget, and that they should not propose their own budgets.]

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 9 – Public Enterprises – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 10 - Public Service and Administration – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 11 - Public Service Commission – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Votes No 12 - South African Management Development Institute; Vote No 13 -
Statistics South Africa; and Vote No 14 - Arts and Culture – put.
Votes agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.
Vote No 15 – Education – put.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Is there any declaration of vote –
DA? The DA withdraws its declaration on this Vote.


Declaration of vote:


Mr B J TOLO: As the ANC, Chair, we support, unreservedly, the
Department of Education. It is our considered view that this department has
delivered, and continues to deliver, sterling work in the field of
education. We call upon the department to soldier on, as they have the
support of the majority of the people of this country.

The Minister and his team must resist attempts by our detractors who are
nostalgic about the apartheid past. As the ANC, we say that with our
support you are destined to go from strength to strength. We support.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 16 – Health – put.

Declarations of vote:

Ms H LAMOELA: Chair, as the R127,6 million adjustment represents roll-overs
because of mismanagement, we really have no option but to vote for this
amount. This adjustment appropriation is a reflection of the utter chaos
the Department of Health wallows in, as it has once again received a
qualified audit report, reflecting zero control over revenue received, lack
of planning, unclaimed benefits, and the renting of unutilised buildings.

Despite the HIV/Aids pandemic killing a thousand people a day, R10 million
was spent on condoms that didn’t arrive. There was the return of R78
million from KZN, reflecting the failure of the hospital revitalisation
programme. Tenders are mishandled; unqualified staff simply forgot to
purchase software programmes; and unconditional grants were withheld from
two provinces - the North West and Mpumalanga - for failing to provide
business plans.

We therefore call on the Minister to, at the very least, assure Parliament
that as with global business best practice, there were substantial
penalties relating to, for example, the nondelivery of R10 million worth of
condoms, and that this delay will not push the crippling HIV infection rate
in this country still higher.

The DA has no option but to vote for this enormous, unutilised amount of
R128 million, because the people need it even if the Department of Health
is incapable of handling it. I thank you.

Ms J M MASILO: Chairperson, we visited more than six provinces as a
committee. We saw progress and good governance in terms of health. As the
ANC we do support Vote No 16 – Health - especially in terms of the
following: firstly, the hospital revitalisation programme, eg in the
Northern Cape - Colesberg Hospital; in the Free State - the Boitumelo
Hospital; in Gauteng - the Pretoria Academic Hospital; in the North West -
the Swartruggens Hospital, to mention just a few. These hospitals now look
like private hospitals even though they are public hospitals. Well done,
Health Department.

The second aspect is the building of new clinics and hospitals of high
standards that are also user-friendly to people with disabilities. The
third aspect is that in terms of the programmes on HIV and Aids, community
health workers and health caregivers are inplace. The fourth aspect is to
do with fighting malaria, TB and diabetes, and for a healthy lifestyle for
all South Africans. I thank you.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 17 – Labour – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 18 - Social Development – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 19 - Sport and Recreation South Africa – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.
Vote No 20 – Correctional Services – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 21 – Defence – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 22 - Independent Complaints Directorate – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 23 - Justice and Constitutional Development – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 24 - Safety and Security – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 25 – Agriculture – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 26 – Communications – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 27 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 28 – Housing – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.
Vote No 29 - Land Affairs – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 30 - Minerals and Energy – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 31 - Science and Technology – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 32 - Trade and Industry – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 33 – Transport – put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 34 - Water Affairs and Forestry – put.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Is there any objection to the Vote?
There is no objection to the Vote, so it is agreed to. Is there any
declaration of vote?

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Yes, the IFP supports . . .

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, you don’t just say “yes”
and jump up. I must recognise you and order you to stand up. You are now
given the opportunity. [Laughter.]

Declaration of vote:


Mrs J N VILAKAZI: The IFP supports the Bill, but would like to urge all
members to go out there and be of assistance to communities in oversight
work. Underspending in roll-overs in populations that are poverty-stricken
and hungry does not make us a responsible and caring government. I thank
you, Mr Chair.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Schedule be agreed to.

Schedule agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the Constitution.

                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                     REVENUE LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Hon Chairperson, my colleagues and special delegates, allow
me to take you through the Revenue Laws Amendment Bills.

The Revenue Laws Amendment Bill of 2005 and the Revenue Laws Second
Amendment Bill of 2005 contain the remaining tax proposals, as announced in
the Budget. The first Revenue Laws Amendment Bill refers to items that must
be dealt with by way of money Bills, while the Revenue Laws Second
Amendment Bill refers to items relating to the administration of the tax
regime.

The tax changes dealt with in the two Bills include a variety of matters,
such as changes to the tax treatment of medical scheme contributions;
medical expenses of site-employer-provided medical services; the
withholding of tax on foreign visiting entertainers and sportspersons;
changes to the tax treatment of public-benefit organisations; the extension
of the urban development zone incentives; measures to facilitate corporate
formation and corporate restructuring; changes to the collection of the
Road Accident Fund levy; and a number of changes to the VAT Act and other
tax changes.

In the interests of time, I was requested to trim my speech. For that
reason, I would recommend that this House accept the Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                       INTERGOVERMENTAL FISCAL REVIEW

                          (Consideration of Report)

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, it is unfortunate that the provinces are not
here to debate this report, because this is a very comprehensive report of
the provincial budgets and the expenditure of the provinces. I hope that
next time they will be able to participate in this debate.

The provincial budgets and the expenditure review not only provide a
comprehensive set of data on the provincial budgets and expenditure, but,
more importantly, they include an analysis of the trends in service
delivery.

The new democratic order of the Republic of South Africa is determined to
give legitimacy to the claims of the Freedom Charter. Unremitting
monitoring of our delivery on the service front is crucial, and should
perhaps be robust and obligatory.

The review currently before the NCOP is an inescapable tool or an
instrument essential for us to conduct our oversight responsibilities as
the elected public representatives. This year’s review was published two
months before the release of the 2005 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement,
that is the forward estimates for the next two financial years.

The current review does not include details for local government finances.
A separate publication on local government finances and service delivery
trends will be released early next year. Although the intergovernmental
relations in this country are still nascent, the Public Finance Management
Act and the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act have
improved not only governance, but also the financial management of the
public sector.

The consequences are significantly better budget planning and markedly more
effective control of expenditure. This review takes us unquestionably to
the next rung of the ladder towards good governance.

For the very first time, the National Treasury and the presiding officers
of the NCOP hosted a workshop on the Intergovernmental Fiscal Review in mid-
September this year. Members of the NCOP and standing committee members
from the provinces received a preview of the document. The Select Committee
on Finance, in addition, convened public hearings over four days in mid-
October.

The 2005 review document demonstrates that the number of beneficiaries for
old age pensions has increased significantly. The Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-
Natal spent relatively more on old age pensions than other provinces.

During the public hearings, we were repeatedly informed that there was a
growing migration of young people away from the Eastern Cape to the Western
Cape. When citizens reach old age, they usually return to the province of
their birth. What is difficult to fathom is why the number of beneficiaries
of old age pensions grows across all provinces. We can understand that the
number of beneficiaries in the Eastern Cape would increase. The crucial
point is why the number of beneficiaries of old age pensions in provinces
receiving young people increases as well.
Of particular concern to the Select Committee on Finance was the period in
which the data was provided in the 2005 review. The review provides us with
data demonstrating the number of learners in our schools, the number of
schools and classes across provinces and, more importantly, the ratio of
learner to educator and the ratio of learners to schools.

The difficulty we are faced with is that this numerical data referred to
2002. This means that the data is three years old. Therefore, the question
is: How do you plan strategically with outdated data? The issue for the
committee is that the gathering of data is not difficult, and little
explanation is forwarded for the outdatedness of the data.

Although the national Department of Education provided data for 2003 during
the public hearings, the newly released figures still do not address . . .

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, I’m afraid your time has
expired.

Debate concluded.


THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’
votes. Are all delegations heads present? Yes.

In terms of Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to make
their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration of vote? No.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, siyavuma. [We support.] However, I have a
question, because I thought that I had 10 minutes . . . [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: You are out of order, hon member.
Gauteng supports. KwaZulu-Natal?

Ms A N T MCHUNU: KwaZulu-Natal steun. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted. [Applause.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, can I take your point of
order?

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, I was not informed that my time was cut down to
the number of minutes . . .

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, you are out of order. It
is written. That thing is functioning. I actually even gave you 12 seconds
after your time had expired. I think your point of order is quite unfair
and not just out of order.

I cut the hon Gamede’s time and that of quite a number of speakers. I think
that rule must apply to everybody. There should be no exception to the
rule, so you are quite out of order.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: We did announce here that times were going
to be cut in half. But we must commend the member because he made history
by standing at the podium while the process was continuing. [Laughter.]

                     MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT

                          (Consideration of Report)
Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Hon Chairperson, hon members, as we are aware the
Minister of Finance presented the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement to
Parliament and the nation on 25 October. Our role as the Joint Budget
Committee is to consider this report and statement, conduct hearings on the
MTEF that fall within our mandate and report to this House. Our National
Assembly component dealt with such a report yesterday.

We would therefore like to present a concise report as to how we went about
implementing the mandate that was put to us by this House. Departments
invited to the hearings were convened in the relevant clusters. This had
the added benefit of fostering co-operation and co-ordination among the
departments falling within the same cluster.

We noticed remarkable and cordial relations rather than competition among
the departments. We hasten to add, though, that there is still work to be
done in this regard. The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement was not
considered in isolation. We also considered the recent report on the
provincial expenditures and the monthly report by the National Treasury on
expenditure by departments.

The major focus of deliberations was the accelerated and shared growth,
which yielded the gross fiscal allocations. As our collective efforts at
instilling fiscal discipline in all facets of government mature and
consolidate, the possibility of any departmental official getting away with
less information on what they do in implementing the budget becomes more
and more remote.

Indeed, oversight can be made more effective and exciting at the same time
when more focus falls on the utilisation of resources to speed up service
delivery and sustainable development to bolster our precious democracy. Our
elaborate report, as printed in the ATC of the 14th, reflects our action
and report to this honourable House, as called upon by the resolution of
the same House.

May I reflect on some of the recommendations we made in the report. For
your attention, hon members, where the word “Parliament” appears, it
refers, in the recommendations, to the engines that drive this institution
– Parliament - the committees. We would therefore implore hon members to
internalise these recommendations, because they call for action and report-
backs as per the resolution of this House.

While all the recommendations remain relevant, one was to call upon our
committees to exercise oversight on the development nodes. We contend that
this House and its committees have a particular role to play in the
development nodes since this is the site where intergovernmental relations,
especially fiscal relations, can be seen at play. We commend the report as
it is appeared in the ATC for your careful consideration, hon members.

I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question. The question
is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in term of
section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all the
delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes.
Are all delegation heads present? They are.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour of, against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke a rona. [North West supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr Y GABRU: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT (OECD) CONVENTION ON
   COMBATING BRIBERY OF FOREIGN PUBLIC OFFICALS IN INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
                                TRANSACTIONS

                          (Consideration of Report)

Mr S SHICEKA: Chair of Committees, I’m standing in front of you today to
request this august House to assent to the country becoming a signatory to
the Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in
International Business Transactions.

The aim of this convention, really, is to criminalise the bribery of
foreign officials by businesses in order to gain commercial advantage. The
way to do this is to ensure that domestic laws that are relevant and that
govern all aspects of the offence will be applicable.

South Africa is in a fortunate position in that it already meets the
requirements of the convention. It has in place very progressive
anticorruption legislation, such as the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt
Activities Act passed in 2004, the anti-money-laundering regime through the
Prevention of Organised Crime Act of 1998 and the Financial Intelligence
Centre Act of 2001.

South Africa was invited by the Secretary-General of the Organisation of
Economic Co-operation and Development, owing to its economic, political and
social and leading position on the continent. The world sees South Africa
as the gateway to Africa.

The benefits of our being party to this convention are manifold. South
Africa will be able to tap into the OECD’s range of expertise, information
and experience. Also, there will be opportunities for the training of our
government and public officials.

In conclusion, our ratification of this convention further strengthens our
fight against corruption. It is yet another weapon for South Africa,
standing side by side with the international community, to stamp out the
demon of corruption.

We are on the offensive in terms of dealing harshly and mercilessly with
those who are found guilty of corruption. It cannot be business as usual.
Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, I shall now put the question.
The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with
in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber. Are all delegation heads
present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order, per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they
vote in favour of, against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal a e thekga. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr Y GABRU: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All provinces have voted in favour of the
report. I therefore declare the report adopted.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.
              NOTICE ON APPROVAL OF REMUNERATION OF MAGISTRATES

                          (Consideration of Report)

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, we are putting this matter to rest once
and for all. Let me just say that the committee, after receiving the
recommendations from the independent commission, headed by the honourable
Deputy Chief Justice, sat down and looked at the contents of the
recommendations.

When looking into the recommendations, as the committee playing our
oversight role, we wanted to make sure who was going to fund the programme.
This is because as the recommendations stood, it was not clear who was
going to fund the programme.

Being a progressive committee, we deemed it fit and proper to invite the
two departments relevant to this particular programme, that is Finance and
Justice and Constitutional Development, to a public hearing to hear their
inputs. For example, Justice, which is supposed to look after magistrates,
didn’t have budgets for that in their programme. As you are aware, our
budget system in this country has a three-year cycle.

We went back to Treasury, that is Finance, to check whether there was any
funding for this particular programme. There was no such thing in their
line functioning. Those two departments agreed and said to the Select
Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs:
“We want to thank you because we did not detect this. Because of what you
have done as a committee, we are now going to sit down as the two
departments to see who is going to fund this particular project.”

I am proud to say, having considered our concerns as a committee, the two
departments agreed that the Department of Finance, that is Treasury, was
going to make funds available to the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development for it in turn to pay our magistrates.

If we had not done that as a committee, what would have happened is that
this would have been a once-off payment by Justice. But what we have done
as a committee means that those recommendations by the commission will now
be effective from April up to whenever.

I therefore want to say to our magistrates: This ANC democratic government
will look after you. We are not in any way going to dump you. We have done
what we have done simply because we want to make sure that your interests
are taken care of.

On that note, from now onwards the remuneration packages of our magistrates
are going to be implemented. Let me say thank you to the committee, because
they really played their oversight role.
Chairperson, I’d be failing in my duty if I do not thank the hon Nyanda,
the hon Ntuli, the hon Darryl Worth, the hon Le Roux, the hon Fielding, the
hon Sicelo Shiceka, the hon Moseki and yours truly for the role we played
in making sure that our magistrates get what they deserve.

On that note, I say to our magistrates: Go do your jobs. This government
loves you. We support this. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question. The question
is that the report be adopted. And as the decision is dealt with in terms
of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all
delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes.
Are all delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour of, against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Gauteng a e thekga. [Gauteng supports]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal a e thekga. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo a e thekga. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?
Ms M P THEMBA: Ke a rona. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEE: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke wa rona. [North West supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr Y GABRU: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I don’t have any appetite for
breaking my record of being progressive, lest I be left standing on that
podium like Mr Sogoni.


                PROPOSED NEW SALARY SCALES FOR THE MAGISTRACY


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I want to Table the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

  That the Council –

  (1) noting that  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
        Affairs and the Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and  Constitutional
        Development held joint hearings on 18 October  2005  to  inter  alia
        enquire into the details of the implications and the approval of the
        proposed new salary scales for the magistracy;


  (2) pending the finalisation of the  recommendations  emanating  from  the
        hearings and arising from the interim report of the Select Committee
        on Security and Constitutional Affairs, resolves as follows:


        (a) in terms of section 12(3)(b)(i) of the  Magistrates  Act  90  of
              1993, approves the draft notice and schedule of the President
              tabled in Parliament on 7 September 2005;


        (b) that the costs for  the  implementation  of  the  motor  vehicle
              allowances  for  senior  magistrates   and   magistrates   be
              allocated to the Justice Vote in terms of  section  213(2)(b)
              of the Constitution of the Republic  of  South  Africa,  read
              with Section 12(4) of the Magistrates Act 90 of 1993; and


        (c) that the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
              table its final report in the Council before the end  of  the
              year detailing the outcomes and recommendations  in  relation
              to legislative and procedural  matters  in  relation  to  the
              determination of salary levels for magistrates;  the  absence
              of a budgetary allocation to defray the  proposed  new  motor
              vehicle allowances for senior  magistrates  and  magistrates;
              the  development  of  policy  measures  to  deal   with   the
              implications arising from the  extension  of  motor  vehicles
              allowances to senior  magistrates  and  magistrates  and  any
              other matter relevant to or emanating from the said hearings.


Secondly, I would like to say that there will be an amendment to section
2(a), where it says “In terms of section 12(3)(a)”, we amend the (a) to
(b), so that it reads “Section 12(3)(b)(i)”.

Thirdly, I request this House to adopt this resolution so that I can put
this matter on the back burner. Let me spend some sleepless nights on other
issues, not this one. Thank you very much.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: As there is no speakers’ list, I shall now
put the question. The question is that the motion be agreed to. As the
decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall
first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to
cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present in the
Chamber? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity
make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.

Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour of, against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: steun. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal is in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke a rona. [North West supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr Y GABRU: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the motion agreed to.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 MOVING OF SPECIAL PENSIONS AMENDMENT BILL AND AUDITING PROFESSION BILL FROM
             “FURTHER BUSINESS” ON ORDER PAPER TO ABOVE THE LINE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, honourable House, I move
without notice:

That the consideration of the Special Pensions Amendment Bill, B28B of
2005, and the Consideration of the Auditing Profession Bill, B31B of 2005,
which appear under “Further Business” on today’s Order Paper be moved above
the line and be dealt with today as Orders 12 and 13 respectively.

I should also confirm to your hon good self that we have consulted with the
Whips, and we are in agreement that we have no reason to halt the
dispensing of the special pensions to those war veterans who are waiting
eagerly to enjoy their festive season with these funds. The same applies to
the auditing profession, because we want good governance and good auditing.
Thank you.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                       SPECIAL PENSIONS AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I call on the hon Sogoni to speak for five
minutes. Five minutes! [Interjections.]

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, I’ve become wiser. The Special Pensions
Amendment Bill, as the Chief Whip indicated, intends to amend the Special
Pensions Act, Act 69 of 1996. We must thank our government for heeding the
cries of many of our suffering former freedom fighters and the families of
those who have passed on.

The specifics of the Special Pensions Amendment Bill are the following.
Firstly, it provides for the lapsing of the provisions for special pensions
and the survivors’ lump sums on 31 December 2006. This means that the
consideration of new applications for pensions and survivors’ lump sums,
after this date, will no longer be possible. However, those applications in
the process will still be finalised.

Secondly, the extension of certain benefits, such as monthly pensions for
surviving spouses or orphans on the death of the pensioner, will apply
retrospectively from 1 December 1996.

In the interests of time this time, I propose the adoption of this report.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.


                          AUDITING PROFESSION BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Chairperson, the current Bill will repeal the Public
Accountants’ and Auditors’ Board Act, Act 80 of 1991. The proposed Bill
improves the integrity of South Africa’s financial sector and financial
reporting by ensuring that there is effective oversight with regard to the
auditing profession as a whole.

The Bill provides for the following: the establishment of the independent
regulatory board of auditors; the education, training and professional
development of registered auditors; the accreditation of professional
bodies; the registration of auditors; and the regulation of the conduct of
registered auditors.

On behalf of the Select Committee on Finance, I appeal to this House to
endorse the Auditing Profession Bill. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 18:28.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 16 November 2005:


         (i)     Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of
              Certain Laws Bill [B 25D – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76)

     (2)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 16 November
         2005:


         (i)     Forestry Laws Amendment Bill [B 24B – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 76)
         (ii)    Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 37 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 77)
         (iii)   Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 77)
         (iv)    Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)
         (v)     Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 28B – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)
         (vi)    Auditing Profession Bill [B 31B – 2005] (National Assembly
              – sec 75)


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


 1. The Minister of Labour

    (a)     Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Forest  Industries
         Education and  Training  Authority  for  2004-2005,  including  the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
         2005 [RP 90-2005].


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Deployment of
   SANDF, dated 16 November 2005:

    The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the letters
    from the President on the deployment of the SANDF to areas outside the
    borders of the country, referred to the Committee, reports that it has
    concluded its deliberations thereon.



National Council of Provinces


1. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Adjustment
 Appropriation Bill [B 21 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 77), dated 16
 November 2005:
    The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of the
    Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 21 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
    77), referred to it, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
    thereon.


2. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Revenue Laws Amendment
 Bill [B 40 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 77), dated 16 November 2005:


    The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of the
    Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 77),
    referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

3. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Revenue Laws Second
   Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2005]  (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 16
   November 2005:

    The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
    Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2005] (National Assembly –
    sec 75), referred to it, reports the Bill without proposed amendments.

 4. Report of the Select Committee on  Land  and  Environmental  Affairs  on
   their study Tour to India, dated 6th August 2005, dated 14 November 2005:

The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having undertaken  a
Study Tour to India, reports as follows:
A. Introduction

In its meeting held on 7th June 2005, the Committee agreed  to  undertake  a
study tour to India from 6th  –  12th  August,  to  meet  and  discuss  with
relevant stakeholders  issues  relating  to  Agriculture;  Aquaculture;  Job
Creation and Poverty Alleviation.

1. Delegation

A multi-party delegation, under the leadership of  the  Chairperson,  Rev  P
Moatshe (ANC) included Mr RJ Tau (ANC); Mr CJ Van Rooyen (ANC); Mr A  Watson
(DA); Mr F Adams (NNP); Ms BN Dlulane (ANC); Dr F Khan (Researcher)  and  Mr
AA Bawa (Committee Secretary).

2. Objectives of the visit

The objective of the visit was to meet some of the various  stakeholders  to
discuss the following issues:

 ▪ Agricultural and aquaculture initiatives including policies
 ▪ Sustainable and tourism development
    ▪ Government’s institutional and  policy  measures  in  support  of  job
      creation and poverty alleviation
      ▪ Selection of projects, program design,  management,  and  evaluation
        mechanisms, and
 ▪ Community participation and  involvement  and  multi-sectoral  approaches
   to programmes

B. Overview of the report

The report sets out the findings  of  the  delegation  as  it  emerged  from
presentation by  the  various  officials  and  on  site  visits  to  various
Aquaculture farms. It provides an analysis of issues and insight to  a  host
of areas  such  as,  Agriculture;  Aquaculture;  Job  Creation  and  Poverty
Alleviation.

C. Overview of Study tour

1. Background of Indian economy

The performance of the Indian economy was good during 2003-2004 as GDP  grew
at  8.2%  and  inflation  contained  below  7%  during  that  year.  On  the
international front India’s total global trade touched US$ 112  billion  and
foreign exchange reserves increased to US$ 1444 billion as at May 2005.

The fundamentals of the Indian economy are sound as India’s current  account
deficit is less than 1%. The Planning Commission, Government  of  India  has
estimated a GDP growth at 8%, savings rate at 26%  and  investment  rate  at
28% during the period between 2004 – 2008.

1.1 South African Prospects

Given the trend and government policy,  it  is  estimated  that  the  Indian
economy would  grow  at  6%,  benefiting  South  African  companies  in  the
following areas:

   1. Growth in manufacturing will ensure surge in imports of key industrial
      inputs such as capital  equipment,  minerals,  technology,  steel  and
      other ferrous and non – ferrous metals from SA.
   2. Growth  in  electricity,  ceramics,  cement  will  further  accentuate
      imports of coal from SA.
   3. Better performance in mining and querying will improve demand  for  SA
      mining technology, consultancy services and mining machinery in India.
   4. Execution of performance in infrastructure projects sectors  including
      electricity, water and road construction will create opportunities for
      SA companies in doing business in India.
   5. Overall performance of the Indian economy will also create demand  for
      SA products such as fruits; wines and other alcoholic beverages.
   6. Growth of agriculture and favorable monsoon will lead to  increase  in
      fertilizer imports from SA.
   7. India is quite advanced in  biotechnology  including  biomedicine  and
      bioinformatics, where SA would gain from the Indian experience through
      joint ventures and training.
   8. Intensify campaign for attracting power intensive industries to SA due
      to low cost of power, eg TATA steel Ltd.
   9. Capacity building regarding technical  /  vocational  skills  such  as
      jewellery making / design, which are labour  intensive  industries  to
      absorb the abundant labour in SA.
  10. A companies being encouraged to participate in bidding for tenders  in
      India, such as security equipment; power,  mining  and  infrastructure
      projects.
  11. The ultimate aim is to sign a Federal Trade  Agreement  (FTA)  between
      South African Customs Union (SACU) and India.

1.2 South Africa India trade

Ever since the diplomatic relations was established between India and SA in
1993, trade has grown rapidly. India’s imports are mainly capital
equipment, crude oil; auto components; chemicals, gold, silver and mineral
fuels. South Africa could meet some of India’s import requirements.

Exports from SA to India are expected to grow in future in view of India’s
commitment in lowering import duties further which was reflected in the
budget presented in the Indian Parliament and the trade policy declared on
the 8th April 2005.

Some of the large as well as medium enterprisers of India are exploring
investment opportunities in SA, just as a number of leading SA businesses
such as SAB Miller; De Beers; Denel and Reutech have set up operation in
India.

2. Aquaculture

Definition: It is the domestic harvesting of fish and other species living
in water.

Aquaculture comprises a whole range of users, systems, practices and
species, operating through a continuum ranging from backyard household
ponds to large-scale farms. Shrimp aquaculture in its traditional form has
been an important source of food and livelihood for coastal people.

During the past two decades, aquaculture in India has become the fastest
growing food-producing sector, and is an increasingly important contributor
to national economic development, global food supply, food security and
nutrition.

No other species is commercially cultured in India, not even marine fishes.
The Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Aquaculture (RGCA) was set up by the Government
of India to develop commercial culture technologies for species that
command good market potential, particularly marine fishes.  In this regard,
the RGCA has, for the first time in India, initiated projects for
developing marine fish culture in India.
As a first step, RGCA established a commercial hatchery for the production
of seabass seeds in India by availing marginal technical advice from the
Central Institute of Brackish water Aquaculture (ICAR).

The lack of regulation governing the establishment of shrimp farms, led in
some places to improper sitting, overcrowding, changes in land use pattern,
and conversion of other habitats. The basic objectives of the programme
were the optimum utilisation of coastal saline areas, and for the provision
of employment and livelihood security to the more vulnerable sections of
the community.

2.1 Development of Fresh Water Aquaculture

The development of Fresh Water Aquaculture is  one  of  the  most  important
production orientated programmes implemented by the States  as  a  Centrally
Sponsored Scheme through the Fish Farmers Development Agencies (FFDAs).

During 2000 – 2001, about 36 394 hectare (ha)  of  water  area  was  brought
under scientific  fish  farming  through  FFDAs.  Government  agencies  have
trained 17 485 fish farmers in improved practices of fish  farming  and  the
scheme has benefited about 46 988 people.

In order to increase fish production and  promote  Aquaculture,  four  pilot
projects were introduced, namely:

 ▪ Development of Fisheries and Aquaculture
 ▪ Integrated Development of Inland Capture Fisheries Resources
 ▪ Development of Waterlogged Areas into Aquaculture Estates and
 ▪ Utilisation of Inland Saline and Soil Aquaculture

2.2 Development of Integrated Coastal Aquaculture

The main objective of this scheme is to utilize the country’s vast  brackish
water land for fish / shrimp culture as to  increase  the  foreign  exchange
earnings  through  increased  shrimp  production,  generation  of   adequate
employment opportunities and to increase the income of farmers.

2.3 Onsite Visits (KOLKATA)

2.3.1. The STATE FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LIMITED
     (S.F.D.C), operating as
     NALBAN FISHERIES PROJECT: SEWAGE FED PISCICULTURE FARM

2.3.1.1 History and Objectives

The S.F.D.C was incorporated in March 1966  as  a  wholly  owned  Government
Company situated in the State of West Bengal, India, also  known  as  Nalban
Fisheries  Project.  It  is  owned  and  managed  by  the  State   Fisheries
Development Corporation Limited and comprises of 174 ha of land,  consisting
of 3 stocking tanks (164 ha) and 9 rearing tanks (10 ha).

It was previously owned by private parties and in  1979-80  handed  over  by
the Government of West Bengal to the SFDC for  pisciculture.  The  area  was
developed into a viable sewage fed  fishery  between  1979–1983,  whereafter
the commercial pisciculture project started between 1983-84  increasing  the
cultural area from 49 ha to 174 ha.
The source of the sewage water is the water canal of the Calcutta  Municipal
Corporation, the flow of sewage water intake and out flow  of  excess  water
from the project is regulated by 3 inlets and 3  outlets  respectively.  The
supply of sewage water to the project is normally received 3  days  a  week,
which serves as an ecological way of recycling organic waste.

The objectives of the S.F.D.C are as follows:

     1. Aiding; promoting; scientifically exploiting  fisheries  and  other
        aquatic products in West Bengal and India.
     2. Purchasing; leasing or taking over rights over tanks; rivers; lakes
        reservoirs and fresh / salt water bheries.
     3. Carrying  on  business  of  fisheries  development;  any  ancillary
        business and sale / export of fish and other byproducts.
     4. Purchasing; leasing; hiring of boats; ships and fishing equipment.
     5. Setting up cold storage; ice making factory  and  factory  for  the
        extraction / manufacture of fish bye products  as  well  as  frozen
        fish products.

2.3.1.2 Organisational Setup

The management of SFDC is vested in a Board of Directors with  the  Minister
of Fisheries, Government of West Bengal as Chairman. As  at  31st  March  04
all 3 directors were nominated by the State Government,  of  which  one  was
the President of SFDC Employees Union, assisted by a team  of  officers  and
technical experts.

2.3.1.3 Staff Component
The project has a staff component of a 152 people of which  11  are  female,
with approximately  65  people  daily  acting  as  share  catches  or  daily
labourers.

2.3.1.4 Species Cultured

The following are species cultured: Indian Major  Carp  (IMC):  Catla;  Rahu
and Mrigel; Common Carp: Cyprinus; Exotic Carp: Silver Carp and Grass  Carp;
Air breathing  species:  Magur;  Singhi  and  Koi;  Tilapia:  Mozambica  and
Nilotica

2.3.1.5 Stocking Density

The Nalban  Fisheries  Project  is  currently  breeding  35  000  –  40  000
fingerlings per hectare per annum.

2.3.1.6 Harvesting of Fish

There is a daily  harvesting  by  one  departmental  team  of  16  permanent
workers and also a daily harvesting by 4 parties of share catches  of  60  /
65 men who get a cash commission of 2 rupees a kilogram.

2.3.1.7 Marketing

Besides that which is consumed locally, the bulk of the fresh fish  is  sold
through fish auction centre’s.

2.3.1.8 Other activities

A boating facility has been established in the Nalban Fisheries  Project  as
a source of recreation for the city  people,  this  activity  brings  in  an
additional source of revenue for the Corporation.

2.3.1.9 Fish Production

The Nalban Fisheries Project has since 2002 produced  the  following  amount
(Metric tons):

 ▪ 2002 / 2003 – 522 Metric Tons
 ▪ 2003 / 2004 – 482 Metric Tons
 ▪ 2004 / 2005 – 588 Metric Tons

2.3.2 MUDIALY FISHERMEN’S CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY LTD (MFCS)

    NATURE PARK


2.3.2.1 History and Vision

In  November  1961  the  Fishermen’s  Co-Operative  Society  named   Mudialy
Fishermen’s Co-Operative Society Ltd was registered and got a water area  on
license from the Culcutta Port  Commissioner,  who  retained  the  right  to
reclaim any portion for development or any other purpose. The Calcutta  Port
Trust (CPT) exercised this right in 1988 when the  water  area  was  reduced
from 250 ha to only 70 ha.

The MFCS has also built this into a “NATURE PARK”  comprising  the  greenery
of water bodies, enclosures for Deer; Rabbits; Peacocks and also attracts  a
variety of migratory and local birds because of the large  number  of  trees
planted there.

The  MFCS  manages  an  Angan-Wari  school  under   the   integrated   child
development scheme and is responsible for the  education;  health  care  and
nutrition for nearly 50 children of the community.  It  has  also  opened  a
consumer store to cater for the needs, such as clothes and food  at  a  fair
price and to extend good service to the local community.

The vision of the MFCS is to:
    ▪ Further develop the present model with  new  scientific  knowledge  in
      to an exemplary demonstration centre on sewage fed fishery.
    ▪ Set up around 60 to 80 aquariums  for  both  fresh  water  and  marine
      ornamental fish for educational and recreational purposes.
 ▪ Undertake the construction of a turtle hatchery farm.
 ▪ Further extend the social forestry and horticultural  projects  involving
   medicinal plants.
 ▪ Improve the current water testing laboratory and  build  a  library  with
   computer facilities.
 ▪ Set up an adult education camp
   ▪ Conduct regular interaction with college and  universities  to  improve
     the understanding of sewage fed fresh water eco-systems.

The central theme / aim of the co-operative is  the  production  of  quality
fish using industrial and  domestic  waste  water.  The  activities  of  the
society evolves around 5 themes, namely:
     ▪ Strengthening the economy
     ▪ Improving solidarity with the local population
     ▪  Preserving  biodiversity  through  sustainable  development  of  the
       wetlands
     ▪ Developing an exemplary ecotourism site
     ▪ Develop the “NATURE PARK” as a demonstration  centre  for  integrated
       sewage fed fishery

2.3.2.2 Treatment of industrial and domestic waste water

The average daily loading  of  sewage  water  is  approximately  23  million
liters, of which 70% is from industries and 30%  domestic  sewage  which  is
passed through 6 ponds  called  anaerobic  tanks,  where  water  is  treated
manually using liming or biochemical’s.  Water  hyacinth  are  usually  kept
near the anaerobic tanks to facilitate absorption of the oil grease  in  the
effluent,  these  tanks  are  often  dug  in  order  to  reduce  the  sludge
deposition. The second tank where water flows into is  the  breeding  ground
for exotic fish which can survive harsh conditions, include omnivorous  fish
like Tilapia; Nylotica and air breathing fish like Singi; Magur and Koi.

The water is then allowed to flow through the other ponds further  improving
water quality, permitting better utilization of the recycled  nutrients  and
mineral contents of the sewage in fish culture before  being  released  back
into the canal system.

2.3.2.3 Species Cultured

The following are species cultured: Indian Major Carp: Catla; Rohu;  Mrigala
and Bata; Exotic Carp: Common Carp; Tilapia; Silver  Carp;  Grass  Carp  and
Nilotica.

2.3.2.4 Fish Production

The MFCS has since 2001 produced the following amount (Metric Tons)

 ▪ 2001 / 2002 – 112.4 Metric Tons
 ▪ 2002 / 2003 – 76.2 Metric Tons
 ▪ 2003 / 2004 – 126.86 Metric Tons
 ▪ 2004 / 2005 – 164.26 Metric Tons

3. Poverty Alleviation

The government of India’s  poverty  alleviation  programme  can  be  broadly
classified under the following categories:

3.1 Self Employment Programmes

Self employment programmes were introduced at a national level in  the  late
1970’s  and  were  designed  to  provide  skills,  subsidised   credit   and
infrastructure support to small farmers and agricultural labourers  so  that
they could find new sources of income.  In  1999  several  self  –  employed
programmes were integrated into  the  Swarnajayanti  Gram  Swarojgar  Yojana
(SGSY) programme.

The key aim of the SGSY programme is  that  it  does  not  seek  to  promote
individual economic activities, but rather seeks  to  promote  self  –  help
groups that are trained in specific skills so that they can formulate micro-
enterprise proposals.  Such  projects  are  based  on  activities  that  are
identified for each block on  the  basis  of  local  resources,  skills  and
markets, which are supported by bank credit and government subsidies.

3.2 Wage Employment Programmes

The first major wage employment programme was introduced in  the  1960’s  to
provide employment to the rural  unemployed  particularly  during  the  lean
agricultural season. The objective of the scheme is  to  provide  additional
wage employment with food security in rural areas  where  beneficiaries  are
temporarily employed to  build  community  assets  and  infrastructure.  The
central and state government shares the cost of the scheme,  which  includes
the distribution of food grain. In 2002,  the  central  government  released
around 4 million tones of food grain under this scheme.

3.3 Area Development Programmes

This  type  of  programme  was  introduced  in   the   1970’s   to   prevent
environmental degradation and  provide  employment  to  the  poor  in  these
regions. In the  mid  90’s,  the  environment  management  aspect  of  these
programmes was strengthened by the  introduction  of  watershed  development
programmes.

Later a scheme was developed to tackle the problem  of  extreme  deprivation
in  rural  parts  of  the  country,  with  the  aim  of  promoting   focused
development programmes for rural areas that would  help  reduce  imbalances,
speed up development and help rural areas overcome poverty.

3.4 Social Security Programme

The Social security programme was  launched  at  a  national  level  in  the
1980’s together with an old age pension scheme, namely:

    ▪ National Old Age Pension Scheme (NOAPS), which provides a  pension  to
      people above the age of 65 with  no  source  of  income  or  financial
      support.
    ▪ National Family Benefit  Scheme,  which  provides  10  000  rupees  to
      families living below the poverty line when their main earning  member
      dies.
    ▪ National Maternity  Benefit  Scheme,  which  provides  500  rupees  to
      pregnant women of families living below the poverty line.
    ▪  Rural  Group  Insurance  Scheme,  which  provides  a   maximum   life
      insurance of 5000 rupees covering the main earning members of families
      earning below the poverty line.

3.5 Food for Work Programme

An important element of India’s food security regime has been the  Food  for
Work (FFW) programme, which provides  poor  people  with  food  –  typically
foodgrains  –  during  periods  of  unemployment  resulting  from   external
calamities such as drought,  floods  and  earthquakes.  This  programme  was
started in 2000/01 as a component of the Employment Assurance Scheme (EAS).

FFW is one example (in many countries, an  important  one)  of  transferring
public resources to identifiable groups of poor people  who  are  vulnerable
to crisis or chronic disadvantage of one kind or  another.  It  does  so  by
offering able-bodied people food in exchange for unskilled labour in  public
works.

The basic principle of FFW is to provide employment to the poor during  hard
times, to create community assets through labour-intensive work and  to  pay
the labourers in foodgrains or other  food  items.  FFW  therefore  aims  to
create win-win  situations  all  round  and  has  been  popular  among  poor
countries worldwide.

FFW is perceived as gender-neutral or even pro-women  because  women  within
the household are more likely to have control over the food received.

3.6 Special Programme for the Informal Sector – National  Policy  on  Street
Vendors
The National policy on Urban Street Vendors which was announced in 2004  was
formulated with the objective to give street vendors recognition  for  their
contribution to society and support to a dignified livelihood.

The aim of the Policy is:

To recognise the service rendered by the venders to the economy and promote
a supportive environment for them to earn a livelihood.
To recognise their right to a livelihood and give dignity to the informal
sector.
To review the legal framework in order to legitimize street vending
To facilitate the use of identified space without obstruction
To regulate street vending through participatory mechanisms and self
compliance.
To promote organisations of vendors to facilitate their empowerment.
To strive for promoting social security and financial services by providing
access to credit through promotion of self help groups and co-operatives.

4. Tourism Development

The Department of Tourism functions under the auspices of  the  Ministry  of
Tourism and Culture and is a nodal agency for the development and  promotion
of Tourism in India.

Up until recently India relied mainly on  domestic  tourism,  now  realizing
the huge foreign tourist market with a tourism contribution to  the  GDP  of
4.9% during 2004. India realized that they  could  not  rely  on  the  small
tourist information centers and launched the Incredible India Campaign on  a
national level in order to attract the local and foreign markets.

India has a huge domestic market with regard to  pilgrims  coming  from  all
parts of India to visit holy sights / shrines and has  also  embarked  on  a
programme of selecting certain rural areas which are easily  accessible  and
establishing these areas as tourist attraction.  These  rural  villages  are
set up with the infrastructure to  accommodate  tourists  staying  there  to
experience what rural living is all about and  at  the  same  time  buy  the
products which are made by the local  people.  The  revenue  generated  from
this is partly reinvested into the infrastructure of the village  empowering
the people to become self sufficient.

The Incredible India  campaign  is  aiming  to  make  people  aware  of  the
importance of tourism and how it  contributes  towards  poverty  alleviation
and job creation by offering training courses to taxi  driver;  customs  and
immigration officials on how to better service  delivery.  As  part  of  the
campaign India has eased some of their visa restrictions, also opening  more
air routes to allow for easier access to those wanting to visit India.
In the next 5 years India forecasts that between 15  –  20  million  foreign
visitors will be entering India, creating approximately 26 million  jobs  in
that period. Domestic travel is encouraged and  also  traveling  of  Indians
abroad as India has a huge number of scientists; doctors,  bio-chemists  and
IT specialists living and working abroad in countries like the  USA,  Canada
and the UK , thus generating much need revenue.

Under the Incredible India campaign  the  tourism  infrastructure,  such  as
ports of entry  are  being  upgraded  and  computerised  making  India  more
accessible and user friendly.

To date the  country’s  tourism  development  plans  have  resulted  in  the
following:
 ▪ In 2002, 2,36 million tourist arrivals were recorded.
 ▪ Foreign exchange earnings for 2002 were US$ 2,96 billion.
 ▪ Income from  the  tourism  industry  for  2002  was  120  billion  rupees
   (Indian currency).
      ▪ In 2004, travel and tourism in  India  generated  approximately  US$
        38,8 billion in economic activity.
      ▪  According  to  the  latest  research  by  Europe's  leading  Travel
        Magazine, Conde Nast  Traveller,  India  has  entered  the  top  ten
        tourist destinations of the world for the first time.
      ▪ Currently, India receives nearly 2,5 million tourists every year
      ▪ Inbound tourism is concentrated in  the  North  and  Rajasthan,  the
        South accounts for about 25% of inbound tourism.

With regard to plans for the  future  growth  of  the  tourism  industry  in
India, a number of challenges and constraints have  been  identified.  These
include:

 ▪ Lack of adequate tourist  infrastructure,  including  adequate  air  seat
   capacity;
 ▪ Accessibility to tourist destinations;
 ▪ Lack of adequate accommodation;
 ▪ Insufficient numbers of appropriately skilled staff;
    ▪  Poor  visitor  experience,  for  example,  due   to   poor   hygienic
      conditions and incidents of touting and harassment in some places; and
   ▪ The perception that the region is prone  to  natural  disasters.  Fresh
     in the mind of many tourists, will  be  the  disaster  wrought  by  the
     December 2004 tsunami, which took at  least  60  000  lives  in  India,
     causing massive destruction of property,  and  severely  affecting  the
     fishing fleet in the coastal areas affected.

5. Forestry

Forests provides for major ecological benefits to India  such  as  soil  and
water conservation, providing a habitat for wildlife and conserving  genetic
diversity. They also maintain the local micro – climate and  help  eliminate
various pollutants in the air.

These ecological functions are essential for life support,  livelihoods  and
the economy, but the diversion of forests to non-forest use results  in  the
reduction in the flow of such ecological services. In  order  to  compensate
for  reduction  of  such  ecological  services,   Central   Government   has
stipulated that those agencies seeking the diversion of forest land  to  non
forest use must compensate indigenous people.

To date Compensatory Afforestation has  taken  place  over  approximately  1
million ha of non-forest and  degraded  forest  land.  The  National  Forest
Policy  of  1988  safeguards  the  traditional  rights  of  forest  dwellers
including tribal communities, as  the  aim  of  the  policy  is  sustainable
development and the involvement of people in protection and regeneration  of
the forests and environment with shared benefits.

In order to achieve the National Forest Policy  goal  of  1/3rd  forest  and
tree cover in the country, the Ministry of  Environment  and  Forest  (MOEF)
have implemented  a  National  Afforestation  Programme  (NAP)  through  the
decentralised set up of Forest Development  Agencies  (FDA)  at  the  Forest
Division level  and  Joint  Forest  Management  Committees  (JFMCs)  at  the
village level.

The overall objective of the scheme is to develop the forest resources  with
people  participation,  focusing  on  improving  the  livelihood  of  forest
communities, especially the poor. The NAP  programme  aims  to  support  and
accelerate the ongoing process of devolving  forest  protection,  management
and development functions to  decentralised  institutions  of  Joint  Forest
Management Committees (JFMCs) at the village level  and  Forest  Development
Agency (FDA) at the forest division level.

Financial support under the NAP scheme is available for:

 ▪ Mobilisation of  village  level  JFMC,  and  Micro  planning  in  project
   villages
 ▪ Afforestation, such as: - Aided Natural Regeneration
                        - Artificial Regeneration
                        -  Bamboo Plantation
                        - Cane Plantation
                        - Mixed Plantations of trees having medicinal value
                        - Regeneration of perennial herbs and shrubs of
                         medicinal value
                        - Pasture Development
 ▪ Soil and Moisture Conservation
 ▪ Fencing, Monitoring and Evaluation of training

The Ministry of Environment and Forests have come up  with  a  Research  and
Development scheme  promoting  research  in  multi-disciplinary  aspects  of
environmental protection, conservation and development. The objective is  to
generate  information  required  to  develop  strategies,   technology   and
methodologies for better environmental management.

The Ministry of  Environment  and  Forests  have  identified  3  programmes,
namely:

Ecosystem Research programme, which emphasizes on  the  ecological  approach
for studying the relationship between man and environment.
Environment Research Programme, which deals with problems  related  to  air,
water, soil pollution and development of  suitable  technologies  addressing
the pollution in the environment.
Eastern and  Western  Ghats  Programme,  which  addresses  the  location  of
specific problems of resource management in the Eastern and Western  regions
of the country relating  to  bio-diversity,  land  use  and  the  impact  of
development activities.

6. Agriculture

India is  mainly  an  agricultural  country  with  about  43  %  of  India's
geographical area being used for agricultural activity. With  the  emergence
of new farming techniques and irrigation high agricultural productivity  was
attained,  addressing  the  issue  of  producing  sufficient  food  for  the
increasing population.

India has  the  world's  largest  cattle  population  (193  million),  large
numbers of sheep and goats, and more  water  buffalo  and  camels  than  any
other country. This has placed heavy demands  on  the  grazing  lands,  both
grasslands and forest areas suffer as a result.

The Indian Government  has  a  pricing  policy  for  agricultural  products,
attempting to ensure favorable prices to the  farmers,  for  their  produce,
with a view to encouraging higher investment and production. Minimum  prices
for major agricultural products are announced each  year,  which  are  fixed
after  taking  into  account  the  recommendations  of  the  Commission  for
Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP).

With regard to regulations and  control,  there  are  no  industrial  policy
licenses  required  for  almost  all  of  the  food  and   agro   processing
industries, except for some items such as beer, potable alcohol  and  wines,
cane sugar, hydrogenated animal fats and oils, etc.

The agriculture sector  has  performs  a  vital  function  in  the  economic
development of India as it contributes  approximately  29.4%  of  the  Gross
Domestic Product (GDP), and employs about 64% of the workforce.  Significant
strides towards  ensuring  food  security  have  been  made  in  agriculture
production.
The following challenges have been encountered by the agricultural sector:

    ▪ It is estimated that about a  total  average  of  16.75  hectares  per
      year of soil in India is lost through  erosion  and  more  than  5,000
      million tons of topsoil is eroded annually. Approximately half of  the
      country  is  threatened  by  various  types  of  degradation  such  as
      salinity,  alkalinity,  waterlogged  areas,  areas  under  ravages  of
      shifting cultivation and desertification.
 ▪ Forest and grasslands have been exploited.
    ▪ Frequent occurrences of floods and  droughts  in  different  parts  of
      the country are evidence of improper land use in  the  catchments  and
      inadequate conservation of rainwater.
    ▪ The problem of land degradation has increased  the  depletion  of  the
      productivity and the basic land stock  through  nutrient  deficiencies
      impacting on the ever growing demand for food, fodder, fibre, fuel and
      the land-based industrial raw materials.
    ▪ Over the last two decades, there has been a  considerable  decline  in
      the incidence of rural poverty. However, a  large  number  of  persons
      continue to live below the poverty line and therefore there is a  need
      for  continued  direct  State  intervention  for  the  eradication  of
      poverty. While the programmes for  self-employment  and  supplementary
      wage empowerment continue, they should be redesigned to make them more
      effective as poverty alleviation instruments.
    ▪ There is urgent need to reduce the dependence  on  fertiliser  imports
      by improving output and productivity in fertiliser production units.

With regard to Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO), India has made some
major developments with regard to GMO technology and foresees that in the
next 20 years India will be self sufficient with regard to food and wheat
security.

The common misconception about GMO is that the seeds can only be used once,
but if used properly in conjunction with natural farming it will yield the
same results for at least one generation.

The legal framework for GMOs is constituted by the Rules for the
Manufacture Use, Import, Export and Storage of Hazardous Micro Organisms,
Genetically Engineered Organisms or Cells (1989) adopted under the
Environment (Protection) Act.

7. Pollution

The Ministry of Environment and Forests primary concern is  the  formulation
and implementation of policies and programmes relating  to  conservation  of
natural resources, biodiversity and prevention  of  pollution.  The  overall
objectives are the conservation of flora and fauna, prevention  and  control
of  pollution,  protection  of   the   environment   through   environmental
management programmes and afforestation.

The country’s national policy for environmental management is contained in
the national Forest Policy Act of 1988, National Conservation Strategy and
Policy Statement on Environment and Development and the Policy Statement
for Pollution Control. Recently, a National Environment Policy was drafted
and introduced as a guide to implement regulatory reforms, programmes and
projects for environmental conservation.

Environmental management in India is maintained through various means, such
as:

Impact assessment of Developmental Projects and its re-engineering based on
experiences;
Adoption of Cleaner Technologies;
Pollution Control through Preventative Strategies;
Setting up of environmental standards for emissions and effluents;
Scientific Management of Hazardous Waste including Bio-medical Waste and
Networking of Institutions for sharing and exchanges of environmental
information

A multi pronged approach combining enforcement of standards, control
mechanisms as well as economic instruments are used to deal with the
prevention and control of pollution. Great emphasis is given to the
formulation of emission and effluent standards for various categories of
industries and their implementation through regular monitoring for
environmental compliance.

The legislation for pollution control include:

  ▪ Water (Prevention and Control) Act, 1974;
  ▪ Air (Prevention and Control) Act, 1981;
  ▪ Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) rules, 1989; and
  ▪ Bio Medical Waste (Management and Handling) rules, 1998

The Indian government came to realise that Small Scale Industries (SSI)
contributes to pollution in a major way due to financial constraints and
training manpower. This prompted government to undertake a Centrally
Sponsored Scheme enabling SSI businesses to set up Common Effluent
Treatment Plants (CETP) to control pollution.
The Indian government also gives financial support to various State
Pollution Control Boards, Universities and Technical Institutions for
upgrading of technologies and capacity building, ensuring better
environmental management.

A charter on Corporate Responsibility for Environmental Protection (CREP)
has been introduced as a road map for the adoption of improved
environmental management practices. With the introduction of various
control measures, pollution has been decreased together with an improvement
in environmental quality.

8. Challenges facing India

The major problems facing India are the issues of food security for a ever
growing population, which has been addressed by the Government of India’s
huge capital investment made in GMO technology. The Indian government
foresees that in the next 20 years India will be self sufficient with
regard to food and wheat security.

Tourism Development is also a problem as India lacks a proper tourism
infrastructure, which is being addressed by the Ministry of Tourism under
the Incredible India Campaign.

Under this campaign, the infrastructure is being upgraded and computerised,
making it more user friendly and has also initiated tourism awareness
programmes.
D. Conclusion and Recommendation

Having undertaken the study tour  the  Committee  has  noted  how  India  is
addressing the issues regarding Food Security, Poverty Alleviation,  Tourism
Development and Aquaculture.

The Committee aims to give input  by  means  of  upcoming  legislation  from
experiences  on  its  Study  Tour  to  India.   Thus   enabling   a   better
understanding of these issues in order to contribute to the  upliftment  and
enrichment of the lives of average South Africans.

E. List of participants

Department of Animal Husbandry and Fisheries:

Mr A Bhattacharya: Head of Fisheries in the Department of  Animal  Husbandry
and
                Fisheries.
Mr PMA Hakeem: Secretary to the Department of Animal Husbandry and
                Fisheries.

Ministry of Rural Development

Mr P Sinha:      Secretary; Land Reform and Rural Development
Mr VS Sampath:   Additional Secretary; Department of Land Resources
Mr BK Saranji:   Director Land Reforms

Ministry of Tourism
Mr AK Mishra:          Secretary; Ministry of Tourism
Mr A Kant:             Joint Secretary; Ministry of Tourism
Mr A Chaturvedi:       Director;Ministry of Tourism
Mr R Talwar:                 Additional Secretary; Ministry of Tourism

Ministry of Water Resources

Mr JH Naryan:          Secretary; Ministry of Water Resources

Department of Environment and Forest Conservation

Mr S Chandra:                Special Cell; Forestry Conservation
Ms M Gupta:            Special Cell; Environment and Forest Conservation

Department of Fisheries; Government of West Bengal

Mr  K  Nanda:             Minister  in  Charge;  Department  of   Fisheries;
Government of
                       West Bengal
Mr RPS Kahlon:         Secretary; Fisheries Department; Government  of  West
Bengal

Member of the Department  –  Related  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on
Science, Technology, Environment and Forests.

Mr PG Narayanan: Chairman
Prof SD Soz
Dr S Chakraborty
Mr J Singh
Mr DS Judev
Dr R Singh
Mr KK Rai
Mr B Singh
Mr F Fanthome
Mr A Gudhe
Mr RCS Reddy
Mr SS Badal
Mr AV Naik
Mr D Venugopal
Mr SR Yadav

South African High Commission – New Delhi

Mr F Moloi – High Commissioner
Mr D M Nxiweni – Deputy High Commissioner
Mr M Ntshinga – First Secretary: Political & Acting Economic Representative
Mr SE Mayoli – Second Secretary: Political
Mr SC Pradhan – Senior Advisor: Department of Trade and Industry

Report to be considered.


