---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 13 October 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-10-13
---


                          THURSDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2005

                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:01.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

The Chairperson requested members to swear or affirm faithfulness to the
Republic of South Africa and obedience to the Constitution in terms of
section 62(6) of the Constitution.

The following members made and subscribed the oath or solemn affirmation:

    Adams, F; Fielding, L H; Gamede, D D; Goeieman, M C;  Hendricks,  N  D;
    Hollander, P M; Krumbock, G  R;  Lamoela,  H;  Mack,  N;  Ntuli,  Z  C;
    Oliphant, M N; Robinson, D; Sulliman, M A; Tau, R J; Vilakazi, J N.
          ELECTION OF THE PERMANENT DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We will now proceed to the election of the
Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP. I wish to announce that the
Returning Officer is the Secretary to the NCOP, Adv Matyolo, and that in
terms of Rule 2 of the Rules of the Election of the Permanent Chairperson
Adv Momoti, Adv Nonyane and Ms Borien Niekerk have been appointed by the
Returning Officer as assistant Returning Officers.

I wish to announce further that the oath of affirmation has already been
administered to the Returning Officer and assistant Returning Officers, as
required by the Rules. Before calling for nominations, I wish to remind
delegates that in terms of the Constitution and the Rules each nomination
must be submitted on a prescribed form and duly seconded.

Furthermore, I wish to draw the attention of delegates specially to section
64 of the Constitution in terms of which no person may be elected as
Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the Council unless he or she is a permanent
delegate of the Council.

I also wish to inform the delegates that in terms of Item 4 of Part A of
Schedule 3 of the Constitution there may be no debate. There will now be an
opportunity for nominations for the Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the
NCOP.
Mr E M Sogoni, seconded by Ms B N Dlulane, nominated Ms P M Hollander for
election as Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Are there any further nominations? If there
are no further nominations, then I declare that I have satisfied myself
that the nomination paper has been properly completed - I have it in front
of me. Only one candidate has been nominated in the name of Peggy Maud
Hollander. The nomination is in order. In terms of Item 5 of Part A of
Schedule 3 of the Constitution, I accordingly declare Peggy Maud Hollander
elected Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, and on behalf of all
present here I wish to congratulate Peggy on her election as a Permanent
Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP. I congratulate you. [Applause.]

I would now like to call upon the Deputy Chair, formally elected now as a
Deputy Chair, to say a few words. [Applause.]

The PERMANENT DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms M P Hollander): Thank you,
Chairperson. I am deeply humbled by the nomination and I accept the
nomination as Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP. I wish to thank all
the members of the NCOP for their confidence in me and I hope that I will
do my duty to the best of my ability. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We shall now proceed to the first motion on
the Order Paper as printed in the name of the Chairperson of the NCOP. I
want to ask the Chief Whip to move that motion on my behalf.


                APPOINTMENT OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you, hon Chairperson. I hereby wish to
move a motion in the name of the Chairperson of the NCOP: I move that the
Council appoints Mrs M N Oliphant as the Chairperson of Committees, in
accordance with Rule 9 of the Rules of the NCOP. I thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: There is no speakers’ list. I shall now put
the question. The question is that the motion be agreed to. As the decision
is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the Chamber to
cast their provinces’ votes.
Are you all present?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first allow
provinces the opportunity to make their declaration of vote if they so
wish. Is there any province that wishes to do so? None.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do so in
alphabetical order per province and delegation heads must please indicate
to the Chair whether they vote in favour of against or abstain. Eastern
Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Steun. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J van ROOYEN: Ons steun. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natali siyavuma. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re a dumela. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Empumalanga siyavuma. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: We are in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                     PLENARY IN THE PROVINCE OF LIMPOPO


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I hereby wish to move a motion
in the name of the Chairperson of the NCOP:





     That, notwithstanding Rule 21(2)(c), the Council in terms of Rule 21(2)
     resolves that in the interest  of  enhancing  public  participation  as
     provided for in section 72(1)(a) and (b) of  the  Constitution  of  the
     Republic of South Africa, 1996, as from 31 October to 4 November  2005,
     the Council  will  conduct  public  hearings,  hold  meetings,  conduct
     oversight visits and will sit in plenary in the province of Limpopo  on
     4 November 2005, at 10:00 until the conclusion of the business of  that
     day.

Mr A WATSON: May I, on a point of clarity, address you on this matter, hon
Chair.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Can I deal with the motion first? I’ll then
hear your point of clarity.

I shall now put the question. The question is that the motion be agreed to.
As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are you all present?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first
allow provinces the opportunity to make their declaration of vote, if they
so wish. Is there any province that wishes to do so? None. We shall now
proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do so in alphabetical order
per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether
they vote in favour of or against, or abstain. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: We support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: We support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Noord-Kaap steun die konsepbesluit. [Northern Cape
supports the draft resolution.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr M J MACK: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Mr A WATSON: Thank you, hon Chair. Chair, I have risen on every occasion
when we passed a similar motion, full knowing that I will be outvoted
because it is dealt with in terms of section 65. The message that comes
through is that minority parties and opposition parties simply don’t have a
voice in this House.

At the Whips’ Committee meetings prior to this sitting I have asked the
Chief Whip if, at least, we cannot have what the Rules of our House ask
for, which is an estimation of the cost - in other words, a draft budget of
some form to be presented to the members. The members of my party
understand that it is difficult to have fixed and final costs because of
the preparations that lie ahead. However, on none of these visits . . . and
let me make that very clear, our party subscribes to the visits to the
provinces in terms of the Constitution and in terms of our Rules, but then
we must stick to the Rules.

If we can come up with all the arguments, hon Chair, on why we cannot
adhere to Rule 221(c), six months after and year after year, then surely we
can present the members of this hon House with the actual costs post facto,
after the trip has taken place. I don’t understand how we can be so badly
organised that we cannot present the House at least with an estimation of
the costs to be incurred. The message that goes out is that we go blindly
into spending the money of the taxpayers and I really appeal to you that we
don’t do it again.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, first of all, our Rules do not
allow for something called “a point of clarity.” When the hon speaker stood
up on a point of clarity, I thought it was because the screens were not
very clear today, that maybe he wanted them to be very clear.

To come back on a more serious note, when you were speaking I was listening
to you attentively and I also think I deserve the same as an equal member,
regardless of whichever party you come from and whatever position you hold
in that particular party. First of all, the draft resolution says
“notwithstanding” and secondly, we have explained several times that it
becomes difficult – it is good because the Secretary to Parliament is here
– and as we speak now, the tendering process is still ongoing. There is no
finality in terms of that.

Thirdly, in terms of the tendering and procurement regulations, once you
have a quote and put it, it becomes part of that budget and it has got a
certain timeframe. By the time we go to Limpopo, we will have overlapped
that timeframe and those things will no longer be applicable. We want to
bring assurance to this House and the public at large that by 26 October we
will have that budget estimate; we will circulate it and it will be public
exposure.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That clarifies it, Mr Watson. I can confirm
that we will circulate the budget. I know you have raised this with me.
Unfortunately, we had to table this motion because preparations have to
continue. I would like to thank you for your support.

The Council adjourned at 14:30.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                          FRIDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces



The Chairperson


1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council:


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 15 September 2005 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 23B – 2005] (National Assembly –
         sec 75).


        The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Education and
        Recreation of the National Council of Provinces.

2.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund
             for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector
             Education and Training (Services SETA) for 2004-2005, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             for 2004-2005 [RP 78-2005].

    2.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 170-2005].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             National Biodiversity Institute for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005.
        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of The Greater St. Lucia
             Wetland Park for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism
             for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    3.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:


            a) Government Notice No R.741 published in Government Gazette
               No 27813 dated 29 July 2005: Amendment of Regulations
               relating to Debt Collectors, 2003 in terms of the Debt
               Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of 1998).


    4.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – National
             Treasury for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 51-2005].

    5.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
             Education (CHE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela
             National Museum for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             160-2005].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Heritage Resources Agency for 2004-2005, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005 [RP 182-2005].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
             Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 157-
             2005].


        (e)      Accession of South Africa’s Membership of the
             International Centre for Scientific and Technical Information
             (ICSTI), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
             1996.


        (f)      Explanatory Memorandum Accession of South Africa’s
             Membership of the International Centre for Scientific and
             Technical Information (ICSTI).


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Sports Commission for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             65-2005].


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Institute for Drug-Free Sport for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 161-2005].

    6.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration and report:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Medical Research Council (MRC) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 91-2002].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
             Laboratory Service (NHLS) for 2001-2002, 2002-2003, 2003-2004,
             2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements for 2002-2003, 2003-2004, 2004-2005.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Education


    a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 15 – Department of Education
       for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
       Financial Statements of Vote 15 for 2004-2005 [RP 162-2005].

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


    (a)     Report on the provisional suspension from office with
         remuneration: Mr I W O Morake, a magistrate at the Lichtenburg
         Magistrates Court.

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of South African National Parks
         (SANparks) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


                          MONDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 15 September 2005 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


         (i)     Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)


         (ii)    Precious Metals Bill [B 30 – 2005] (National Assembly –
              sec 75)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister for Public Service and Administration


    a) Report and Financial Statements of the State Information Technology
       Agency (Proprietary) Limited (SITA) for 2004-2005, including the
       Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
       2005 [RP 39-2005].


2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Ingonyama Trust Board for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 134-2005]


                         TUESDAY, 20 SEPTEMBER 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


    a) Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art Gallery
       for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
       Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 162-2005].

                        WEDNESDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2005


National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

    1. The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on  Security
       and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


       (a)   Report  on  the  provisional  suspension  from   office   with
       remuneration: Mr I W O  Morake,  a  magistrate  at  the  Lichtenburg
       Magistrates Court.

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Transport


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
        Corporation (RTMC) for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP 26-
        2004].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
        (RSR) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 81-2005].


2.    The Minister for Safety and Security


    a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department for Safety
       and Security for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 187-2005].


3.    The Minister in The Presidency


    a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government Communication
       and Information System (GCIS) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
       the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
       172-2005].



                         THURSDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      (1)   Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment
         Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of Communications on 22
         September 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Communications


          i) Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment
             Bill [B 32 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75) [Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             28050 of 20 September 2005.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
         the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
         Joint Rule 160, on 23 September 2005.
         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

3.    Translations of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Defence


           i) Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Krygstuigkorporasie van Suid-
              Afrika, Beperk [W 14 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)

      This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Armaments
              Corporation of South Africa, Limited Amendment Bill [B 14 –
              2005] (National Assembly– sec 75).


           ii) Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Spesiale Verdedigingsrekening [W
               15 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)

      This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Defence
              Special Account Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75).


     (2)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          i) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Grondwetlike Aangeleenthede [W 22 –
             2005] (National Assmebly – sec 75)

      This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Constitutional
             Matters Amendment Bill [B 22 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
             75).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Transport


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
        Corporation (RTMC) for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP 26-
        2004].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
        (RSR) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 81-2005].


2.    The Minister of Safety and Security


    a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department for Safety
       and Security for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 187-2005].


3.    The Minister in The Presidency


    a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government Communication
       and Information System (GCIS) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
       the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
       172-2005].


4.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Sentech for 2004-2005,
        including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005.


                          FRIDAY, 23 SEPTEMBER 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Public Works


    (a)     Reply from Minister of Public Works to recommendation in Eighth
        Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts, 2005, as adopted
        by the House on 7 June 2005.

     b) Reply from Minister of Public Works to recommendation in Sixth
        Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts, 2005, as adopted
        by the House on 7 June 2005.


            Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     a) Reply from Minister of Trade and Industry to recommendation in
        Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts, 2005, as
        adopted by the House on 7 June 2005.


        Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library
        for the Blind for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005



                          MONDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:

          1) The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 23 September 2005 in terms
             of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a
             section 75 Bill
             (i) Nursing Bill [B 26-2005](National Assembly-sec 75)



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs


    a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of Foreign
       Affairs for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
       on the Financial Statements of Vote 3 for 2004-2005.


2.    The Minister of Safety and Security


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Independent Complaints
        Directorate (ICD) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 23 for 2004-2005 [RP 771-
        2005].


3.    The Minister of Public Works


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
        Development Board (CIDB) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 206-
        2005].


4.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
        Marketing Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 1-2005].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural
        Development Bank of South Africa (Land Bank) for 2004-2005,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 164-2005].



     c) Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort Biological Products
        Limited for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

5.    The Minister of Housing


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Thubelisha Homes for 2004-2005,
        including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing Foundation for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the People’s Housing Partnership
        Trust (PHPT) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
        (RHLF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.
                         TUESDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2005


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Transport


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and Navigation
        Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2004-2005, including the Report
        of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-
        2005.


2.    The Minister of Public Works


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Build
        Environment (CBE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
        177-2005].


3.    The Minister of Science and Technology


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Research Foundation
        (NRF) Agricultural Marketing Council for 2004-2005, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
        2005.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of GODISA for 2004-2005, including
        the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        for 2004-2005.


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of South
        Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
        Council (HSRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 140-2005].

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Ntsika Enterprise Promotion
        Agency for the nine months ended 31 December 2004, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for the
        nine months ended 31 December 2004.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
        Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2004-2005, including
        the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        for 2004-2005.


     c) Report of the South African Council for the Non-Proliferation of
        Weapons of Mass Destruction for the period 1 July 2003 to 30 June
        2004.


5.    The Minister of Correctional Services


     a) Draft Directives regarding Complainant Participation in
        Correctional Supervision and Parole Boards, tabled in terms of
        section 299A of the Criminal procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of
        1977) as amended.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
    Life and Status of Women on Programme 5 on Policy Co-ordination, which
    is part of Budget Vote 1, “The Presidency”, dated 16 September 2005:


      The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
        Status of Women, having considered Programme 5 on Policy Co-
        ordination which is part of Budget Vote 1 “The Presidency”,
        referred to it, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
        thereon.




2.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
    Life and Status of Women, on Hearings held with the National and
    Provincial Gender Machinery on 21 November 2003, dated 16 September
    2005:




    The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
      Status of Women, having held hearings with the national and provincial
      gender machinery on 21 November 2003, reports as follows:



                              Table of Contents

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                           SECTION ONE:  OVERVIEW

1.  Introduction

2.  National Policy Framework for Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality

3.  Report of the National OSW on the status of GFPs in National
Departments
SECTION TWO:  SUMMARIES OF REPORTS BY OSWs AND DEPARTMENTS

1.  Reports by the national and provincial OSWs

2.  Reports by the Gender Focal Points in national departments

                   SECTION THREE:  ANALYSIS OF SUBMISSIONS

1.  Office on the Status of Women

2.  National Gender Focal Points

3.  Provincial Departmental Gender Focal Points

                       SECTION FOUR:  RECOMMENDATIONS

1.  National Office on the Status of Women

2.  Provincial Office on the Status of Women

3.  National Gender Focal Points

4.  Provincial Departmental Gender Focal Points

5.  Recommendations to the JMCIQLSW

CONCLUSION

REFERENCES


                              Executive Summary

                                Introduction

The Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and
Status of Women (hereinafter the JMC) was, amongst other functions,
established to monitor the State’s obligations to the Beijing Platform for
Action, as well as to any other applicable international instruments, to
which the country is a signatory. To give effect to its mandate, the JMC
invited the national Office on the Status of Women (OSW), provincial OSWs
and national Gender Focal Points (GFPs) to make presentations on the
following:

   OSWs:
      • Structure of the OSWs.
      • The status of GFPs in the provinces.
      • Provincial gender programmes and budgets.
      • Impact of the programmes and monitoring indicators.
   GFPs:
      • An overview of the  GFP  in  the  Department,  including  lines  of
        reporting.
      • The departmental gender programmes and related budgets.
Altogether the national OSW, 7 provincial OSWs[1]  and 28 GFPS participated
in the hearings, by way of either oral presentation and/or written
submission.

Results and analysis

OSWs have been established in all provinces that reported at the hearings,
with the exception of Gauteng. In Gauteng, the Social Development
Directorate performs this function and a Gender/HIV programme is currently
being established in the Directorate. The number of staff in the OSWs
ranges from 1 to 12. Most of the Heads of the OSWs, with the exception of
Mpumalanga, are appointed at deputy director level and not in the position
of director as is recommended by South Africa's National Policy Framework
for Women's Empowerment and Gender Equality (hereinafter Gender Policy).

Very little information is available on the budgets of the OSWs, but in
some instances, OSWs reported budgetary constraints. The report indicates
that provincial gender policies have been developed in Gauteng and draft
policies in KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape. It is unclear whether the
other provinces have developed gender policies. Gender action plans are in
operation in Gauteng, and KwaZulu-Natal is in the process of developing
one.

Only 3 provinces indicated that gender-mainstreaming policies have been
developed. Information on programmes undertaken by OSWs is sketchy. Some of
the programmes that are, however, underway in some OSWs include programmes
focusing on capacity building, policy development and analysis, gender
machinery and coordination and planning.
Nationally, most of the Departments have established GFPs, with many
reporting that GFPs are staffed with 1 person and some reporting that 3 or
more persons staff them. In most cases, GFPs are not located in the Office
of the Director-General and are instead located elsewhere in the
Departments, with the Human Resources section being a popular site of
location. In addition, most GFP coordinators are appointed at deputy
director or even assistant director level. It is noted that some GFPs also
have responsibilities other than gender. Furthermore, a number of
Departments raised the lack of resources as one of the greatest impediments
to the effective implementation of their work.

Less than half of the Departments reported that they are involved in policy
development to promote gender equity. In addition, very few Departments
have developed a gender policy that defines the organisational framework
within which gender equity will be promoted. In addition, very few
Departments indicated their role in embarking on a gender mainstreaming
strategy in Departments.  The implication of this is that Government policy
for furthering gender equity is adversely affected as guiding policies and
concrete gender mainstreaming strategies constitute the foundation upon
which gender-related work should be framed.

With  regard  to  programmes,  many  Departments  focused  on  the  internal
projects and programmes that  they  are  implementing,  such  as  employment
equity issues, recruitment and selection practices  and  internal  policies.
Many Departments make  little  or  no  mention  of  programmatic  work  done
externally. Where external work is  being  done,  this  is  largely  centred
around the commemoration of calendar events such  as  National  Women’s  Day
and the  16  Days  of  Activism  on  No  Violence  Against  Women.  This  is
problematic, as a comprehensive programme of action needs to  encompass  far
more than this.

Information pertaining to the status of provincial GFPs was insufficient
and this limits the analysis with regard to provincial GFPs. Many
Departments in the Eastern Cape and Western Cape have established GFPs,
while the situation in the North West and Mpumalanga is of concern.
Information on this matter is unclear for other provinces. The location of
GFPs varies, with many being located in the Human Resources sections. In
addition, the rank of GFP coordinators also varies, with most being
appointed at assistant director level. The implication of this is that most
co-ordinators are not equipped with the skills and commensurate level of
experience as envisaged by the National Policy Framework for Women’s
Empowerment and Gender Equality.

While information pertaining to budgets was not available for GFPs in most
provinces, 2 provincial OSWs reported that dedicated budgets are available
in some Departments in those provinces. With regard to programmes
undertaken by GFPs, most of the programmes reported on pertained to
external work.

Recommendations

Some very specific recommendations, as well as some generic
recommendations, are made to the different gender machineries. One of the
most important recommendations to the JMC is the need for additional
information from all parties that made submissions to the hearings. This
will allow the JMC to fill the gaps and make a comprehensive assessment of
the national and provincial gender machinery structures.

Another generic recommendation is for structures to be established and
resourced in accordance with the national Gender Policy, so as to allow
them to fulfill the functions assigned to them. There is a further need to
establish the skills level of some of the persons appointed in the OSWs and
GFPs and if necessary, to provide them with the necessary training that
will enable them to fulfill their functions in their respective positions
or operate at a more senior level.
                            Section One: Overview

1.     Introduction


The Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of  Quality  of  Life  and
Status of Women (hereinafter the JMC) was initially  established  as  an  ad
hoc committee but became  a  permanent  committee  in  1998.  The  JMC  was,
amongst other functions, established to monitor the State’s  obligations  to
the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination  Against  Women  (CEDAW)
and the Beijing Platform for Action, as well  as  to  any  other  applicable
international instruments, to which the country  is  a  signatory.  To  give
effect to this role, the JMC is required to monitor the work  of  Government
Departments in  meeting  the  objectives  of  gender  equality  and  equity.
Strategic objective H of the Beijing Platform for Action, which  deals  with
institutional mechanisms for the advancement of  women,  has  resonance  for
the JMC.

Strategic objective H of the Beijing Platform for Action  notes  that  state
parties are obliged to create or strengthen  national  machineries  for  the
advancement  of  women.  The  gender  machineries  are  thus   tasked   with
supporting Government mainstreaming gender in all policies  and  programmes.
Thus,  the  Beijing  Platform  for  Action  identifies  the   following   as
imperative for the effective functioning of national machineries[2]:

    • Location in the highest level of Government.
    • Sufficient resources in terms of budget and professional capacity.
    • Opportunity to influence development of all government policies.
    • Institutional mechanisms  or  processes  to  facilitate  decentralised
      planning, implementation and monitoring. This process  should  involve
      Non-Governmental   Organsiations   (NGOs)    and    Community    Based
      Organisations (CBOs).

To give effect to its mandate, the JMC invited the national  Office  on  the
Status of Women (OSW), provincial OSWs  and  national  Gender  Focal  Points
(GFPs) to make presentations on the following:

   OSWs:
      • Structure of the OSWs.
      • The status of GFPs in the provinces.
      • Provincial gender programmes and budgets.
      • Impact of the programmes and monitoring indicators.


   GFPs:
      • An overview of the  GFP  in  the  Department,  including  lines  of
        reporting.
      • The Departmental gender programmes and related budgets.

The questions posed by  the  JMC  were  very  specific.  The  aims  were  to
ascertain whether the gender machinery structures were  in  place  and  what
the nature of their programmes  and  budgets  were.  GFPs  varied  in  their
responses  to  the  JMC,  with  some  of  the  GFPs  providing   substantial
information, not only on their  structures,  but  also  on  policies  within
Departments, activities around gender mainstreaming and challenges, etc.

In  compiling  this  report,  it  was  deemed  essential  to  capture   this
additional information, even if it  was  only  available  for  a  few  GFPs.
Therefore, reporting the  findings  was  broader  than  merely  establishing
whether  GFPs  are  operational  in  Departments.  The  report  includes  an
analysis of the information against the functions accorded to the  GFPs  and
OSWs in the National Gender Policy.

Cognisance  is  taken  of  the  limitations  of  following  this  method  of
reporting, but the importance of recording this  information  outweighs  the
limitations. This document  could  therefore  be  used  as  a  baseline  and
further information could be elicited from  Departments  to  ensure  that  a
comprehensive report on all aspects of the Gender Machinery is compiled.
The OSWs and GFPs that participated  by  either  making  oral  presentations
and/or by providing written submissions are:


|OSWs                          |GFPs cont.                        |
|National OSW                  |Independent Complaints Directorate|
|Eastern Cape                  |Justice and Constitutional        |
|                              |Development                       |
|Free State                    |Labour                            |
|KwaZulu-Natal                 |Land Affairs                      |
|Gauteng                       |Minerals and Energy Affairs       |
|Mpumalanga                    |National Prosecuting Authority of |
|                              |South Africa                      |
|North West                    |National Treasury                 |
|Western Cape                  |National Intelligence Agency      |
|                              |(NIA)[3]                          |
|GFPs                          |Public Enterprises[4]             |
|Agriculture                   |Public Service and Administration |
|Arts and Culture              |Public Service Commission         |
|Correctional Services         |Safety and Security – Secretariat |
|Defence                       |Science and Technology            |
|Education                     |Social Development                |
|Environmental Affairs and     |South African Police Services     |
|Tourism                       |                                  |
|Foreign Affairs               |South African Sports Commission   |
|Health                        |Trade and Industry                |
|Home Affairs                  |Water Affairs and Forestry        |
|Housing                       |                                  |

This report presents the findings  of  the  submissions  (both  written  and
oral) made on 21 November 2003 to the JMC. The report is divided  into  four
sections comprising the following:

   1. Section One provides contextual information  on  the  national  gender
      policy framework and the national Gender Machinery.
   2. Section Two summarises the submissions made by the OSWs and  the  GFPs
      in Departments.
   3. Section Three is an analysis of the submissions made.
   4. Section Four details recommendations for consideration.


2.     National Policy Framework for Women’s Empowerment and Gender
   Equality



In December 2000, Cabinet adopted South Africa's National Policy Framework
for Women's Empowerment and Gender Equality (hereinafter the Gender
Policy), prepared by the OSW in the Presidency. The policy framework
outlines South Africa’s vision for gender equality and sets out how it
intends realising its gender goals. It establishes guidelines for South
Africa to remedy the historical legacy of racism and sexism by proposing
and recommending an institutional framework that facilitates equal access
to goods and services for both women and men. The Gender Policy also
proposes a process that no longer regards gender issues and gender equality
as peripheral, but which places gender issues at the very centre of the
transformation process within all structures, institutions, procedures,
practices and programmes of government, its agencies and parastatals, civil
society and the private sector (South Africa’s National Policy Framework
for Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality, 2000).


2.1   Gender Machinery

In order  to  achieve  national  and  international  commitments  to  gender
equality, a Gender Machinery was established. This Gender  Machinery  refers
to a set of co-ordinated structures within and outside Government which  aim
to achieve equality for women in all spheres of life,   that  is  political,
civil, social, economic and cultural. These  national  machinery  structures
are  located  in  the  Executive,  Parliament,  and  in  civil  society.  An
independent statutory body, the Commission for Gender  Equality  (CGE),  has
also been established to  monitor  the  progress  and  achievements  towards
gender equality.


    2.1.1  National Machinery


Executive level

 • Office on the Status of Women – The OSW is located in the Office  of  the
   Presidency.  It  plays  a  vital  role  as  the  principal  co-ordinating
   structure for the national machinery on gender equality. One of the  main
   functions of the OSW is to develop national  gender  plans  and  national
   strategies to implement them. It includes, amongst its tasks,  initiating
   policy and action-orientated research pertinent to gender  mainstreaming;
   developing key indicators for measuring national progress towards  gender
   equality; and working with  ministries  and  Departments,  provinces  and
   publicly funded bodies in mainstreaming gender in policies, practices and
   programmes (Parliament of South Africa, 2002).
 • Gender Desks or Focal  Points  –  These  GFPs  are  based  in  Government
   Departments. The main task is to ensure the effective  implementation  of
   the National Gender Policy at an  operational  level.  Focal  points  are
   responsible for the formulation and implementation  of  effective  action
   plans to promote women’s empowerment and gender equality in the  work  of
   Government Departments.

Legislature
 • The Women’s Parliamentary Caucus – This is  a  multi-party  caucus  whose
   functions include creating  forums  in  which  women  in  Parliament  can
   discuss  and  debate  gender  issues  and   providing   capacity-building
   initiatives for women in Parliament.
 • Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement  of  Quality  of  Life  and
   Status of Women. The functions of this Committee are  to,  among  others,
   ensure that legislation before Parliament  is  gender  sensitive  and  to
   encourage the public, and particularly women, to participate in  the  law
   making process.

Independent Statutory Bodies

A number of independent statutory bodies  have  been  established  that  are
involved in gender issues, including, the CGE, the Human Rights  Commission,
the Independent Electoral  Commission,  the  Public  Protector,  the  Public
Service Commission, the Youth  Commission,  the  Land  Commission,  and  the
South African Law Commission. The CGE is  geared  specifically  towards  the
empowerment of women and gender equality. It forms an integral part  of  the
Gender Machinery.

Women’s Organisations in Civil Society

Women’s organisations in civil  society  play  an  important  role,  as  the
national  machinery  of  a  country  cannot  on  its  own   make   effective
contributions and shift  public  policy  agendas  for  women.  The  national
machinery  has  a  responsibility  to  provide  women’s  organisations  with
education and training as well as information and resources.


2.1.2 Provincial Machinery


Different structures have been developed to fulfill the varying needs of
the provinces. The Gender Policy, however, recommends that the general
principles of the national model be followed. This will include the
establishment of an OSW (in the Premiers’ Offices), gender units or focal
points in all provincial Departments, a women’s caucus in provincial
legislatures and support for the establishment of civil society structures.
Furthermore, the provincial OSW is responsible for developing a provincial
gender policy and action plan that is in line with the National Gender
Policy and co-ordinating the activities of other role-players and
stakeholders.




2.1.3 Local Government Machinery


Local Government is in the best position to impact directly  and  positively
on  women’s  empowerment  and  gender  equality.  The  South  African  Local
Government  Association  (SALGA)  has  advocated  the  creation  of   gender
structures, which would guide the work of local government councils.

2.2 Integrated Co-ordination Framework and Process for Gender



Mainstreaming


The Gender Policy outlines an integrated co-ordination framework and  gender
mainstreaming process that is intended to  guide  and  mobilise  ministries,
provinces and local government towards integrated programme delivery. It  is
an integrated approach, as the cross-cutting nature of gender demands  this.
The objectives of the co-ordination framework include:

    • Setting goals and objectives for the national gender programme.
    • Establishing clear lines of communication and accountability.
    • Developing a dynamic Management Information System  that  facilitates
      informed implementation.

The co-ordination process is located in the Presidency  (with  the  national
OSW), which is accountable  for  the  National  Gender  Programme.  The  OSW
operates  through  the  Gender  Focal  Points  located   in   the   national
Departments. It also draws on the strategic input of the National  Technical
Committee. The Provincial OSWs, which are tasked with the development  of  a
provincial gender policy and plan of action, in line with  national  policy,
feeds  into  the  co-ordination  process  as   one   of   the   implementing
agencies[5].

The Minister and  the  Director-General  in  the  Presidency  have  specific
functions as the custodians and principal champions of the  national  gender
programme. They also report directly to the President on gender  issues.  An
example of the function of the Minister in the Presidency includes  ensuring
that gender is mainstreamed through  Cabinet  and  Cabinet  Committees.  The
Director-General,  on  the  other  hand,  has  as  one   of   his   or   her
responsibilities, facilitating gender mainstreaming  among  senior  managers
such as Director-Generals.

A National Co-ordinating Committee  has  also  been  established  which,  is
regarded  as  government’s  hub  for  the  effective  co-ordination  of  the
National Gender Programme. This committee is chaired by the OSW and  members
of this committee cut  across  all  national  ministries,  provinces,  local
government structures and organs of civil society. Some of the functions  of
this committee include providing guidance on gender analysis,  developing  a
national gender action  plan  and  designing,  implementing  and  evaluating
cross-cutting programmes such as poverty  alleviation,  with  Ministers  and
Director-Generals.

In his 2003 State of the Nation  address,  President  Mbeki  indicated  that
further steps are underway  to  ensure  the  implementation  of  the  Gender
Policy. The President indicated that a system would  be  introduced  through
which gender representation targets and content of  programmes  become  part
of the  core  performance  criteria  of  every  government  institution  and
manager. This would provide further  impetus  for  gender  mainstreaming  in
government institutions.


    2.3 Gender Mainstreaming


The Gender Policy document refers to gender mainstreaming as a process  that
is goal orientated and “that recognises that most  institutions  consciously
and unconsciously serve the  interests  of  men”  (South  Africa’s  National
Policy Framework for Women’s  Empowerment  and  Gender  Equality,  2000,  p.
xvii). The Gender Policy thus encourages institutions to  embrace  a  gender
perspective  in  transforming  themselves.  It  also   promotes   the   full
participation of women in decision-making so that women’s  needs  move  from
the  periphery  to  the  centre  of  development   planning   and   resource
allocation.

It is important to note that gender equality is the  responsibility  of  all
institutions of Government. In order to achieve gender equality,  Government
must  embark  on  a  rigorous  process  of  gender  mainstreaming.  This  is
essentially the task of structures of the  National  Machinery  as  well  as
individual Government  Departments  at  a  national,  provincial  and  local
level.

The Gender Policy document outlines three main areas  of  intervention  that
Government   Departments   can   make   in   gender   mainstreaming.   These
interventions  relate  to  external  and  internal   gender   transformation
encompassing the following:

   1. Promoting women’s empowerment and gender  equality  in  their  service
      provision (external transformation).
   2. Raising public awareness  about  gender  in  their  interactions  with
      clients  and  stakeholders  in  the  private  and  community   sectors
      (internal and external transformation).
   3. Promoting women’s empowerment and gender equality  in  their  internal
      employment policies and practices (internal transformation).

3. Report of the National OSW on the status of GFPs in National Departments

In November 2003, the OSW undertook its 3rd Audit on the status of  GFPs  in
national Departments. Twenty-two Departments responded to the  questionnaire
distributed by the OSW. The results indicated the following:

 • Of the departments that responded, 31.8% (7) have GFPs  at  the  director
   level, which is the level mandated by the Gender Policy.
 • Six of the Departments reported that their GFPs were at  deputy  director
   level and 4 GFPs were appointed at assistant director level.
 • The understanding of the structure of GFPs varied. In 15 departments, the
   GFP referred to an individual and in 9 departments, the GFP referred to a
   unit.
 • Only 9 Departments have formally appointed GFPs. In these instances,  the
   person’s performance contract refers to their function as that of a  GFP,
   but only 6 Departments assess them on GFP work.
 • The GFPs are responsible for work other than  gender  related  functions.
   Only 6 Departments perform GFP functions exclusively, whilst  GFPs  in  2
   Departments perform 3 functions or  less,  and  in  14  Departments  they
   perform 4 or more functions, over and above their gender functions.


Section Two: Summaries of Reports by OSWs and Departments



Reports by the National and Provincial Offices on the Status of Women (OSW)


As indicated earlier in the report, the OSWs were requested to report on:

      • Structure of the OSWs.
      • The status of GFPs in the provinces.
      • Provincial gender programmes and budgets.
      • Impact of the programmes and monitoring indicators.

The provincial  OSW  reports  varied  in  the  extent  and  depth  to  which
information was supplied. Many of the reports addressed the first two  areas
that had be to  reported  on,  whilst  significantly  less  information  was
received on the provincial gender programmes, and even less on  budgets  and
impact of programmes.



1. Eastern Cape



1.1 Structure


The OSW is staffed with  3  people,  namely  a  deputy  director,  assistant
director and an administrative officer.

Provincial  Gender  Focal  Points  (GFPs)  have  been  established  in  some
Departments. GFPs  are  staffed  by  co-ordinators  appointed  at  assistant
director level and  Special  Programme  Officers  (SPOs)  are  appointed  at
deputy  director  level.  The  following  GFPs  have  been  established   in
Departments:

Sport, Arts and Culture      1 SPO, deputy director.
                       1 GFP, assistant director.
Agriculture            1 SPO, deputy director.
                       1 GFP, assistant director.
Public Works                 1 SPO, deputy director.
                       1 GFP, assistant director.
Education              1 SPO, deputy director.
                       1 GFP, assistant director.
Health                       1 Acting SPO, deputy director.
Transport              1 SPO, deputy director.
Safety and Liaison           1 SPO, deputy director.
Economic Affairs       1 SPO, deputy director.
Finance                1 GFP, assistant director.

The location of the GFPs differs across Departments. Some of  the  GFPs  are
located in human resources and others in the Heads of Department’s  offices.
The location  of  the  GFPs  places  them  outside  of  key  decision-making
structures and thus limits the impact of the GFP in gender mainstreaming.


1.2 Budget


The OSW representative reported that for the  2003/04  financial  year,  the
Office had a budget of R1.2 million. No indication was  given  whether  this
amount included salaries, infrastructure as well as project expenditure.


1.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan


The report does not indicate whether the  OSW  has  developed  a  provincial
gender policy and gender action plan that  is  in  line  with  the  national
policy. It has undertaken activities for the promotion of the Gender  Policy
Framework. However, the report  does  not  indicate  whether  this  is  with
reference to the national policy or a provincial policy.


1.4 Gender Mainstreaming


Following a Gender Audit,  the  provincial  OSW  in  consultation  with  the
national OSW introduced a coordination framework for the  implementation  of
gender mainstreaming and the empowerment of women. In  accordance  with  the
needs of the province, three gender clusters have  been  prioritised.  These
are the economic empowerment of women, ‘no violence against women’, and  the
special support for rural women’ clusters.


1.5 Programmes


   As per the brief given to the OSWs, the report presented by the OSW
   focused on the programmes within the clusters, as prioritised by the
   province, and the various projects undertaken by the Departments to give
   effect to the objectives of the clusters. It is unclear from the report
   what the role of the OSW is within these programmes.


 • Women and the Economy

The Departments forming part of this cluster include Environment and
Tourism (lead department); Economic Affairs; Sport, Recreation, Arts and
Culture; Roads and Public Works; Provincial Treasury and Land Affairs. Some
of the programme areas prioritised by the Departments are:


      o Sports, Recreation, Arts and Culture  -  Women  in  Publishing  and
        Women in Arts and Crafts.
      o Economic Affairs, Environment and Tourism - Women’s co-operatives.
      o Roads and Public Works -  Promoting  women’s  full  access  to  and
        control over productive resources.


 • Girl Child

Sports,  Recreation,  Arts  and  Culture  has  been  involved  in   numerous
programmatic areas including  an  eco-challenge,  gymnastrada,  guiding  and
scouts and the South African Games. The Department  of  Education  has  been
involved in awareness raising.

 • Gender Based Violence

    The Departments of Justice, Safety and Liaison, Health, South African
     Police Services, South African National Defence Force, Correctional
   Services, Education and Social Development constitute this cluster. The
      programmatic areas cited by Departments as areas of work include:

         o Social Development - Victim empowerment.
         o Roads and Public Works - HIV and AIDS.
         o  Sports,  Recreation,  Arts  and  Culture  -  Imbiza   Intersect
           Coalition Arts and Culture launch and Life skills training.
         o Education - Awareness raising.
         o Health - Provision of emergency care  services  for  victims  of
           sexual offences or abuse.
         o Correctional Services - Rehabilitation.



 • Rural women


      This cluster area is in line with the Provincial Integrated Rural
 Development Plan and is constituted by the Departments of Agriculture, Land
    Affairs. Social Development, Sports, Arts, Culture, Transport, Water
      Affairs and Roads and Public Works. The report indicated that the
 Department of Roads and Public Works has poverty alleviation as one of its
  programme areas. The report furthermore indicates that the Department of
      Agriculture is involved in three projects in this cluster, but no
                    indication is given of the projects.


1.5 Achievements


   The report cites provincial leadership to gender mainstreaming and the
  empowerment of women as an achievement. This is evident in the Provincial
 Growth and Development Plan for 2004 – 2014. Projects and programmes report
                    mainstreaming gender as an objective.


1.6 Challenges


 The Eastern Cape OSW undertook a gender audit in 2001, which indicated that
    the province was not in a position to significantly address itself to
  fulfilling its gender mandate. GFP coordinators had not been appointed in
    the Departments to drive the process of gender mainstreaming and the
 empowerment of women. Subsequent to the gender audit, GFPs were established
 in some departments. This process of the appointment, location and resource
  allocation to the GFPs were, however, not uniform in the province. GFPs,
  staffed by coordinators, were appointed at assistant director levels and
            special programmes officers at deputy director level.



2. Free State



2.1 Structure


The OSW is  staffed  with  a  deputy  director,  an  assistant  director,  2
administrative clerks, a messenger and  a  secretary.  An  interdepartmental
gender committee has been formed. This committee consists of the  GFPs  from
provincial and national departments, which have  offices  in  the  province.
Very few gender co-ordinators have been  appointed  at  a  local  government
level. Gender co-ordinators in local government,  however,  attend  meetings
when provincial activities  are  being  planned.  Other  structures  of  the
gender machinery in the province include the Committee  on  the  Improvement
of Status  of  Women,  Youth  and  Disabled.  The  Women’s  Caucus  is  non-
operational.


2.2 Budget


There was an indication by the presenter that gender programmes  received  a
significantly  smaller  allocation  than  that  of  the  youth  directorate.
However, it was  not  clear  whether  this  was  for  the  OSW  or  for  the
respective Departmental GFPs.


2.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan


The National Policy Framework had been  presented  to  the  Members  of  the
Executive Committee, Heads of Departments, Managers and Deputy Managers  and
municipal districts. The Free State Provincial Executive  Committee  adopted
the policy. A Free State  Development  Plan  has  been  developed.  The  OSW
indicated that a monitoring strategy is  in  place  to  gather  Departmental
information on  the  GFPs  on  structures  of  GFPs,  programmes,  projects,
budgets, and disaggregated data of staff.


2.4 Gender Mainstreaming


The report states that Strategic Plans and an  Operational  Plan  have  been
devised from the Gender Policy.


2.5 Programmes



   Education


Some of the programme areas of the Department  of  Education  include  those
addressing sexual harassment, adult basic education and  training,  equality
in job allocation, skills development through the  allocation  of  bursaries
and the building of hostels for farm school children.

 • Economic empowerment of women

The report cites 3 Departments that are engaged in the economic empowerment
of women. These include the Departments of Public Works, Roads and
Transport, Health and Provincial Treasury. Provincial Treasury was cited as
having undertaken road shows, which addressed issues of financial
management. In general, the report was not clear about the programme areas
that these Departments are engaged in.

 • Agriculture

The report indicated that women manage more than 80% of small-scale
projects on tribal land in the former Qwa-Qwa and in townships. Women
constitute 60% of all land reform beneficiaries. The Department of
Agriculture is reported to have a female farmer of the year competition, a
food security pilot project of which the main beneficiaries are women and a
programme that facilitates mentoring and partnership between women farmers
and more experienced neigbouring farmers.

 • Social Development
The Department of Social Development reported on the distribution of
grants, hospice organisations, victim empowerment, and shelters for abused
women amongst its programme areas, which has a gendered impact. Internal
measures include a HIV and AIDS policy.

 • Health

Within the Department of Health, several programmes are said to benefit
women. These include the maternal death notification programme, cervical
cancer services, the Prevention of Mother-to-Child programme, termination
of pregnancies, and the provision of female condoms.

 • Capacity building and skills development

The Departments of Health, Sport, Arts, Culture, Science and Technology as
well as Provincial Treasury indicated their involvement in capacity
building and skills development. The Department of Health had offered
training on post exposure prophylaxis, Provincial Treasury on financial
management and Sports, Arts, Culture, Science and Technology on needlework
and literacy projects.

The GFPs in the provincial Departments and national Departments (with
offices in the provinces) as well as the gender co-ordinators in local
government received training on policy development, gender mainstreaming,
strategic planning, gender awareness and gender analysis.


2.6 Achievements


No achievements were cited other than those listed under the various
programmes.


2.7 Challenges


The following challenges were cited in the report:

 • GFPs don’t have the necessary capacity to achieve gender equality.
 • Due to the capacity of GFPs, gender strategies, programmes and activities
   are not incorporated into the strategic plans of the  Departments,  which
   results in a lack of commitment by Departments.
 • Special Programme Officers are  appointed  at  assistant  director  level
   whereas Departments can make the appointments at a deputy director level.


 • Only a few gender co-ordinators have been appointed at  Local  Government
   level and they are generally responsible for other functions as well.



3. Gauteng





3.1 Structure


The  Gauteng  Province  does  not  have  an  OSW.  The  Social   Development
Directorate has,  however,  been  coordinating  all  gender  activities  and
programmes. It is in the process of filling the positions in the new  Gender
and HIV/AIDS programme.  The  positions  of  a  deputy  director,  assistant
director and a senior administrative officer are currently being filled.


3.2 Budget


The report does not give  an  indication  of  the  budget  attached  to  the
directorate.

3.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan


A gender policy framework was developed in 2002/03. The  Gauteng  Provincial
Government has a gender action plan and this was  recently  integrated  with
the Gauteng Provincial Government’s priorities. A  draft  Sexual  Harassment
Policy Framework is also in place.


3.4 Gender Mainstreaming


One of the province’s key intervention strategies is  gender  mainstreaming.
Gender indicators have been developed and a monitoring process is in place.


3.5 Programmes


 • Policy development and analysis

The Executive Council has approved a Gauteng  Provincial  Government  Gender
Policy  Framework.  The  Directorate  provides  support  to  Departments  to
facilitate the  development  of  sector  specific  policies  and  programmes
designed to address gender issues. A  draft  Gauteng  Provincial  Government
Sexual  Harassment  Policy  is  in  place  and  Departments  are   currently
finalising their respective policies.

 • Capacity Building

One of the priorities of the Directorate was ensuring that GFPs  and  senior
managers receive training on gender planning and gender budgeting.

 • Gender machineries

All Departments have nominated GFPs. It is  reported  that  the  designation
and location of these vary across the Departments. The positions range  from
that of chief director to assistant  director  and  in  one  case,  that  of
senior administrative officer. A gender forum has been established and  this
structure meets monthly.

 • Monitoring and evaluation
An annual analysis is undertaken of Departmental strategies and  budgets  to
ascertain whether they are in line with national and  provincial  priorities
as well as to ensure that gender is  integrated  into  strategic  plans  and
budgets. A quarterly tracking chart is also  in  operation  to  capture  the
Premier’s and Members of  the  Executive  Council’s  (MECs)  commitments  on
gender  issues  and  to  monitor  progress  against  the  delivery  of   the
commitments made by the Premier and MECs.

 • Gender Mainstreaming

All provincial Departments are reported to have gender budgets. The  outputs
of gender budgets reflect gender sensitive  indicators  for  all  programmes
and projects, which are in line with the  core  functions  of  the  specific
Department.

 • Co-ordination and planning

The Directorate ensures that certain events are commemorated. These  include
Women’s Day and 16 Days of Activism.  They  are  responsible  for  providing
strategic support to the lead department co-ordinating Women’s Day  as  well
as co-ordinating all provincial Departments in celebrating Women’s Day.

3.6 Achievements

No specific achievements other than the ones mentioned above  are  cited  in
the report.


3.7 Challenges


The directorate lists social regeneration and economic empowerment as  their
challenges.


4. KwaZulu-Natal



4.1 Structure


The OSW is located within the Directorate for Human Rights. The position  of
Head of the OSW, at deputy  director  level,  is  vacant.  The  position  of
assistant  director  and  administrative  officer  is  also  on  the   staff
establishment. It was indicated that the position of the  Head  of  the  OSW
would be converted into a director’s position, as from April 2004.



Within the Departments, most GFPs have been permanently established.


4.2 Budget


It was reported that the OSW has a budget of R1.6 million. It is unclear
whether this amount includes personnel costs.


4.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan


The  OSW  has  a  draft  gender  policy  and  is  currently  working  on  an
implementation strategy as well as a gender monitoring tool. The Office  has
furthermore undertaken a gender audit in the province as part  of  assessing
the 10 years of democracy.


4.4 Gender Mainstreaming


The OSW has developed guidelines for gender mainstreaming.

4.5 Programmes


    The following Departments are said to have programmes that are gender
                                  related:

      • Legislature - Holding of a Young Women’s Parliament and celebration
        of significant events.
      • Department of Health - Workshops on the gender policy in the health
        sector, celebration of significant event days and the establishment
        of a workplace gender forum.
      • Social Welfare and  Population  Development  -  Victim  Empowerment
        programme, domestic violence  programme  and  a  domestic  violence
        resource directory.
      •  Provincial  Treasury  -  Gender   audit,   awareness   programmes,
        celebration of significant events.
      • Traditional and Local  Government  Affairs  -  Awareness  campaign,
        training of co-ordinators, celebration of  events  for  significant
        days.
      • Education  -  Women  empowerment  programme,  women  in  management
        programme and the celebration of events for significant days.
      • Transport - Zibambele Road Maintenance  Contract,  Women  for  Road
        Safety, Employment  for  Female  Traffic  Officers,  Vukuzakhe  and
        labour  construction  programmes  and  celebration  of  events  for
        significant days.


4.6 Achievements


The OSWs report indicated the following achievements:

      • GFPs have been permanently  established  in  some  Departments  and
        municipalities.
      •  Capacity  building  programmes  for  GFPs  and  Provincial  Gender
        Machinery have been undertaken.
      • A gender audit was conducted.
      • A draft provincial gender implementation strategy is in place.
      • A draft gender monitoring and evaluation tool has been developed.
      • Guidelines for gender mainstreaming are in place.
      • Awareness campaigns are held.


4.7 Challenges


The following challenges were cited:

    • Establishment of permanent GFPs and the resourcing thereof.
    • Establishing an integrated approach to gender issues and political buy-
      in. Furthermore, there is a need for an integrated  approach  to  deal
      with gender issues.



5. Mpumalanga[6]


5.1 Structure

The OSW  is  located  within  the  Office  of  the  Premier.  The  following
positions are on the staff structure of the OSW:

 • Deputy director
 • 2 assistant directors
 • 3 chief community liaison officers
 • 3 community liaison officers
 • 3 administrative clerks

Currently,  the  positions  of  assistant  director  (research),   2   chief
community  liaison  officers,  2   community   liaison   officers   and   an
administrative clerk are vacant.

GFP coordinators have been appointed in Departments. However, no  structures
are in place and they have inadequate job  descriptions.  GFPs  coordinators
have been appointed fulltime in 6 Departments, namely, Health;  Agriculture,
Conservation and  Environment  Affairs;  Housing  and  Land  Administration;
Safety and  Security;  Social  Services,  Population  and  Development;  and
Sports Recreation, Arts and Culture. Whilst other  Departments  are  in  the
process of appointing staff in the GFPs, the GFPs refers  to  an  individual
person and units have not been established.


5.2 Budget


The budget of the OSW as well as that of the GFPs are not  provided  in  the
report.


5.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan


The report does not indicate whether there is a Provincial Gender Policy  or
whether the province has a gender action plan.


5.4 Gender Mainstreaming


This information is unavailable in the report.

5.5 Programmes


The OSW has undertaken the following programmes since its establishment:

    • Co-ordinated the HIV and AIDS programme Vusa Isizwe, targeting  school
      children.
    • Conducted training for GFPs coordinators on gender issues.
    • Conducted a gender workshop for Members of the Provincial  Legislature
      and Heads of Departments.
    • Ran awareness campaigns on legislation affecting women.
    • Co-ordinated the calendar on women’s events.

Departments were engaged in the following programmes:

    • Housing - Workshops to gender sensitise senior managers.
    • Safety and Security - Campaigns on gender-based violence,  partnership
      against crime and moral  regeneration.  Awareness  raising  programmes
      were conducted on drug and  substance  abuse  for  youth  as  well  as
      paralegal workshops for farmers.
    • Social Development - Welfare services for women.


5.6 Achievements


No specific achievements were reported other than those mentioned above.


5.7 Challenges


Challenges were cited for the OSW and for the GFPs.


OSW


    • Not all positions in the OSW has been filled.
    •  Budgetary  constraints  are  experienced  due  to  cost   curtailment
      measures, which has impacted on the filling of posts.
    • Provincial or national Governments on occasion give the OSW additional
      mandates that are not funded.


GFPs


    • GFPs deal with issues other than  gender,  such  as  HIV,  disability,
      youth and children’s issues. Some GFPs are also responsible for  other
      core functions within their Departments.
    • The location and rank of the GFPs are a challenge. Some GFPs  have  to
      report to numerous persons. They do not have an influence on decision-
      making and thus do not have the  ability  to  influence  decisions  on
      issues such as gender mainstreaming and gender equality.
    • Departments do not have budgets to undertake gender responsibilities.



6. North West



6.1 Structure


The  OSW  was  established  in  1995  and  is  located  within  the  Special
Programmes Directorate, in the Office of the Premier. The  report  indicates
that a director,  who  is  also  responsible  for  the  disability  desk,  3
assistant directors, a senior administrative officer, an office manager  and
an administrative clerk, is provided for on the  structure.  It  is  unclear
from the report whether all these positions are located within  the  OSW  or
within the Special Programmes  Directorate.  Furthermore,  clarification  is
needed on the level at which the Head of the OSW is appointed.

The status of the Departmental GFPs is:

    • The Department of Health - A person has been appointed to the  GFP  as
      an assistant director.
    • The Department of Agriculture - A person has been  formally  appointed
      in the GFP as assistant director.
    •  Conservation  and  Environment  –  An  assistant  director  has  been
      appointed.
    • Department of Minerals and Energy – Systems are in  place  to  address
      gender in the province.
    • Other departments have ad hoc gender desks where gender does not  form
      part of the individual’s job description.


6.2 Budget


The Special Programmes Directorate has a budget, and the  OSW  is  allocated
for within this budget. The amount allocated to the OSW was not indicated.


6.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan


It is unclear whether the province has a Gender Policy and a  gender  action
plan.


6.4 Gender Mainstreaming


The province adopted a Provincial Gender Strategy in  2003.  The  Provincial
Gender Strategy  set  mechanisms  in  place  by  which  Departments’  gender
programmes will be assessed.


6.5 Programmes


There is no clear indication from the report about the programmes  currently
underway in the OSW and in  the  Departments.  The  report,  however,  makes
brief mention of a United Nations Development Programme (UNDP/OSW)  capacity
building programme and Departmental gender analysis.  The  nature  of  these
undertakings is unclear.


6.6 Achievements


The report indicated the following achievements:

    • Between 1997 and 1998, a business plan was developed which  was  aimed
      at integrating the implementation of gender programmes in Government.
    • A gender audit was undertaken between 1998 and 1999.
    • In 2001, a provincial gender summit was held.
    • A capacity building training programme was developed for GFPs.
    • A Gender Strategy has been developed and adopted by the province.


6.7 Challenges


The challenges reported on include:

    • Most of the Departments in the province  do  not  have  a  permanently
      appointed GFP. The Departments of Health, Agriculture and Conservation
      and  Environment  are  the  only  Departments  with  GFPs.  The  other
      Departments have ad hoc GFPs and gender does not form  part  of  their
      job descriptions. This makes it difficult for the  OSW  to  engage  in
      training and other initiatives.
    • The OSW is faced with the challenge of getting the  provincial  gender
      machinery operational.
    • Departments do not have specific budgets for mainstreaming gender.
    • The  relationship  between  national  and  provincial  Departments  is
      problematic.

7. Western Cape[7]

7.1 Structure

 The OSW head is appointed at deputy director level. The OSW is staffed with
                              only one person.

        Table: Status of GFPs in Western Cape provincial Departments
|Department   |Structure   |Rank of GFP |Gender        |Budget     |
|             |and location|            |programmes    |           |
|Housing      |Included in |Assistant   |Draft gender  |Dedicated  |
|             |2004/05     |director    |equality and  |budget     |
|             |strategic   |            |women         |2004/05    |
|             |plan.       |            |empowerment   |           |
|             |Location in |            |implementation|           |
|             |Human Rights|            |strategy.     |           |
|             |and special |            |              |           |
|             |projects.   |            |              |           |
|             |Ad hoc      |            |              |           |
|             |function    |            |              |           |
|Health       |Add-on      |Position    |Draft gender  |No budget  |
|             |function.   |vacant. The |equality and  |           |
|             |Human       |position was|women         |           |
|             |Resources.  |at the level|empowerment   |           |
|             |            |of assistant|implementation|           |
|             |            |director.   |strategy.     |           |
|             |            |            |Celebration of|           |
|             |            |            |commemorative |           |
|             |            |            |days.         |           |
|Agriculture  |Located in  |Deputy      |Draft gender  |Dedicated  |
|             |Human       |director:   |equality and  |budget     |
|             |Resources   |gender,     |women         |2004/05.   |
|             |and Support |youth, HIV, |empowerment   |           |
|             |Services.   |disability  |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy.     |           |
|             |            |            |Celebration of|           |
|             |            |            |commemorative |           |
|             |            |            |days.         |           |
|Social       |            |Assistant   |Celebration of|Dedicated  |
|Services     |            |director.   |commemorative |budget     |
|             |            |            |days.         |           |
|             |            |            |Safe houses.  |           |
|             |            |            |Sponsorships. |           |
|Education    |Human       |Assistant   |Celebration of|Dedicated  |
|             |Resources   |director:   |commemorative |budget     |
|             |Development |gender, HIV,|days.         |           |
|             |            |youth,      |Draft gender  |           |
|             |            |disability. |equality and  |           |
|             |            |            |women         |           |
|             |            |            |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |            |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy.     |           |
|             |            |            |Life skills.  |           |
|Community    |Add-on      |Senior      |Commemorative |           |
|Safety       |function.   |officers:   |days, Draft   |           |
|             |Human       |gender,     |gender        |           |
|             |Resources   |youth,      |equality and  |           |
|             |Development |disability. |women         |           |
|             |            |            |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |            |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy;     |           |
|             |            |            |trauma rooms; |           |
|             |            |            |young women at|           |
|             |            |            |risk.         |           |
|Economic     |Human       |Deputy      |Celebration of|Dedicated  |
|Development  |Resources   |director:   |commemorative |budget     |
|and Tourism  |Development |gender,     |days. Draft   |           |
|             |Formal      |youth, HIV, |gender        |           |
|             |structure.  |disability, |equality and  |           |
|             |            |labour      |women         |           |
|             |            |relations.  |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |            |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy.     |           |
|Environmental|Add-on,     |Contract    |Draft gender  |No budget. |
|Affairs and  |Human       |appointment:|equality and  |           |
|Development  |Resources   |gender,     |women         |           |
|planning     |Development |youth,      |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |disability  |implementation|           |
|             |            |and HIV.    |strategy.     |           |
|Local        |Formal,     |Assistant   |Celebration of|Dedicated  |
|Government   |Human       |director.   |commemorative |budget     |
|             |resources.  |            |days. Draft   |2004/05.   |
|             |            |            |gender        |           |
|             |            |            |equality and  |           |
|             |            |            |women         |           |
|             |            |            |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |            |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy.     |           |
|Provincial   |Add-on,     |Officer     |Draft gender  |No budget. |
|Treasury     |Human       |(Acting).   |equality and  |           |
|             |Resources   |            |women         |           |
|             |Management  |            |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |            |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy.     |           |
|Provincial   |            |            |Nonexistent.  |No budget. |
|Administratio|            |            |              |           |
|n            |            |            |              |           |
|Transport and|Formal, will|Special     |Draft gender  |Dedicated  |
|Public Works |be located  |Programmes  |equality and  |budget     |
|             |in HOD (1   |Officer:    |women         |2004/05.   |
|             |April 2004).|gender,     |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |youth,      |implementation|           |
|             |            |disability. |strategy.     |           |
|             |            |            |Commemorative |           |
|             |            |            |days.         |           |
|Culture      |Add-on      |Sport       |Celebration of|Dedicated  |
|Affairs and  |            |Promotions  |commemorative |budget.    |
|Sport        |            |Officers.   |days.         |           |
|             |            |            |Draft gender  |           |
|             |            |            |equality and  |           |
|             |            |            |women         |           |
|             |            |            |empowerment   |           |
|             |            |            |implementation|           |
|             |            |            |strategy.     |           |

7.2 Budget

   Whilst the report gives an indication of budgets allocated to specific
  programmes, it does not provide the overall budget allocation to the OSW
                       for the 2003/04 financial year.

7.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

   A draft provincial Gender Equality and Women Empowerment Implementation
                            strategy is in place.

7.4 Gender Mainstreaming

  The OSWs report does not indicate whether the Office is developing or has
         developed a gender mainstreaming strategy for the province.

7.5 Programmes

              Table: Programmes of the OSW in the Western Cape
|Programme    |Budget    |Activity       |Status    |Challenges    |
|Policy       |R15 000   |Draft          |Draft.    |No capacity to|
|Development  |(2002/03) |provincial     |          |give effect to|
|and Research |          |gender equality|          |the plan.     |
|             |          |and women      |          |Obtaining     |
|             |          |empowerment    |          |institutional |
|             |          |implementation |          |support and   |
|             |          |strategy.      |          |buy-in.       |
|Capacity     |R50 000   |Mainstreaming  |Developed |Need to       |
|Building and |(2003/04) |training for   |training  |appoint person|
|Training     |          |trainers in the|package.  |to provide and|
|             |          |public sector. |          |sustain       |
|             |          |OSW specific   |          |training.     |
|             |          |capacity       |          |              |
|             |          |building.      |          |              |
|Public       |R285 000  |Celebration of |          |Capacity to   |
|Education,   |(2003/04) |commemoration  |          |give effect to|
|Awareness    |          |days.          |          |programmes for|
|Raising and  |          |Development of |          |commemorative |
|Communication|          |promotional    |          |days.         |
|             |          |materials.     |          |              |
|             |          |Partnerships   |          |              |
|             |          |with civil     |          |              |
|             |          |society.       |          |              |
|Co-ordination|Integrated|The formal     |          |Commitment    |
|of gender    |R350 000  |structuring of |          |from all      |
|machinery    |(2004/05) |a provincial   |          |gender        |
|             |          |gender         |          |stakeholders  |
|             |          |management     |          |in provinces. |
|             |          |system.        |          |Resources.    |
|Monitoring,  |          |Developing of  |Appointed |Budgetary     |
|Evaluation   |          |an audit       |the Human |constraints   |
|and Reporting|          |instrument.    |Sciences  |              |
|             |          |               |Research  |              |
|             |          |               |Council   |              |
|             |          |               |(HSRC) to |              |
|             |          |               |develop an|              |
|             |          |               |audit     |              |
|             |          |               |instrument|              |
|             |          |               |.         |              |

7.6 Achievements

    Other than the achievements mentioned above, the OSW reported on the
                           following achievements:

    •  Convening  a  conference  entitled  “Breaking  Barriers:   Women   in
      Technology”.
    • Hosting a social sector consultative workshop.
    • Undertaking a provincial consultative road show.
    • Hosting conferences on gender violence.

7.7 Challenges

               The report indicates the following challenges:

    • There is a need to strengthen existing relations with the NGO sector.
    • Structuring and co-ordination of the provincial gender machinery.
    • Resources for the replication of gender desks on district level.
    • Understanding the role and operational methodology of the OSW.
    • OSW needs to be properly resourced with regard to the approval of  the
      organogram and the filling of posts.
    • Departments need to institutionalise gender portfolios by:
         o Formalising structures.
         o Adequately resourcing structures.
         o Strategically locating gender structures.
         o Appointing the GFPs at the recommended rank.
         o Understanding the responsibilities of GFPs.


Gender Focal Points

1. Department of Agriculture

1.1 Structure

In July 2003, the Departmental Executive Committee ratified a decision to
establish a Gender Forum in the Department. This Forum is in the process of
being established. It is envisaged that the Forum will be composed of 70%
women and 30% men, who would be nominated from departmental programmes. The
Forum will report to the Director-General and the Employment Equity Forum.
The GFP staffed with a deputy director has been created in the Director-
General’s office. The relationship between the Gender Forum and the GFP was
not indicated. This needs to be explored as well as the functions of the
two structures.

1.2 Budget

The report indicated that the budget allocation to the Forum would be
discussed after the launch.

1.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

The Department’s report does not indicate whether there is any gender
policy or gender action plan implemented or developed for the Department.

1.4 Gender Mainstreaming

There is no indication of a gender mainstreaming strategy in place in the
Department.

1.5 Programmes

 • Female farmer of the year competition

This competition was initiated in 1999 to celebrate women farmers’
contribution to the agricultural sector. Women are recognised in the top
exporter-, top national markets-, top informal markets- and top household
producer categories.

1.6 Staff component

|Female                 |Male                |
|36%                    |64%                 |
|Women in senior positions                   |
|40%                    |                    |
|Senior management positions held by women   |
|Director-General       |0                   |
|Deputy                 |2                   |
|Director-Generals      |                    |
|Chief of staff of      |0                   |
|ministry               |                    |
|Assistant              |0                   |
|Director-General       |                    |

The Human Resources Management recruitment strategy is in the process of
being revised to ensure gender balances in recruitment processes.

1.7 Achievements

The Department’s report did not indicate any specific achievements.

1.8 Challenges

No challenges were reported.


2.    Department of Arts and Culture (DAC)





2 Structure


The GFP is staffed with a Special Programmes Officer who has been  appointed
at a deputy director level and reports to the  Director  of  Human  Resource
Management. This person is responsible for gender issues, HIV and AIDS,  the
Employee Assistance Programme, disability issues and children’s rights.

1. Budget

The GFP does not have a budget  of  its  own.   It  draws  from  the  budget
allocated to Human Resources.  The  amount  available  to  the  GFP  is  not
indicated.

2.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan
The  GFP  is  currently  engaged  in  a  review  of  departmental   policies
pertaining to HIV and AIDS, employment equity,  recruitment  and  the  draft
‘Human Resource and Development and Disability’ policy. No mention  is  made
of a gender action plan.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

The Department’s report does not make mention of  strategies  to  mainstream
gender into all departmental plans, procedures,  programmes,  outputs,  etc.
This information needs to be elicited from the Department.

5. Programmes

Internally,  the  Department  has  embarked  on  information  and   training
sessions for staff on the Domestic Violence Act (Act  No  116  of1998),  the
Customary Marriages Act (Act No 120 of 1998) and on sexual harassment.

Externally,  the  Department  has  only  been  involved  in  initiatives  to
commemorate International Women’s Day, Women’s Day,  Human  Rights  Day  and
the 16 days of No Violence Against Women programme.

6. Staff Component

Not reported.

7. Achievements
No specific achievements other than those mentioned above are documented  in
the report.

2.8 Challenges

The Department has  not  listed  the  challenges  faced  by  the  GFP.  This
information needs to be elicited.


3.  Department of Correctional Services (DCS)

1. Structure

The Gender Desk within  the  Department  of  Correctional  Services  is  the
equivalent of a directorate and is managed by  a  National  Manager  who  is
appointed at a director level.  In addition  to  the  director,  the  gender
desk is staffed with six people.  Two  of  these  are  appointed  at  deputy
director levels and are responsible for policy, planning, mainstreaming  and
advocacy and for women’s empowerment  and  capacity  building  respectively.
Two  assistant  directors  provide  programmatic  support  to   the   deputy
directors.   The  remaining  three  staff  members  provide   administrative
support to the directorate.

2. Budget

No mention is made in the Department’s report on  the  budget  available  to
the Gender Desk.  This would need to be sourced from the DCS.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The DCS report does not cover any  aspects  relating  to  the  work  of  the
Gender Desk in reviewing Departmental policies from a gender perspective  or
in developing gender related policies. This needs to be determined.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

Strategies pertaining to the mainstreaming of gender are not touched  on  in
the report.

5. Programmes

The following internal programmes are listed in the report  as  a  means  of
promoting gender equity in the department:  workshops,  training,  security,
bursaries, employment opportunities, personnel development and leave.

In relation to the services that the DCS provides, the following  programmes
are  targeted  at  offenders:  educational  programmes,   skills   training,
counseling, health care, HIV and AIDS, moral and spiritual care, sports  and
recreation, victim offender mediation and support systems for release.   The
ways in which these programmes promote gender equity is  not  clarified  and
the objectives, methodology and impact assessment mechanisms have  not  been
outlined in the report.

3.6 Staff Component

The following information is provided with respect to  the  demographics  of
senior managers in the Department:

Senior Management Demographics for 2003
|Group                 |Numbers               |Percentage            |
|White male            |3                     |3.7                   |
|Black male            |62                    |76.5                  |
|Female                |16                    |19.7                  |

3.7 Achievements

The Department’s achievements with respect to furthering gender  equity  are
not indicated in the report.

8. Challenges

The  challenges  identified  relate  to  restructuring,  the  socio-economic
status of women, women as practitioners  and  the  sphere  of  work  in  the
justice system.  The exact nature of these  challenges  is  not  articulated
and this needs to be clarified.

   4. Department of Defence (DoD)


1. Structure

The GFP in  the  Department  of  Defence  is  a  sub-section  in  the  Equal
Opportunities  Chief  Directorate.   The  GFP  reports  to  the  Council  on
Defence, the Secretary of  Defence  and  the  Chief  of  the  South  African
National Defence Force (SANDF).  It is staffed by  five  personnel  members.
These posts are the military equivalent of a deputy director, two  assistant
directors, an administrative officer and a chief clerk.

A Gender Forum has been established and each service and division chief  has
appointed a representative  to  serve  on  this  forum.   The  Gender  Forum
assists the GFP in attaining its objectives, which include ensuring that:

    • The gender policy is implemented.
    • The  budgets  of  the  various  services  and  divisions  are  gender
      sensitive.
    • Gender-related training is conducted.
    • Gender is mainstreamed in all services and divisions.

2. Budget

The GFP was allocated R 89 211.00 for the 2003/04 financial  year.  The  GFP
is further striving to ensure that all services  and  divisions  budget  for
gender- related activities in their respective budgets.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The objectives listed by the GFP include the following:

    • To ensure that the ‘National Policy on Women’s Empowerment and  Gender
      Equity’  is  implemented  in  all  services  and  divisions   of   the
      Department.
    • To market and promote gender policies in the Department
    • To monitor Departmental programmes and policies to  ensure  that  they
      are consistent with the national gender policy.

The GFP has formulated several policies. These include a  sexual  harassment
policy and a gender-based  violence  policy.  A  policy  pertaining  to  the
promotion of gender equity  and  a  pregnancy  policy  are  still  in  draft
formats.

No mention is made of a Gender Action Plan in the Department’s report.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

The GFP indicates that the mainstreaming  of  gender  in  all  services  and
divisions is one of its objectives.  The Gender Forum is used to  assist  in
monitoring the implementation of this.

5. Programmes

4.5.1 Internal Programmes




   Gender Training Programme


The purpose of this programme is  to  build  internal  capacity  within  the
department and to equip  staff  with  skills  and  contextual  knowledge  on
gender issues.  Examples cited are a ‘Women in Law’ course and  training  on
sexual harassment.


   Hotline


An internal hotline  has  been  established  for  the  reporting  of  sexual
harassment and gender-based violence in the Department.  This  hotline  will
be used to serve as an indicator of the levels of gender-based violence  and
sexual harassment.


   Gender Sensitisation Programmes


This initiative is comprised of internal roadshows and  presentations  aimed
at
facilitating an understanding of the departmental policies  that  relate  to
gender. The programme is targeted at both management and staff.

4.5.2 External Programmes


   Gender Awareness Campaign


The awareness campaign is predominantly centred around calendar events  such
as National Women’s Day and the 16 Days of Activism on No  Violence  against
Women and Children.


   Peace Table Seminar


The peace table initiative strives to create a  forum  where  women  in  the
military can engage with women in civil society to promote peace.  The  2003
seminar focused on how women can contribute towards  the  implementation  of
the African Union (AU) and New Partnership for Africa’s Development  (NEPAD)
peace agenda.

6. Staff Component

Not reported.

7. Achievements

The work of the GFP has been recognised by  some  countries  in  Africa  and
internationally. Namibia, Botswana and Nigeria have requested that  the  GFP
assist their Defence Forces in setting up their own Gender Focal Points.  In
addition, North Korea, Portugal  and  Pakistan  have  requested  information
from the GFP on its work in the Department.

8. Challenges

The report does not list the identified challenges.

5.  Department of Education (DoE)

1. Structure

The  GFP  in  the  Department  of  Education  has  been  established  as   a
directorate, comprising a director, a chief education specialist,  a  senior
administrative officer (this post was vacant at the time of  reporting)  and
a secretary. The GFP reports to the chief director of special programmes  in
education.  The director of the GFP participates in  departmental  strategic
planning meetings and attends management meetings.

2. Budget

The budget allocated to the GFP for the  2003/04  financial  year  was  R1,5
million.  Of this, R 200 000 was allocated to programmatic  work.   Much  of
the  work  done  by  the  GFP  is  funded  by  donations  and  by   building
partnerships  with  other  directorates.   The  GFP’s  report   notes   that
budgetary restrictions limit programmatic initiatives to a large extent.

5.3   Policy and Gender Action Plan

One of the strategic objectives of the GFP is to ensure that  gender  equity
is reflected in  all  policies  and  practices  of  the  Department.  Policy
guidelines on sexual harassment and learners who become pregnant  have  been
developed by the GFP.

5.4 Mainstreaming of gender

The GFP has developed a framework to assist sectional  heads  to  mainstream
gender into their work.  This  framework  still  needs  to  be  approved  by
senior management before it can be utilised.

5. Programmes


   Gender sensitisation workshops


Workshops aimed at improving the conceptual understanding of  gender-related
issues were conducted  with  school  governing  bodies,  educators,  learner
representative councils, educator unions and education officials.


   Girl Education Movement


The Girl Education Movement was launched to focus on and build the  capacity
of girls.  A website was  created  to  provide  girls  with  a  platform  to
discuss issues affecting the quality of their lives.  A workshop on  writing
skills was also conducted for  girls  to  enhance  their  ability  to  write
articles for publication.


   Advocacy Strategy


Campaigns on gender-based violence and the link between gender and  HIV  and
AIDS have been conducted.  These campaigns have entailed the compilation  of
educational materials such as posters and manuals.

6. Staff Component

Not reported.

5.7 Achievements

No achievements are listed.

5.8 Challenges

Budgetary constraints were listed as an impediment to the work of  the  GFP.


6. Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT)

6.1 Structure

The Division for Gender,  Disability,  Youth  and  Children  serves  as  the
Gender Focal Point for the Department.  This  division  is  located  in  the
Directorate  for  Transformation  and  Special   Projects.    The   Division
comprises  an  assistant  director  and  an  administrative  officer.    The
assistant director  serves  as  the  GFP  officer.  The  assistant  director
reports to the deputy director of transformation.

2. Budget

Currently, the GFP does not have a budget of its own. Its work is funded  by
the budget of the Directorate:  Transformation and  Special  Projects.   The
amount available to the GFP from this budget has not  been  stipulated.   It
is envisaged that a proposal will be submitted to secure a dedicated  budget
for the GFP.  It is hoped that this will be available in the next  financial
year.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The  Department  reports  that  it  is  cognisant  of  the  national  policy
framework on gender and it has put in place structures  to  give  effect  to
this.  This is not elaborated on in the report. The  role  of  the  Division
for Gender, Disability, Youth and Children is to co-ordinate and  facilitate
the development and implementation of policies and strategies which  promote
‘gender  equality,   women’s   empowerment,   disability   inclusivity   and
integration,  youth  development  and  the  promotion  and   protection   of
children’s rights’.  The report does not specify how this is  done  and  the
policies that have been worked on.  The only specific reference to a  policy
that has been developed is a sexual harassment policy.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

The directorate is currently in the process of establishing  structures  and
mechanisms for ensuring that gender is mainstreamed  into  the  Department’s
core  functions.   A  departmental  Gender  Committee  has  therefore   been
established  to  give  effect  to  this.   The  Gender  Committee  comprises
officials who  have  been  nominated  as  gender  representatives  from  the
various Chief Directorates in the Department.   Gender  issues  are  also  a
standing agenda item in meetings of the Transformation  Steering  Committee,
which are chaired by the Director-General.

6.5   Programmes

6.5.1 Internal

 • Internship programme

As part of its internship programme, the Department has allocated R 147  000
to 8 students from disadvantaged communities to  study  for  a  certificated
course at the Garankuwa Hotel Management  School.  Fifty  percent  of  these
students are female.


   Training of tour operators


The Department has set aside R 240 000 for the training  of  tour  operators
in the next financial year.  Fifty percent of those trained will be women.

Employment equity targets

The Departmental draft Employment Equity  Plan  calls  for  an  overall  50%
target of women employees.  Currently, 35% of the staff  in  the  Department
is women.  Women hold 40% of senior management positions.

6.5.2 External

 • Commemoration of Calendar Events

The Department has been actively involved in commemorating national  gender-
related events such as the celebration of Women’s Day.


   Arts, crafts and clothing project


Funds have been  allocated  to  a  training  and  developmental  project  in
KwaZulu-Natal.  This project has entailed the  production  of  African  art,
crafts and clothing.  Some of the work produced as a result of this  project
was showcased at the World Summit on Sustainable Development  in  2002.  The
project currently receives orders from an international market as well.

The ways in which this project has benefited women and the number  of  women
involved are not articulated in the report.

   Tourism project


The Department has initiated a tourism  project  in  the  Limpopo  Province,
where women are  trained  in  running  bed  and  breakfast  outlets.   These
outlets are then marketed internationally.  The number of women involved  in
this project is not reflected in the report.




   Abalone fishing exemptions


In Centane in the Eastern Cape, 115 abalone  fishing  exemptions  have  been
handed out, of which 63 were to women.


   Fly-fishing project


In Caledon in the Free  State,  the  Department  has  funded  a  fly-fishing
project, which is run by 40 women.  This poverty  relief  project  has  also
become a tourist attraction site and as a consequence,  the  women  involved
have been trained and given bicycles so that they  can  provide  tour  guide
services as well.

6.6 Staff Component

Not reported.

6.7 Achievements

No achievements are reported.
8. Challenges

One  of  the  major  challenges  reported  on  is  the  need  to  capacitate
representatives that serve on the Gender  Committee.  A  second  significant
challenge is the need to strengthen the co-ordination function  of  the  GFP
within the Department. This includes establishing a co-ordination link  with
the Department’s  statutory  bodies  and  the  provincial  line  functionary
departments.

7. Foreign Affairs

7.1 Structure

The Department does not have any person staffing the position in the GFP,
which is at director level. The Human Resources section has taken the
initiative to consult with the OSW as well as the Department of Public
Service and Administration to develop a gender strategy. Following this,
the Department is in the process of establishing a GFP in the Directorate:
Transformation, which will house the Gender Unit and an Employment Equity
sub-directorate. The Gender Unit will be responsible for making
recommendations on programmes, and together with the Employment Equity
Forum monitor the advancement and implementation of programmes.

7.2 Budget

The Department currently does not have an operational GFP.

7.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

None. The Department is currently using the employment equity plan to
address representivity and training in the Department.

7.4 Gender Mainstreaming

    The Department’s report does not indicate whether they have a gender
                           mainstreaming strategy.

7.5 Programmes

 • Recruitment and selection

A decision had been taken to use the Department’s current recruitment
process to recruit women, especially for middle and senior management
positions.

 • Human resource development

Training is being used to develop and advance women in the Department. ABET
is also used to develop staff, especially women at lower levels.

 • Foreign Service Institute

In order to increase the number of women in missions abroad, women have
been part of some of the following training initiatives:

     1) Diplomatic training: 10 out of 22 participants  being  trained  are
        women.
     2) Mission administration course: 16 out of 32 officials are women.
     3) Foreign Affairs Assistance Course: 20 out of the 24  officials  are
        women.

7.6 Staff component

|Female staff members                               |49%          |
|Female staff in senior management positions        |5%           |
|Females staff in middle management positions       |33%          |
|Female staff in positions below middle management  |62%          |
|Missions abroad headed by women as Ambassadors,    |16 out of 106|
|High Commissioners or Consul Generals              |             |

7.7 Achievements

As the Department does not have a GFP in place, there were no achievements
reported.

7.8 Challenges

The Department does not  have  a  GFP  and  therefore  this  issue  was  not
addressed in the report.

8.    Department of Health (DoH)

8.1   Structure

The organogram of the Department indicates that the GFP  is  headed  by  the
deputy director-general  and  it  comprises  a  director,  deputy  director,
assistant director (post vacant at the time of reporting), a  secretary  and
a senior administrative officer (post vacant at the time of reporting).

2. Budget

The total budget allocated to the GFP for the current financial year is
 R 1 892 000.  In addition to this, some of the programmes of the  GFP  have
received external funding, namely the Danish funded project on HIV and  AIDS
and gender- based violence.

Department of Health: Budget
|Line item                  |Amount Allocated                         |
|Personnel                  |R 1024 000.00                            |
|Administration             |R  100 000.00                            |
|Professional & Special     |R   688 000.00                           |
|Services                   |                                         |
|Equipment                  |R      80 000.00                         |

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The GFP has finalised and launched ‘Gender Policy Guidelines for the  Public
Health Sector’ in November 2002.  It  has  also  engaged  in  a  process  of
advocacy and awareness  raising  on  this  policy  in  6  provinces,  namely
Limpopo,  Northern  Cape,  Free  State,  KwaZulu-Natal,   North   West   and
Mpumalanga.  The policy has been presented to  senior  management  in  these
provinces.  In addition to this, a further  10  departmental  policies  have
been analysed from a gender perspective.

4.  Gender  Mainstreaming

Nationally, 4 clusters  and  1  directorate  have  been  trained  in  gender
analysis and  mainstreaming.  In  the  Limpopo  province,  approximately  36
middle managers have been trained.   In  all  9  provinces,  15  senior  and
middle managers have been trained on gender and health related issues.

The report does not indicate how gender is mainstreamed  into  the  work  of
the Department.
5. Programmes

 • Sexual Assault Care Practitioners Training Project (SACP)

It is estimated that more than 600 nurses have been trained  in  2001/2  (40
nurses in KwaZulu-Natal, 30 nurses in the Northern Cape, 544 nurses  in  the
Western Cape and 19 nurses in Gauteng).  Further information on  the  nature
of this project is lacking.

 • Training for state doctors

Training has been provided to state doctors  (100  doctors  in  the  Western
Cape and 27 doctors in the Eastern Cape).  The nature of this  training  and
its impact from a gender perspective are unclear.

 • Projects on HIV and AIDS and gender-based violence (donor funded project)

Under the auspices of this project,  research  has  been  conducted  on  the
following:

    • Partner violence and HIV.
    • Child sexual abuse.
    • Disclosure of serostatus.
    • Sexual coercion and sexual debut.
    • Monitoring the implementation of rape  law  reforms  in  South  Africa
      (with special focus on  the  investigation  and  prosecution  of  rape
      cases).
    • Justice  served  in  South  Africa  (exploring  alternative  ways  and
      mechanisms to improve on justice with regard to rape).
    • The economic aspects of sexual assault services.
    • Prevention of violence and harassment of girls in schools.

 • Projects related to strategy development and services (donor funded)

The following strategy development and service related  initiatives  are  in
progress:

    • Anti-rape responses:  this entails the mobilisation of partnerships.
    • Development of a profile of convicted  child  offenders  (aged  0-11)
      years).
    • Development of strategies to effectively prevent and respond  to  the
      rape of children aged 0-11 years and the offering of support to  both
      the victims and offenders.


 • Research on rape

This research  focuses  on  rapes  committed  against  victims  in  the  age
category 0-35 years and will be used to generate knowledge that can be  used
to inform an anti-rape strategy.

 • Stop women’s abuse helpline

This is a call-in helpline that aims to provide  victims  of  violence  with
information. The helpline also serves as  a  referral  system  and  provides
support.

8.6 Staff Component

Not reported.
8.7 Achievements

The following achievements are listed:

    • Initiation of a process for  developing  a  model  of  sexual  assault
      service provision based on the SACPs project.
    • Development of national management guidelines for dealing with  sexual
      assault.
    • Development of a sexual assault policy.
    • Development of a ‘Sexual Assault Care  Practice  Curriculum/  Training
      Manual’.
    • Facilitation of sexual harassment workshops within the Department.
    • Facilitation of workshops on gender-based violence and health.
    • Establishment  of  a  gender  forum  comprised  of  the  national  and
      provincial GFPs which meets quarterly to review and plan programmes.

8.8 Challenges

The following challenges have been identified:

    • Weaknesses in strategic direction with regard to the mainstreaming  of
      gender.
    • The full-time appointment of GFPs in the provinces.
    • The need to clarify the roles,  powers  and  functions  of  provincial
      GFPs.
    • Inadequate human and financial resources.
    • Lack of co-operation from some senior managers.
    • The need for capacity building in the provinces.
    • The lack of a staff retention strategy at both national and provincial
      level.
9. Department of Home Affairs (DoHA)

9.1  Structure

The GFP in the Department of Home Affairs comprises a  person  appointed  at
the level of an assistant director. This person is also responsible for  the
portfolios of disability, children’s rights, youth affairs and  ‘other  add-
ons’.  The assistant director reports to the  deputy  director  of  business
process management. The Department does not have GFPs at  provincial  level.


2. Budget

There is no dedicated budget for gender programmes.  The  GFP  utilises  the
budget of the Business Processes Management Section.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The GFP  does  not  participate  in  the  development  of  policies  and  in
selection and procurement processes in the Department.

4.  Gender Mainstreaming

The Gender Focal  Person  has  developed  programmes,  which  are  aimed  at
mainstreaming gender into the work of  the  Department.  It  appears  as  if
though these programmes are merely proposals at this point.  This  needs  to
be clarified.

5. Programmes

The  only  programmes  listed  in  the  report  are  those  that  have  been
recommended to mainstream gender  into  the  work  of  the  Department.   It
appears as if though these programmes have  not  yet  been  implemented  and
that they are merely proposals at this point.  This needs to  be  clarified.



   Recognition of Customary Marriages Act


The GFP  recommended  that  programmes  be  implemented  to  strengthen  the
implementation and popularisation of the  registration  and  recognition  of
the Customary Marriages Act.   Public  awareness  programmes  on  fraudulent
marriages are also proposed.


   Immigration Act


A programme that facilitates the collation  of  submissions  on  legislation
relating to cross border and international trafficking and public  awareness
in this regard is proposed.


   Refugee Act


There is a need for programmes that highlight the plight of  women  refugees
and  that  commemorate  World  Refugee  Day.  These  programmes  should   be
conducted in partnership with civil society so as to educate the  public  on
xenophobia.  An investigation of the  feasibility  of  establishing  special
refugee centres for women and children needs to be conducted.


   Departmental Women Empowerment Initiative


Internally, the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs  has  launched  the  Women’s
Empowerment Initiative on 15 August 2003.  The initiative  aims  to  enhance
the skills and qualifications  of  all  women  employees,  to  assist  women
employees to develop self-esteem and to  monitor  gender  considerations  in
the selection and procurement process.

6. Staff Component

Not reported.

7. Achievements

No achievements are listed in the report.  The report makes  no  mention  of
the gender-related work done by the GFP other than the proposal  highlighted
above. The outputs of the GFP would need to be tracked and documented.

8. Challenges

The challenges that the GFP faces in meeting its objectives  have  not  been
identified.


10. Housing

10.1 Structure

The Department has an internal and external gender focus. A deputy director
in the Human Resources Management Directorate deals with the internal
gender issues. A deputy director in the Directorate Human Settlement Policy
and Integration deals with gender issues as it pertains to the external
housing policy issues. However, gender mainstreaming is not the only
function of these officials as they are also responsible for disability
issues, HIV and AIDS, children, youth, the elderly, employment equity,
service delivery and developing human settlement policies. Both deputy
directors report to their directors in the respective directorates.

10.2 Budget

The Department does not have specific gender budgets for the GFPS.

The deputy director: Transformation has an all-inclusive budget of R2
million, within which gender related issues are addressed.


10.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

The Department’s report does not indicate whether there is an operational
gender policy and action plan.

10.4 Gender Mainstreaming

The Department’s report indicates that gender programmes are aimed at
mainstreaming gender within the internal programmes and the Department’s
housing policies and programmes. It does, however, not indicate whether
there is an operational gender mainstreaming strategy in place.

10.5 Programmes

The Department has no stand-alone programmes but it reports that gender
mainstreaming is done in both its internal and external programmes. These
gender mainstreaming activities form part of other activities such as
employment equity, service delivery or the housing subsidy programme.
Monitoring and evaluation is noted as being an important aspect of the
work.

    • In 2003/04 research on integrating gender in housing and human
      settlements were undertaken – R160 000.
    • Workshop on women in housing – R60 000. The aim of the workshop was
      for the Minister to engage with stakeholders on issues and challenges
      that women in housing are facing as consumers as well as service
      providers. This information will form the basis of a gender programme
      that the Department will develop.
    • The housing subsidy programme targets female-headed households and as
      at September 2003, slightly more than 50% of the approved subsidies
      was allocated to female-headed households.
    • As at September 2003, 83 projects countrywide included women as
      developers or contractors. The total subsidy value is approximately
      R850 million.
    • The Department has approved a project where at least 10% of the
      provincial housing budget allocation should be utilised by projects
      that are undertaken by female developers or contractors.

10.6 Staff component

This information is not supplied in the report.

10.7 Achievements

The Department’s report does not indicate any specific achievements other
than those indicated for the programmes.

10.8 Challenges

Challenges are not addressed in the report.

11.  Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD)

The mandate of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) in terms of  the
Domestic Violence Act is to monitor the implementation of  the  Act  by  the
South African  Police  Services  and  the  Municipal  Police  Services.  The
Domestic Violence Act makes provision for the ICD  to  submit  a  report  to
Parliament every six months regarding the number and particulars of  matters
reported to it.

The report submitted by the ICD does not, however,  give  substance  to  its
strategies  for  monitoring  the  implementation  of   the   Act.    Further
information in this regard needs to be elicited.

11.1  Structure

The GFP in the ICD is located  in  the  sub-directorate  of  Human  Resource
Management and reports to the deputy manager of Human  Resource  Management.
The GFP  comprises  a  Special  Programmes  Officer  and  special  programme
representatives, located in each of the 9 provinces. The GFP is  responsible
for internal gender awareness, stakeholder collaboration and  training.  The
nature of this training is not  specified.  The  GFP  is  a  member  of  the
national  office  management,  senior  management  and  special   programmes
committees. The role of the GFP is to report on  gender  and  other  special
programmes at these meetings. The nature of ‘other  special  programmes’  is
unclear.

11.2  Budget

A budget of R 66 000 has  been  allocated  to  both  internal  and  external
special programmes.

 3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The ICD has an approved ‘Gender  Policy’  since  March  2001.   Policies  on
gender,  selection,  recruitment  and  equity  have  been  developed.  These
policies were forwarded to all staff for their input before being  approved.
The following project objectives constitute part of a strategy to  implement
the National Gender Policy Framework:

     • To monitor the implementation of the Domestic Violence Act.
     • To actively participate in the 16 Days of  Activism  on  No  Violence
       Against Women and Children.
     • To employ more women in senior positions.
     • To revise the current internal policy on gender.


 4. Gender Mainstreaming

The report does not indicate how gender is mainstreamed  into  the  work  of
the ICD.

11.5  Programmes

11.5.1 Internal

 • Staff Development

The  ICD  encourages  all  staff  to  attend   conferences,   training   and
information  sessions  on  gender  issues  and  national  gender   machinery
meetings.  During August, all offices participated in  dialogues  on  issues
that affect women. The aim of these dialogues was to get both men and  women
to engage on gender-related issues.  A report  on  the  dialogues  has  been
compiled and has been forwarded to the OSW in September 2003.

 • Systems Development

Systems have been developed for monitoring how gender equity in the  ICD  is
being promoted. The ICD has two internal standing  committees,  the  Special
Programmes Committee and the Equity Committee that meets quarterly and  part
of their mandate is  to  monitor  progress  made  in  this  regard.  Matters
pertaining to gender equity are also reported on  to  management  at  senior
management meetings and national office management meetings.

The ICD also monitors the implementation of the Domestic Violence Act.   The
Communications component is responsible for community outreach  initiatives.
 A quarterly newsletter on special programmes is also produced  and  one  of
its goals is to give coverage to gender issues.

 • Health Care and Rehabilitation

The report makes note of the fact that  a  number  of  employees  have  been
referred to health care facilities.  The objectives of this  initiative  and
its relevance for impacting positively on gender  relations  are  not  clear
and needs to be clarified.
 • Education

The ICD ensures that equal opportunities are provided to all  employees  for
the furthering of education.


11.5.2 External

 • Public Education and Awareness Raising

The ICD strives to play a proactive role in sensitising communities  on  the
Domestic Violence Act.  Vulnerable communities in rural  and  farming  areas
and informal settlements are the main target groups.  This is  done  through
campaigns run during the 16 Days of Activism of No Violence  Against  Women,
the Imbizo Focus Weeks and the Public Service Week.  The ICD also makes  use
of a newsletter, information  boards,  information  sessions,  training  and
other calendar events to disseminate information on  gender-related  issues.


 6. Staff Component

The following information is provided with respect to staffing:


Staff Complement as at 31 October 2003

|Total Female Staff    |Total Male Staff      |Total Staff           |
|58                    |63                    |121                   |
|Total female staff    |Total male staff      |Total staff employed  |
|employed at salary    |employed at salary    |at salary level 9 and |
|level 9 and above     |level 9 and above     |above                 |
|12                    |24                    |36                    |

 7. Achievements

The report does not make specific mention of the achievements of the GFP.

 8. Challenges

No challenges are identified in the report.

12. Justice and Constitutional Development

2.1 Structure

The GFP is a directorate located in the office of the Director-General. The
organogram of the Director-General’s office is in the process of being
finalised and it is envisaged that the Director of the GFP will report
directly to the Director-General. The positions in the Directorate are that
of director, deputy director, legal administrative officer, administrative
officer and an administrative clerk. Not all the positions are filled due
to a bargaining chamber resolution.

The Department furthermore has a National Gender Forum, which consists of
the GFP coordinators from the Provincial Gender Forums, representatives
from the Head Office Gender Forum and the Gender Directorate.

Functions of the GFP

    • Ensure the ongoing development of the gender policy.
    • Mainstream gender into policy development.
    • Monitor and facilitate the implementation of the gender policy.
    • Drive the gender budget process within the Department.
    • Facilitate the establishment of regional gender sub-structures.
    •  Facilitate  the  relationship  between  the  Department   and   other
      Government Departments and constitutional bodies within  the  national
      gender machinery.
    • Provide secretarial services to the National Gender Forum.
    • Integration of gender equality analysis into, amongst others:
      o Policy programme development
      o Research
      o Interpretations of judgements
      o Legal advice
      o Dispute resolutions
      o Legal advice

Functions of the National Gender Forum

    • To act as an advisory body and monitoring  mechanism  to  ensure  that
      gender considerations are integrated into mainstream issues.
    • To advise the Department on the integration of  gender  concerns  into
      mainstream policy and planning.
    • To apply gender equality analysis tools in  assessing  and  monitoring
      the Department’s  policies,  legislation,  procedures,  practices  and
      programmes.
    • To monitor progress  in  the  implementation  of  the  gender  policy,
      identify blockages and facilitate the  process  of  redressing  gender
      imbalances in Departmental policies and practices.


12.2 Budget

From the Department:
Administration   R2 024 000
Projects         R1 095 000
Total            R3 119 000

Donor funding:
European Union   R3 000 000

12.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

The Department does have a Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan.

12.4 Gender Mainstreaming

The Department has a gender mainstreaming strategy. Details of this
strategy are captured below.

12.5 Programmes

|Programme    |Sub-programme    |Project       |Progress                |
|Sexual       |Law reform       |Sexual        |The South African Law   |
|Offences     |                 |Offences      |Commission submitted a  |
|             |                 |Substantive   |report on sexual        |
|             |                 |Law and Sexual|offences (including a   |
|             |                 |Offences      |draft bill) to the      |
|             |                 |Processes and |Minister in January     |
|             |                 |Procedure.    |2003. The Criminal Law  |
|             |                 |              |(Sexual Offences)       |
|             |                 |              |Amendment Bill is       |
|             |                 |              |currently before        |
|             |                 |              |Parliament.             |
|             |                 |              |Other discussion papers |
|             |                 |              |being developed are on  |
|             |                 |              |adult prostitution and  |
|             |                 |              |stalking.               |
|             |Sexual Offences  |              |These courts have been  |
|             |Courts           |              |launched throughout the |
|             |                 |              |country. An audit has   |
|             |                 |              |been conducted to       |
|             |                 |              |provide clarity as to   |
|             |                 |              |the status of all sexual|
|             |                 |              |offences courts.        |
|Domestic     |Magisterial      |              |The Gender Directorate  |
|Violence     |guidelines on the|              |and a committee of 15   |
|             |Domestic Violence|              |Magistrates assisted the|
|             |Act              |              |Consortium on Violence  |
|             |                 |              |Against Women to develop|
|             |                 |              |guidelines in the       |
|             |                 |              |implementation of the   |
|             |                 |              |Domestic Violence Act.  |
|             |Multi-disciplinar|              |An integrated strategy  |
|             |y training manual|              |on training was         |
|             |on the Domestic  |              |developed to address the|
|             |Violence Act     |              |problem of inefficiency |
|             |                 |              |in the implementation of|
|             |                 |              |the Domestic Violence   |
|             |                 |              |Act in the entire       |
|             |                 |              |Criminal Justice System.|
|             |Training on the  |              |Decentralised training  |
|             |Domestic Violence|              |courses have been       |
|             |Act              |              |designed to counter the |
|             |                 |              |problems of staff being |
|             |                 |              |unable to attend        |
|             |                 |              |training.               |
|             |Simplification of|              |The Consortium on the   |
|             |the Domestic     |              |implementation of the   |
|             |Violence         |              |Domestic Violence Act   |
|             |application forms|              |simplified the domestic |
|             |                 |              |violence protection     |
|             |                 |              |order applications      |
|             |                 |              |forms.                  |
|Maintenance  |The              |Appointments  |Assistants to           |
|             |implementation of|of assistance |maintenance officers    |
|             |the maintenance  |to maintenance|have been appointed in  |
|             |system           |officers.     |56 maintenance courts.  |
|             |                 |              |The policy and          |
|             |                 |              |regulations for the     |
|             |                 |              |permanent appointment of|
|             |                 |              |maintenance             |
|             |                 |              |investigators are being |
|             |                 |              |finalised.              |
|             |                 |Training of   |The Department, together|
|             |                 |maintenance   |with the Justice        |
|             |                 |investigators.|College, HJN Training   |
|             |                 |              |and Technikon Pretoria  |
|             |                 |              |have provided training  |
|             |                 |              |for maintenance         |
|             |                 |              |investigators.          |
|             |                 |Duties of     |The duties of the       |
|             |                 |maintenance   |maintenance             |
|             |                 |investigators.|investigators have been |
|             |                 |              |established, The        |
|             |                 |              |Departments is also in  |
|             |                 |              |the process of          |
|             |                 |              |prioritising the        |
|             |                 |              |establishment of an     |
|             |                 |              |Information Support     |
|             |                 |              |Centre for maintenance  |
|             |                 |              |and related             |
|             |                 |              |investigations.         |
|             |                 |Baseline      |A study was commissioned|
|             |                 |costing       |into the costing of the |
|             |                 |Initiative in |appointment of          |
|             |                 |Maintenance   |maintenance             |
|             |                 |Courts.       |investigators. Five     |
|             |                 |              |reports evolved from    |
|             |                 |              |this and are being      |
|             |                 |              |considered.             |
|             |Simplification of|              |A committee has been    |
|             |maintenance      |              |established to look at  |
|             |application forms|              |the simplification of   |
|             |                 |              |maintenance forms.      |
|             |Technical        |Committee to  |The function of this    |
|             |amendments to the|investigate   |committee is to         |
|             |Maintenance Act  |the execution |investigate the         |
|             |                 |of orders     |practical problems      |
|             |                 |under         |experienced by the      |
|             |                 |Maintenance   |maintenance court as it |
|             |                 |Act.          |pertains to the Chapter |
|             |                 |              |5 civil remedies as set |
|             |                 |              |out in the Maintenance  |
|             |                 |              |Act.                    |
|Family Court |                 |              |This committee was      |
|sub-committee|                 |              |established to implement|
|on drafting  |                 |              |some of the tasks geared|
|of technical |                 |              |towards establishing    |
|amendments   |                 |              |fully-fledged and       |
|             |                 |              |effective functioning   |
|             |                 |              |family courts.          |
|Family Court |                 |              |The Gender Directorate  |
|process      |                 |              |leads this process,     |
|mapping      |                 |              |which is aimed at       |
|project      |                 |              |re-engineering the      |
|             |                 |              |systems in these courts |
|             |                 |              |in order to automate    |
|             |                 |              |efficiencies.           |
|The South    |Tabling the      |              |It was envisaged that   |
|African      |Charter before   |              |the Charter would be    |
|Charter of   |Cabinet on 26    |              |tabled before Cabinet on|
|Victims      |November 2003    |              |26 November 2003 and be |
|Rights and   |                 |              |launched on 8 March     |
|the Minimum  |                 |              |2004.                   |
|Standards for|                 |              |                        |
|Service      |                 |              |                        |
|Providers    |                 |              |                        |
|Translation  |                 |              |The Domestic Violence,  |
|of the Acts  |                 |              |Maintenance and         |
|into 9       |                 |              |Recognition of Customary|
|African      |                 |              |Marriages Acts have been|
|languages and|                 |              |translated into 9       |
|Brail        |                 |              |African languages. These|
|             |                 |              |Acts are also in the    |
|             |                 |              |process of being        |
|             |                 |              |finalised in brail text.|
|Service      |Magistrates      |              |A workshop was held to  |
|delivery     |workshop inJuly  |              |discuss service delivery|
|improvement  |2002             |              |improvement in courts   |
|by judicial  |                 |              |regarding the           |
|decision     |                 |              |prioritisation of       |
|making       |                 |              |maintenance, domestic   |
|project      |                 |              |violence, sexual        |
|             |                 |              |offences cases and court|
|             |                 |              |management.             |
|             |Developing other |              |                        |
|             |guidelines       |              |The Lower Court         |
|             |                 |              |Management Committee has|
|             |                 |              |been tasked to develop  |
|             |                 |              |magisterial guidelines  |
|             |                 |              |in the implementation of|
|             |                 |              |the Maintenance Act and |
|             |                 |              |Child Justice Act.      |
|Women        |Recognition of   |              |The Gender Directorate  |
|empowerment  |Customary        |              |was involved in a       |
|on justice   |Marriages Act    |              |3-month radio talk show |
|issues       |radio talk show  |              |on this Act. A plan of  |
|through      |                 |              |action will be produced |
|effective    |                 |              |based on the problems   |
|communication|                 |              |identified during the   |
|             |                 |              |programmes.             |
|Amendments to|                 |              |The Directorate was     |
|regulations  |                 |              |involved in a process of|
|of the       |                 |              |insuring that           |
|Recognition  |                 |              |regulations are amended |
|of Customary |                 |              |to make the process of  |
|Marriages Act|                 |              |registering a customary |
|             |                 |              |marriage easier for     |
|             |                 |              |women.                  |
|Mainstreaming|Mainstreaming    |              |A study was conducted by|
|Gender       |Gender report    |              |the Gender Directorate  |
|             |                 |              |with the aims of        |
|             |                 |              |enhancing the           |
|             |                 |              |Directorate’s           |
|             |                 |              |effectiveness in working|
|             |                 |              |with the leadership of  |
|             |                 |              |the Department to       |
|             |                 |              |accelerate gender       |
|             |Mainstreaming    |              |transformation.         |
|             |Gender           |              |                        |
|             |Implementation   |              |The Directorate has     |
|             |Guidelines       |              |developed guidelines to |
|             |                 |              |assist the              |
|             |                 |              |Ministry/Department and |
|             |                 |              |affiliated structures to|
|             |                 |              |implement gender        |
|             |                 |              |equality analysis in its|
|             |                 |              |entire business;        |
|             |                 |              |training will commence  |
|             |Mainstreaming    |              |in February and March   |
|             |gender reporting |              |2004.                   |
|             |protocol         |              |                        |
|             |                 |              |The Directorate has     |
|             |                 |              |developed reporting     |
|             |                 |              |protocols to assist the |
|             |                 |              |Minister and the        |
|             |                 |              |Director-General to     |
|             |                 |              |monitor the             |
|             |                 |              |implementation to gender|
|             |                 |              |equality analysis by all|
|             |                 |              |managers in the Ministry|
|             |                 |              |/ Department.           |
|Gender Budget|Customer needs   |              |The Gender Directorate  |
|Project      |assessment tool  |              |conducted a needs       |
|             |and report       |              |assessment with its     |
|             |                 |              |customers in order to   |
|             |                 |              |develop gender budgeting|
|             |                 |              |guidelines to assist the|
|             |                 |              |Ministry / Department to|
|             |                 |              |mainstream gender in all|
|             |                 |              |aspects of its budget.  |
|             |                 |              |                        |
|             |Gender budget    |              |A gender budget         |
|             |assessment tools |              |assessment tool has been|
|             |and report       |              |developed to assess the |
|             |                 |              |Department’s budget     |
|             |                 |              |allocation and          |
|             |                 |              |expenditure trends. This|
|             |                 |              |was envisaged to be     |
|             |                 |              |conducted between 24 –  |
|             |                 |              |28 November 2003.       |
|             |Gender budget    |              |                        |
|             |implementation   |              |The report from the     |
|             |guidelines       |              |assessment of the budget|
|             |                 |              |allocation will lead to |
|             |                 |              |the development of the  |
|             |                 |              |gender budget           |
|             |                 |              |implementation          |
|             |                 |              |guidelines.             |
|Promotion of |                 |              |The Act was enacted in  |
|Equality and |                 |              |February 2000.          |
|Prevention of|                 |              |                        |
|Unfair       |                 |              |                        |
|Discriminatio|                 |              |                        |
|n Act of 2000|                 |              |                        |
|             |                 |              |                        |
|             |Equality Court   |              |Thirty-three courts have|
|             |                 |              |been identified for the |
|             |                 |              |first phase             |
|             |                 |              |implementation.         |
|Tertiary     |                 |              |Some tertiary           |
|institutions |                 |              |institutions have been  |
|research     |                 |              |assisting the           |
|programme    |                 |              |Directorate with        |
|             |                 |              |research, monitoring and|
|             |UCT: Consortium  |              |evaluation.             |
|             |on Violence      |              |                        |
|             |Against Women    |              |Conducted research on   |
|             |research         |              |the implementation of   |
|             |                 |              |Domestic Violence Act in|
|             |Technikon South  |              |the Western Cape.       |
|             |Africa           |              |                        |
|             |                 |              |Conducted research on   |
|             |                 |              |the experiences of black|
|             |                 |              |women in the Maintenance|
|             |University of    |              |Court.                  |
|             |Potchefstroom    |              |                        |
|             |                 |              |Assisting with research |
|             |                 |              |on constitutional       |
|             |University of    |              |development.            |
|             |Witwatersrand:   |              |                        |
|             |Centre for       |              |                        |
|             |Applied Legal    |              |Assisting the Justice   |
|             |Studies          |              |College with the        |
|             |                 |              |development of the      |
|             |                 |              |Recognition of Customary|
|             |Service delivery |              |Marriages Act bench     |
|             |improvement      |              |book.                   |
|             |through          |              |                        |
|             |partnership with |              |The Directorate held a  |
|             |tertiary         |              |seminar with tertiary   |
|             |institutions     |              |institutions to         |
|             |conference,      |              |establish a formal      |
|             |September 2003   |              |working relationship.   |
|             |                 |              |A conference is         |
|             |                 |              |scheduled for February  |
|             |                 |              |2004.                   |
|             |                 |              |                        |
|Transformatio|Research on      |              |It focuses on the nature|
|n of the     |equalising       |              |of current obstacles to |
|Judiciary    |opportunities    |              |women’s equal           |
|             |within the       |              |participation within the|
|             |judiciary between|              |judiciary.              |
|             |men and women    |              |                        |
|             |Meeting with SA  |              |A meeting was held to   |
|             |women judges,    |              |initiate the programme  |
|             |October 2001     |              |and ascertain the       |
|             |                 |              |problems that women     |
|             |                 |              |judges are experiencing.|
|             |                 |              |In order to address some|
|             |                 |              |of the problems, laptops|
|             |                 |              |were purchased to assist|
|             |                 |              |women judges. The       |
|             |                 |              |laptops could not be    |
|             |                 |              |distributed as the      |
|             |                 |              |Minister, Deputy        |
|             |                 |              |Minister, and Chief     |
|             |                 |              |Justice said it was     |
|             |                 |              |discriminating against  |
|             |                 |              |men.                    |
|             |South African    |              |A committee emanated    |
|             |women judges     |              |from this conference to |
|             |conference,      |              |look at gender issues   |
|             |October 2003     |              |within the judiciary,   |
|             |                 |              |and the establishment of|
|             |                 |              |the Association.        |
|             |Women in the     |              |Four women judges and a |
|             |judiciary        |              |chief magistrate have   |
|             |transformation   |              |been nominated to form a|
|             |committee        |              |committee that will     |
|             |                 |              |focus on gender issues  |
|             |                 |              |and to establish a SA   |
|             |                 |              |Association of women    |
|             |                 |              |judges.                 |
|Employment   |                 |              |The Department is not   |
|Equity       |                 |              |making sufficient       |
|             |                 |              |progress to ensure that |
|             |                 |              |women are appointed to  |
|             |                 |              |senior and              |
|             |                 |              |decision-making         |
|             |                 |              |positions.              |
|Women who    |Application for  |              |The Department has      |
|killed their |Presidential     |              |appointed a researcher  |
|abusive      |pardon           |              |to investigate the      |
|partners     |                 |              |implications of granting|
|             |                 |              |pardons.                |
|             |                 |              |                        |
|             |                 |              |A workshop will be held |
|             |                 |              |with constitutional     |
|             |                 |              |experts in April 2004 to|
|             |                 |              |discuss the             |
|             |                 |              |constitutional          |
|             |                 |              |implications of         |
|             |                 |              |presidential pardons.   |
|Ratification |                 |              |The Directorate is part |
|of the United|                 |              |of an inter-departmental|
|Nations      |                 |              |task team looking at    |
|Convention   |                 |              |this convention and its |
|Against      |                 |              |protocols.              |
|Transnational|                 |              |                        |
|Organised    |                 |              |                        |
|Crime        |                 |              |                        |
|Development  |                 |              |The Directorate is      |
|of a booklet |                 |              |compiling a booklet,    |
|on precedent |                 |              |which discusses all     |
|setting court|                 |              |landmark decisions by   |
|judgements   |                 |              |the Constitutional Court|
|             |                 |              |and other courts that   |
|             |                 |              |hold significance for   |
|             |                 |              |women’s human rights.   |
|Draft        |                 |              |The Directorate has     |
|National     |                 |              |participated in the     |
|Action Plan  |                 |              |drafting of a preface   |
|Against      |                 |              |for this national action|
|Racism       |                 |              |plan.                   |

12.6 Staff component

| Post Class           |African Male          |African Female        |
|13                    |16                    |12                    |
|14                    |7                     |4                     |
|15                    |2                     |1                     |

18.7 Achievements

The achievements of the GFP are not highlighted in the report.

18.8 Challenges

The challenges faced by the GFP are not mentioned.

19. Public Service Commission[9]

19.1 Structure

The GFP in the Department refers to an individual. A senior Human Resources
Practitioner is responsible for all special programmes, including gender.
This person report to the assistant director: Group Human Resources.

19.2 Budget

The Department has allocated a budget of R52 000 towards all special
programmes for the 2003/04 financial year.

20. Safety and Security – Secretariat[10]

20.1 Structure

The Secretariat does not have a GFP in place.

20.2 Staff component

The Secretariat has a staff complement of 30. At the time of the
presentation, there were 16 vacant positions in the Secretariat. Of the
staff in management level, there is 1 deputy director and 4 assistant
directors.

21.  Department of Science and Technology (DST)

21.1 Structure

The Science, Gender and Disability Unit was established  in  November  2002,
and is responsible for the gender mainstreaming of line  function  programme
delivery in the Science, Engineering  and  Technology  (SET)  sector.   This
unit only has an  external  focus  and  is  managed  by  a  manager  who  is
appointed at a director level.  The unit is also  staffed  with  two  deputy
directors and a secretary.  The deputy-directors have been in  office  since
June 2003 and August 2003, respectively.  The GFP  reports  to  the  general
manager of Human Capital and Science Missions.

A Special Programmes Officer, appointed  at  a  deputy  director  level  and
located in  the  Human  Resource  Management  Section,  is  responsible  for
ensuring gender equity in terms of employment practices, training and  staff
development. This person is also responsible  for  organising  commemorative
events such as Women’s Day  and  the  16  Days  of  Activism  Campaign.  The
Internal GFP reports to the general manager of Human Resource Management.

21.2  Budget

The following information was provided with respect to the budget:


|Project                       |Amount                             |
|South African Reference Group |R1 Million                         |
|on Women in Science and       |                                   |
|Technology (SARG)             |                                   |
|South African Women in Science|R1 Million                         |
|Awards                        |                                   |
|Research Project              |R260 000                           |
|Administrative cost of unit   |As necessary                       |

It was not stipulated whether the unit has its own budget or not.

21.3  Policy and Gender Action Plan

The internal gender programme has been involved in developing a sexual
harassment policy.

The SET sector has identified a  need  for  a  Gender  Equity  Mainstreaming
Policy.  It is  envisaged  that  this  policy  will  capture  the  following
themes:

      • Human capital development, with specific focus on  the  development
        of women.
      • Research agenda that reflects the needs/interests of women  leading
        to an improvement in their quality of life and allowing them to  be
        involved in wealth creating entrepreneurship.


It is anticipated that this policy should be available for public debate by
mid-2004.
21.4 Gender Mainstreaming
As part of an attempt to recognise the need to mainstream gender, the DST
has firmly entrenched this concept in the National Research and Development
Strategy that was approved by Cabinet in 2002.  The objective here is to
mainstream gender into all research agendas to ensure that women are viewed
as potential end-users and/or beneficiaries with a resultant improvement in
the quality of their lives and in their communities.

The Science, Gender and Disability Unit focuses on achieving gender
mainstreaming in two ways:

 • Human capital development in a holistic manner by addressing the
   educational pipeline issue for the girl child and the recruitment,
   retention and development of women in Science, Engineering and
   Technology.
 • Ensuring that research agendas of publicly funded institutions reflect
   the needs and interests of women.

In September 2003, the Science, Gender and Disability Unit  set  up  a  two-
phased process aimed at  achieving  organisational  transformation  and  the
inclusion of gender sensitivity in all line function programmes  to  promote
the mainstreaming of gender in the DST. The first phase involved  a  set  of
focused  interviews  of  seven  senior  managers  by  an   external   gender
consultant to obtain an understanding of the  organisational  culture,  work
environment  and  core  activities  of  the   individual   programmes.   The
interviews  were  followed  by  a  one-day  gender  sensitivity  and  gender
mainstreaming workshop to which  all  senior  managers  were  invited.   The
final report on the outcomes  and  recommendations  of  the  interviews  and
workshop is still in the process of being drafted.

21.5 Programmes

 • Human Capital Development Plan

An engendered human resource development plan is crucial to the  achievement
of an improved quality of life and wealth  creation  for  women.  This  plan
strives to address the following issues:


      • Identify  impediments  to  progress  in  Science,  Engineering  and
        Technology.
      • Identify needs/deficits of the science, engineering and  technology
        sector in attracting and retaining women.
      • Identify and develop appropriate rewards and recognition systems
      • Monitor survival and progress at institutions.
      • Analyse the impact of (or lack of) mentoring and coaching roles  of
        senior women researchers and businesswomen in the technology sector
        as role models and high achievers.


   Establishment of engendered research agendas


The principle objective of establishing engendered research  agendas  is  to
improve the quality of life of women and to enable women to be  involved  in
wealth creation.  The three major areas in which  the  quality  of  life  of
women can be improved are through:


         • Women’s health
         • Women’s role in society
         • Women’s safety and security


   South African Reference Group on Women in Science and Technology



The Research and Development Strategy  of  the  Department  of  Science  and
Technology articulates a clear position on the empowerment of  women  and  a
need for their meaningful participation and contribution in the  development
of research and development in South  Africa.  Wide  consultation  with  key
stakeholders at various  forums  determined  that  the  vehicle  to  achieve
gender  mainstreaming  is  through  the  appointment  of  a  South   African
Reference Group on Women in Science and Technology (SARG).


The following key objectives have been set for the SARG:



      • Assist the National Advisory Council on Innovation (NACI) to
        promote a research agenda, including influencing funding that will
        improve the quality of life of women.
      • Assist NACI to promote innovation that will allow women to make a
        greater contribution to wealth generation in South Africa.
      • Provide advice on developing mechanisms that will increase the
        participation and contribution of women in science and technology.
      • Highlight role models that promote women’s entry and advancement in
        science and technology.
      • Monitoring role in tracking institutional impact.

 • Equity Audit of Science Councils

In 2002, the Science, Gender and Disability Unit  undertook  an  audit  that
sought to  uncover  how  the  various  Science  Councils  responded  to  the
challenge of addressing equity issues  in  their  respective  organisations.
This baseline audit of the Science Councils was to  provide  basic  data  on
the availability of resources  and  the  progress  attained  in  some  areas
towards transformation. The study has  been  set  within  the  framework  of
corporate governance.

 • South African Women in Science Awards


The  South  African  Department  of  Science  and  Technology  has   created
recognition awards to celebrate “Women  in  Science”.   This  was  a  direct
response  to  the  vision  encapsulated  in  the   National   Research   and
Development Strategy of ultimate improvement in the quality of life  of  all
South Africans.


 • Research Project on Gender Equity in Science and Technology


The Science, Gender and Disability Unit commissioned research to inform  DST
and the SARG  on  the  status  in  Science  Councils  and  Higher  Education
Institutions of the following:

      •  The  number  of  women  scientists   and   engineers   and   their
        qualifications.
      • Special policies and programmes for development of women in SET.
      • Preferential funding mechanisms for grants for women in SET.
      • Research agendas/projects being developed with a gender perspective
        that sees women as beneficiaries/end users.


   SARG Website and On-Line Discussion Forum



The SARG website was officially launched on Youth Day in 2003 and  its  main
purpose is to inform the public of gender-related developments  in  SET  and
the activities of the SARG. The site also serves as a portal for  discussion
forums. A closed forum allows for discussions between SARG members. An  open
forum allows individuals from  the  scientific  community  and  the  general
public to enter into discussion and debates with each other, SARG,  DST  and
NACI on issues relating to gender mainstreaming  in  SET  within  the  broad
themes of human capital development and research  agendas.  The  themes  and
lessons arising out of these forums will be  used  to  inform  other  gender
equity initiatives such as conferences and research endeavours.



   Poverty Relief Programme

The Technology for Poverty Alleviation Programme is one of  the  initiatives
within the  Poverty  Relief,  Infrastructure  Investment  and  Job  Creation
Programme, which was approved by the  Ministers'  Committee  on  the  Budget
(MINCOMBUD).  The  programme  focuses   on   the   transfer   of   available
technologies to communities to  enhance  the  use  of  local  resources  and
indigenous  knowledge  to  stimulate  economic  activity.   Many  of   these
projects have been  implemented  in  poverty  nodes  as  identified  by  the
Integrated  Sustainable  Rural  Development  Programme  (ISRDP).  Technology
partners  follow  a  holistic  approach  to  poverty  relief,  focusing   on
technology as one component to contribute towards the  economic  empowerment
of previously marginalised groups and communities, with special emphasis  on
women.
21.6 Staff Complement
Not reported.
21.7 Achievements
No specific achievements are reported.
21.8 Challenges
No challenges are reported.

22.  Department of Social Development (DoSD)

22.1 Structure

The GFP in the Department of Social Development is a sub-directorate and  is
staffed with a deputy director and one contract worker. The GFP  is  located
in the Director-General’s office and has been placed under  the  Directorate
of Executive Support.   It  reports  to  the  chief  director  of  corporate
services.

22.2 Budget

R 580 000 was allocated to the GFP for the 2003/04 financial year.
22.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

No mention was made of work done in this regard.

22.4 Gender Mainstreaming

Overall, no mention was made of this aspect of the work  of  DoSD.  However,
mention was made of the fact that no clear indicators  have  been  developed
to ensure effective gender mainstreaming into the Department’s programmes.

22.5 Programmes

 • Training

Training is provided on legislation such as the Domestic Violence  Act  (Act
No 116 of 1998) and the Maintenance Act (Act No 99 of  1998).   Training  is
further provided on international and regional treaties such as the  Beijing
Platform for Action (BPA), the Convention on the Elimination  of  All  Forms
of Discrimination against  Women  (CEDAW),  the  South  African  Development
Community  Declaration,  National  Gender  and  Policy  Framework  and  more
broadly on issues such as sexual harassment, self  defence  and  sensitising
men to gender issues. The target group of this training was not given.

 • Gender Advocacy and Awareness Programmes

This  programme  entails  the  commemoration  of   National   Women’s   Day,
International Women’s  Day,  16  Days  of  Activism  and  the  International
Women’s Day for Peace.

22.6 Staff Complement

Not reported.

22.7 Achievements

No achievements are listed.

22.8 Challenges

No challenges are listed.


23. The South African Police Services (SAPS)

23.1   Structure

The deputy national commissioner manages the Gender  Focal  Point  in  SAPS.
Internally, the Divisional Commissioner: Career Management is the  custodian
of internal gender-related issues.  Externally, the divisional  commissioner
crime prevention is responsible for the gender-related work of SAPS.


23.2 Budget

The SAPS budget makes provision for the activities and programmes  conducted
to address gender issues.  The amount allocated is not stipulated.

24.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

A Sexual Harassment  Policy  has  been  developed  and  popularised  amongst
staff.

24.4  Gender Mainstreaming

This is not indicated.

24.5   Programmes

24.5.1 Internal programmes

 • Women’s Empowerment Sessions

‘Women’s Empowerment Sessions’ were conducted in all nine  provinces.  These
sessions were motivational sessions for women in SAPS.  It is  thought  that
they resulted in more  women  applying  for  middle  and  senior  management
posts.  Gender structures were also established as  part  of  this  process.
The role of these structures was  not  clarified.  These  gender  structures
have undergone training.  The  purpose  and  content  of  this  training  is
unclear.


   Exhibitions


Exhibitions were held at  the  specialised  units  during  the  Women’s  Day
celebrations at the Pretoria West College.   The  purpose  of  this  was  to
expose women to the specialised units with the aim of  stimulating  interest
in them, given that they are male dominated.

 • Bridging programme/ recruitment strategies

A bridging programme has been established  at  the  Special  Task  Force  to
‘accommodate the disadvantaged’.  The nature of, objectives and the ways  in
which this programme benefits women are not clear.

Recruitment strategies  in  2004  in  the  Special  Task  Force  will  focus
specially on women.


   Launch of the Women’s Network


The Women’s Network was launched to facilitate communication  and  the  flow
of information amongst women in leadership  positions  and  the  sharing  of
best practices.   It  is  unclear  whether  this  network  only  focuses  on
internal gender issues.


   Calendar Events


The celebration of National Women’s Day with related activities  took  place
in the provinces and divisions.  It was envisaged  that  men  will  run  the
campaign during the 16 Days of Activism.

 • Sexual Harassment Survey

A survey on the prevalence of sexual harassment in SAPS has been  conducted.
The final report will be used to determine whether the  current  policy  has
been effective and whether there is a need for further interventions.

 • Affirmative Action Programme

An ‘Entering Leadership Programme’ has been initiated.  Seventy  percent  of
the participants in 2003 were women.     The  purpose  and  method  of  this
programme was not clarified.  Numeric targets in terms of gender  have  also
been set as per the SAPS Employment Equity Plan. The overall  representation
of women in SAPS in 2003 is 26%.




 • Training
At middle management level, a total of 27 441 women were trained.   A  total
of 110 women received bursaries.

25.6 Staff Component
Numeric targets in terms of gender have been set as per the SAPS  Employment
Equity Plan. The following table provides  information  on  the  numbers  of
women in SAPS over the past four years:

|Year                  |Men                   |Women                 |
|2000                  |79%                   |21%                   |
|2001                  |77%                   |23%                   |
|2002                  |75%                   |25%                   |
|2003                  |74%                   |26%                   |



25.7 Achievements

Achievements of the GFP are not specified.

25.8 Challenges

No challenges are listed.

26.  South African Sports Commission

26.1  Structure

In terms of the ‘Women, Sport and Recreation Policy Guidelines’,  the  South
African Sports Commission (SASC), together with the provinces,  have  agreed
that the Committee  on  the  Transformation  of  the  South  African  Sports
Commission’s  (SASC)  Board,  will  take  responsibility  for  the   overall
strategic direction and policy framework on all matters pertaining to  women
and sport.  A Commissioner will chair  this  committee.   Co-ordinators  for
women and sport  will  provide  assistance  to  this  committee.   The  main
responsibilities of the co-ordinators will be  to  initiate,  implement  and
oversee all operational issues.

The provincial forums will take responsibility for:

    • Advising the co-ordinator on equity issues.
    • Implementing the policy.
    • Initiating and implement women and sport projects.
    • Assisting in dispute resolution.
    • Hosting information dissemination sessions.
    • Sharing ideas and addressing key issues.
    • Assisting with equity research.
    • Ensuring that key role players establish equity desks.
    • Addressing cultural dynamics.


26.2  Budget

R100 000 was received in the 2003/04 financial year.  It is unclear  whether
this budget is intended solely for gender-related initiatives  in  sport  or
whether it caters for a broader range of activities.

26.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

Policy guidelines have been developed on women, sport  and  recreation.   In
terms of these guidelines, the SASC has to submit a women and  sport  policy
document and business plans and budgets for related projects to  the  SASC’s
Board Committee on Transformation. A document that sets  out  the  framework
and strategic direction for  all  issues  pertaining  to  women,  sport  and
recreation must also be submitted to this committee.

26.4 Gender Mainstreaming

Although the policy guidelines on women, sport and recreation indicate  that
gender mainstreaming should be one of  the  key  performance  areas  of  the
SASC, no further information is provided on the strategies for so doing.

  5. Programmes

The following projects are listed in the SASC report:

    • Gender training  workshops  on  life  skills,  capacity  building  and
      mentorship.  The target of this initiative is not mentioned.
    • Establishment of forums  in  the  provinces  (no  further  information
      provided in this regard).
    • Research on women, sport and recreation.   The  exact  nature  of  the
      research is not stipulated, yet reference is made  to  the  fact  that
      data is being collected on the trends of  participation  of  women  in
      sport.
    • Support for  girl  child  programmes  such  as  leadership/peer  group
      courses.
    • Commemoration of calendar events such as Women’s  Day  and  Disability
      Month.

26.6 Staff Complement

Not reported.

26.7  Achievements

Not reported.

26.8  Challenges

The following challenges are listed:  (Note that the  exact  nature  of  the
challenges were not clarified).

    • Budgetary constraints.
    • Lack of sponsorships.
    • Lack of support from male counterparts.
    • Lack of support from families and partners.
    • Minimum media support.
    • Cultural dynamics.
    • Pregnancy in sport and taboos relating to this.
    • Women’s sport being trivialised, criticised and not taken seriously.
    • Codes such as netball being dubbed ‘Cinderella sports’.
    • Some codes seen as being masculine.


27.  Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)

27.1  Structure

Before the current unit came into existence, a Gender Desk had been  set  up
in 1998, which was transformed into a Gender Unit in 2000.

The Gender Focal Point in the Department of Trade and Industry is  currently
called the Gender and Women’s Empowerment Unit, set up in  2003.   The  unit
is staffed with a director who reports to the  Deputy  Director-General.   A
chief director post has been created, but is still to be confirmed.

27.2 Budget

The  internal  administration  of  the  Gender   and   Women’s   Empowerment
Programme is allocated R1,5  million  annually.   The  South  African  Women
Entrepreneurs Network (SAWEN) is budgeted at R 2 million and R 6 million  is
allocated to Technology for Women in Business (TWIB).

27.3 Policy and Gender Action Plan

One of the initiatives of the  unit  has  been  to  revise  the  Gender  and
Women’s Empowerment Policy and Strategy framework.  No  further  information
in this regard is provided.

A Gender and Women’s Empowerment Committee has been set up  to  monitor  the
impact of policies.

 4. Gender Mainstreaming

No mention is made of the mainstreaming of  gender  into  the  work  of  the
Department.

 5. Programmes

    • Launch of the ‘Women’s Forum Annual Conference and Awards’.
    • Facilitated a process for growing and supporting  women’s  enterprises
      through  SAWEN.  A  committed  budget  has  been  secured  for   SAWEN
      groundwork. SAWEN  provincial  chapters  have  been  launched  in  the
      Eastern  Cape,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Gauteng,  Bloemfontein,  North   West,
      Northern Cape and Limpopo.
    • Hosted the national technology for ‘Women In Business Conference’  for
      2003.
    • Commissioned a study to assess the national status  of  South  African
      women entrepreneurs.

 6. Staff Complement

Not reported.

 7. Achievements

The following achievements are listed:

    • Developed a business plan with milestones  and  incorporated  this  as
      part of the divisional strategic plan.
    • Secured a gender budget  as  well  as  separate  budgets  for  various
      initiatives.
    • Launched the DTI internal  clinic  providing  medical  and  counseling
      services specifically for women.
    • Engaged with the private sector to support a women’s  entrepreneurship
      programme (JSE, APDF, BMF and ABSA are participating partners).
    • Supported the Spousal offices (the nature of  is  achievement  is  not
      made clear).

27.8  Challenges

The following challenges have been identified:

    • The need for additional financial resources.
    • The need to increase staff capacity.
    • The need to implement the ‘Gender and Women’s Empowerment  Policy  and
      Strategy Framework’ throughout the DTI.
    • The need to  increase  women’s  support  and  design  in  relation  to
      financial and non financial schemes.




28. Department of Water Affairs and Forestry

28.1 Structure

Gender issues are managed by the Equity Programmes, which resides within
Human Resource Management. This sub-directorate also manages issues
relating to disability, youth and children, and employment equity. The
Gender Focal Point reports to the Director Human Resources Management.

28.2 Budget

The budget is located within the  Human  Resource  Management  Directorate’s
budget.  The amount allocated to gender-related work is not specified.

28.3  Policy and Gender Action Plan

The Department’s Gender Policy was developed to promote gender equity and
equality in the fields of water and forestry and to honour national and
international legislation calling for gender equity and equality.


This policy document outlines the status of gender-related issues in the
Department.  It also outlines the important gender principles that
recognise and address the conditions that mitigated against women taking
their full part in society, ending discriminatory practices and according
special recognition and treatment to women as a means towards addressing
the imbalances of the past.


Apart from the Gender Policy, the Department has also adopted an Anti-
Sexual Harassment Policy as the department believes that it is its duty to
provide a work environment that is free of sexual harassment. The policy
applies where sexual harassment has occurred in the work environment.

The Department has developed a draft gender action plan. This document is
an implementation plan that details what will be done, how it will be
accomplished and who is responsible. Although the intention of this
document is very clear, it has been seriously affected by capacity problems
in terms of taking it forward, specifically with regard to awareness
raising, implementation and monitoring.

28.4 Gender Mainstreaming

The Gender  Policy  outlines  both  the  internal  and  external  goals  and
objectives for gender mainstreaming. One of  the  goals  is  to  ensure  the
equal participation and involvement of women and men in  decision-making  on
all projects undertaken by the Department.  The  policy  then  reflects  the
structure responsible for implementation and also outlines the national  and
international instruments supporting gender equality and/or mainstreaming.

28.5 Programmes

   • Representation in project structures

Water projects were managed through local project steering committees.  The
Department requires that their membership consist of 30% women, which has
been complied with. With the handover of responsibilities to local
government, the 30% target is still being applied. In all institutions for
which the Department has oversight and where the Minister is responsible
for appointments of the Board, adequate gender representation is promoted.

Celebration of calendar events

For the past year, the Department has successfully celebrated and
participated in the National Women’s Day, the 16 Days of Activism on No
Violence Against Women and Children Campaign and International Women’s Day.
The last gender-related event that was celebrated was the ‘Women in Water
Awards’ celebration.

Water Resources Management Branch Progress

The Department has undergone a process of transformation, which has
resulted in the establishment of a gender component in the Stakeholder
Empowerment Unit in the Water Resources Management (WRM) branch.

During the Earth Summit in August 2002, the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry made a commitment to work in partnership with the Gender and Water
Alliance (GWA). This would entail the development of training modules for
ensuring gender mainstreaming in integrated water resources management.

In the development of the Levhuvhu River Government Scheme, local women
were trained in concrete technology, catering, bookkeeping, minute taking
and facilitation. Those trained in concrete technology have been employed
in the scheme, and local women now cater for project meetings. In such
initiatives, sustainability is a challenge, and only co-operative
governance could be a means for ensuring poverty alleviation in these areas
after the completion of projects.
The Department has been supporting the ‘Water for Food Movement’, which is
an association of rural women who use water-harnessing mechanisms, in order
to have enough water for their communal vegetable gardens.

A gender analysis of the water sector is currently underway. Some of the
water management institutions are being analysed. A gender mainstreaming
strategy will be developed, implemented and monitored.

 • Water Services Programme Progress

    o Awareness raising and training programmes  were  rendered  to  project
      implementing agents  and  management  staff  in  the  Department,  and
      district municipalities in KwaZulu Natal, Limpopo, Eastern  Cape,  and
      North West. The aim was to assist  managers  and  implementing  agents
      understand relationship between gender and sustainability  and  ensure
      that these get addressed within project cycles.
    o Establishment of units to address gender within the Department and the
      water services sector. This has been achieved in Eastern Cape, Limpopo
      and North West.
    o The development of  a  draft  gender  mainstreaming  strategy  in  the
      Eastern Cape.
    o Started a process of development of gender key performance  indicators
      for integration into the monitoring and evaluation system.
    o  Started  a  process  of  developing  a  sector  gender  mainstreaming
      strategy.
    o Assumed a leading role in the " Take a Girl Child  to  Work"  project,
      sponsored by Cell C.

28.6 Staff Complement

The following information was provided:




|Period                |Male                  |Female                |
|1999-2000             |16 385 (71%)          |6 554 (29%)           |
|2000-2001             |15 548 (71%)          |6 403 (29%)           |
|2001-2002             |14 539 (71%)          |5 841 (29%)           |
|2002-2003             |12 912 (70%)          |5 553 (30%)           |

28.7 Achievements

No specific achievements other than those identified in the programmes
listed above, have been identified.

28.8 Challenges

No challenges have been identified other than the fact that the
implementation of the Gender Action Plan has been seriously affected by
capacity problems.

Section Three: Analysis of Submissions

Office on the Status of Women

1. Structure

1.1 Capacity of OSW in terms of staff complement

The table below indicates the staff complement of the OSWs in the
provinces:


|OSW                       |No. of     |Position(s)                     |
|                          |positions  |                                |
|Eastern Cape              |3          |Deputy director, assistant      |
|                          |           |director, administrative        |
|                          |           |officer.                        |
|Free State                |6          |Deputy director, assistant      |
|                          |           |director, administrative officer|
|                          |           |(2), messenger and secretary.   |
|KwaZulu-Natal             |3          |Deputy director, assistant      |
|                          |           |director and administrative     |
|                          |           |officer.                        |
|Gauteng[11]               |3          |Deputy director, assistant      |
|                          |           |director and administrative     |
|                          |           |officer.                        |
|Mpumalanga                |12         |Deputy director, assistant      |
|                          |           |director (2), chief community   |
|                          |           |liaison officers (3), community |
|                          |           |liaison officer (3), and        |
|                          |           |administrative clerk (3).       |
|North West                |7          |Director, assistant director    |
|                          |           |(3), administrative officer,    |
|                          |           |office manager and              |
|                          |           |administrative clerk.           |
|Western Cape              |1          |Deputy director.                |

From the above table, it is evident that OSWs vary in the number of people
staffing the offices. This ranges from 1 position in the Western Cape to 12
posts being available on the organogram of the Mpumalanga OSW. A number of
vacancies were reported in the OSWs. These include the position of the
deputy director in KwaZulu-Natal and half of the positions in the
Mpumalanga office.  The vacancies in both the KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga
office is of serious concern, as it impacts on the Offices’ ability to
deliver.

The shortage of staff in the Western Cape OSW is another grave concern. The
capacity of human resources no doubt impacts negatively on the fulfilling
of the functions of the OSW. It is difficult to see how this OSW can meet
its mandate with only one staff member employed.

Another concern is with the seemingly skewed staff distribution in the Free
State. The Free State OSW appears to be heavily staffed in an
administrative capacity and less so with staff carrying out programmatic
functions. The reasons for and effectiveness of this should be further
investigated.

The report submitted by the North West is unclear as to whether the
positions all have gender responsibilities. It was indicated that the
director is also responsible for disability issues. Thus, the question
arises as to whether the administrative staff support functions other than
gender issues.

1.2 Location

The Gender Policy recommends that OSWs be established within provinces and
be located in the Offices of the Premiers. The Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal
and North West OSWs indicated that they are based in the recommended
office. Although Gauteng indicated the Directorate that the new Gender/HIV
structure will report to, it is unclear whether the Directorate will be
located in the Premier’s office. Three OSWs (Eastern Cape, Free State and
Western Cape) did not indicate the location of their offices.

1.3 Level of Appointment

Most of the OSWs (6) indicated that the position of head of the OSW (or in
the case of Gauteng, head of the programme) was at deputy director level.
As indicated earlier, 2 of these were vacant (KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng).
Only the North West reported that the OSW is headed by a director. As was
also indicated previously, other than gender responsibilities, this
position also has the responsibility for disability issues.

In 3 of the OSWs, the deputy director or director is assisted by at least 1
assistant director (Eastern Cape, Free State and KwaZulu-Natal). The
Mpumalanga OSW reports having 2 assistant directors while the North West
has 3 assistant directors, of which 1 position is vacant.

Whilst the Gender Policy does not make specific reference to the level at
which provinces should appoint OSW coordinators, it stands to reason that
positions should be at the level where the person can influence decision-
making and have the necessary level of authority to monitor gender goals
and take action should this be the case.

1.4 Functions of the OSW

The Gender Policy identifies clear areas of foci for the provincial OSWs.
These are:

 • To develop a gender policy and plan of action (in line with the national
   policy).
 • To coordinate the activities of other role-players and stakeholders.

Given the functions of the OSW, it would thus also be responsible for co-
ordinating the activities of GFPs in Departments and to some extent, the
establishment of the GFPs in provincial Government Departments.

Other than report on the GFPs, the OSWs were not asked to report on the
functions of the OSW. However, all but Gauteng reported on the programmes
undertaken by the provincial Departments. The fact that Gauteng had not
reported could possibly be ascribed to the Province not having an Office on
the Status of Women. From the data collected, most provinces were thus able
to report on the status of GFPs within Departments and to indicate where
Departments had not been able to establish GFPs. Provincial GFPs will,
however, be discussed in a different section of the report.

2. Budget

Only 3 OSWs (Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape) provided
some information on their budgets. These are indicated in the table below:

|Province              |Amount                                   |
|Eastern Cape          |R1.2 million (2003/04).                  |
|Free State            |Not available.                           |
|KwaZulu-Natal         |R1.6 million (the financial year is not  |
|                      |known).                                  |
|Gauteng               |Not available.                           |
|Mpumalanga            |Not available.                           |
|North West            |Special Programme Directorate has a      |
|                      |budget from which the OSW is allocated   |
|                      |funds.                                   |
|Western Cape          |Policy Development and Research - R15 000|
|                      |(2002/03).                               |
|                      |Capacity building - R50 000 (2003/04).   |
|                      |Public Education - R285 000 (2003/04).   |
|                      |Coordination of gender machinery - R350  |
|                      |000 (2004/05).                           |



Mpumalanga and the Western Cape mentioned budgetary constraints in the OSW
as one of the reasons why positions were not filled. Furthermore,
Mpumalanga indicated that they are often given additional mandates, which
are not funded. The Free State indicated that the budgetary allocation to
their offices was far less than the allocation of the Youth Directorate in
the province. This touches on the issue of prioritisation, and begs the
question of whether gender equality is being given the necessary
prioritisation.

Whilst the OSWs in the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal may appear to be
getting a substantial amount of financial resources, it is necessary to
ascertain what percentage of that amount goes towards the operations costs
of programmes and the percentage that is allocated towards administrative
functions such as salaries and infrastructure. At this point, it is not
clear as to whether the amount is sufficient or not, but it is often the
case that administrative expenditure outweighs the programmatic costs. This
has serious impact on the output of the programmes.   Furthermore, in his
2003 State of the Nation address, the President indicated that more funds
would be allocated towards gender. It would need to be established whether
this was indeed the case.

The Gender Policy does not refer specifically to the allocation of
resources for provincial OSWs. However, it is imperative that adequate
resources are made available to the provinces for them to give effect to
their mandates. This requires an adequate allocation of financial resources
to allow for the effective coordination, monitoring, networking and
technical support required by the Office, as well as adequate financial
allocations for programmes.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

3.1 Developing policy

The Gender Policy clearly states that one of the provincial OSW functions
is to develop a provincial gender policy and plan of action. This
provincial policy should be in line with the national policy. As mentioned
elsewhere in the report, one of the limitations of the hearings was that
very specific questions (and thus limiting responses) were posed to OSWs.
Many of the OSWs thus chose to answer the questions without any elaboration
on any other issues. Within this report, it is thus difficult to report
conclusively on the issue of the development of gender policies within the
OSWs. Reference was made in some provincial reports to Gender Policies but
very little detail was given on this. Hence, additional information is
required from OSWs.

The reports show that Gauteng has a provincial Gender Policy in place. Two
other provinces, namely Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal indicated that draft
policies are available. The Free State and the Eastern Cape make reference
to undertaking activities to promote the gender policy. As no further
information was provided on these gender policies, it is unclear whether
the activities that they are undertaking is in relation to a national or
provincial gender policy. This information needs to be sourced from the
provinces. The OSWs of Mpumalanga and the North West did not indicate if
the province has a Gender Policy or if one is being developed.

3.2 Gender Action Plan

Gauteng was the only province that referred to a provincial gender action
plan. The Free State's report mentioned a developmental plan and the North
West OSW stated that they had developed a business plan, which was aimed at
integrating gender programmes in Government. As no further information was
provided, it is unclear whether these plans can be equated with a gender
action plan. This would need further investigation. KwaZulu-Natal is in the
process of developing a gender action plan. For most of the other
provinces, this information was not available and requires further
investigation.

3.3 Gender Audits

The OSWs in the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and the North West mentioned
that their provinces had undertaken gender audits and in the case of the
Free State, developed monitoring tools. The gender audit in the Eastern
Cape led to the development of a gender mainstreaming strategy and an
empowerment of women coordination framework.

The Gender Policy recommends that provincial machineries should be
structured and reflect those in the national machinery. One of these
functions that should be mirrored is the development of indicators to
measure progression towards gender equality. The gender audits undertaken
by the aforementioned 3 OSWs thus squarely fall within the ambit of the
provincial OSWs’ work. It should be ascertained what the OSWs progress has
been towards the development of indicators to measure provincial
progression towards gender quality.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

Gender equality in all institutions of government can only be attained if a
rigorous process of gender mainstreaming occurs (National Gender Policy).
Therefore, it is the task of the gender machinery, also those in Government
Departments, and at all levels, to ensure this. The Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-
Natal and Gauteng indicated that they have a gender mainstreaming policy.
The Free State indicated that they have a strategic plan and an operational
plan derived from the Gender Policy. The North West has a gender strategy
and in the absence of any further information, it is not possible to say
whether this could be equated with a gender mainstreaming strategy.

With the exception of Gauteng, very little information is provided on the
gender mainstreaming strategies of provinces. It is therefore unclear how
gender is mainstreamed in provincial programmes and projects. Additional
information needs to be provided by all OSWs on their gender mainstreaming
strategies.

5. Programmes

The OSWs were not asked to provide information on the programmatic work of
their offices. Despite this, the OSWs in Gauteng, Mpumalanga and the
Western Cape gave some indication of the programmes underway. Sufficient
information was provided by Gauteng and the Western Cape to ascertain the
programmatic areas, as well as the aims of the respective programmes.

The brief given to the OSWs requested that they provide information on the
programmes of the provincial GFPs. However, they failed to provide
information indicating the link between the GFPs' programmatic work and the
involvement of the OSWs.

Because programmatic information is only available for Gauteng, the Western
Cape and Mpumalanga, it is not possible to make significant comments on the
programmes of the OSWs. This is clearly an area that should be further
explored.




|OSW          |Programme            |Description of programme      |
|Gauteng      |Policy development   |Support is provided to        |
|             |and policy analysis  |Departments to develop sector |
|             |                     |specific policies and         |
|             |                     |programmes that address gender|
|             |                     |issues.                       |
|             |Capacity building    |The Directorate has done      |
|             |                     |training on gender budgeting  |
|             |                     |and gender planning with GFPs |
|             |                     |and senior management.        |
|             |Gender machineries   |A Gender Forum has been       |
|             |                     |established which meets       |
|             |                     |monthly.                      |
|             |Monitoring and       |Annual analysis of            |
|             |evaluation           |Departmental strategies and   |
|             |                     |budgets are done to ascertain |
|             |                     |if they are in line with      |
|             |                     |national and provincial       |
|             |                     |priorities as well as to check|
|             |                     |for the integration of gender |
|             |                     |into plans and budgets.       |
|             |Gender mainstreaming |The programme ensures that    |
|             |                     |gender is mainstreamed into   |
|             |                     |Departments.                  |
|             |Co-ordination and    |The Directorate coordinates   |
|             |planning             |and plans the celebrations of |
|             |                     |certain commemorative events. |
|Mpumalanga   |HIV and Aids         |Co-coordinated the HIV and    |
|             |                     |AIDS programme Vusa Isizwe,   |
|             |                     |which targets school children.|
|             |Gender training      |Conducted training for GFPs   |
|             |                     |coordinators on gender issues.|
|             |Gender workshop      |Conducted a gender workshop   |
|             |                     |for Members of Parliament and |
|             |                     |Heads of Departments.         |
|             |Awareness campaigns  |Ran awareness campaigns on    |
|             |                     |legislation affecting women.  |
|             |Calendar events      |Co-coordinated the calendar on|
|             |                     |women’s events.               |
|Western Cape |Policy development   |Drafted a provincial gender   |
|             |and research         |equality and women empowerment|
|             |                     |implementation strategy.      |
|             |Capacity building and|Involved in mainstreaming     |
|             |training             |training for trainers in the  |
|             |                     |public sector.                |
|             |                     |OSW specific capacity         |
|             |                     |building.                     |
|             |Public education,    |Involved in the celebration of|
|             |awareness raising and|commemoration days.           |
|             |communication        |Development of promotional    |
|             |                     |materials.                    |
|             |                     |Partnerships with civil       |
|             |                     |society.                      |
|             |Co-ordination of     |The formal structuring of a   |
|             |gender machinery     |provincial gender management  |
|             |                     |system.                       |
|             |Monitoring,          |Developing of an audit        |
|             |evaluation and       |instrument                    |
|             |reporting            |                              |

The programmes of the Western Cape and Gauteng clearly gives effect to the
functions outlined for the provincial OSWs.

6. Challenges

Most of the OSWs reported on challenges impeding their work. The Free State
and Eastern Cape did not raise challenges pertaining to their offices. One
cannot, however, make the assumption that no challenges exist.

|Challenge                                    |Raised by           |
|Fostering an integrated approach to gender   |KwaZulu-Natal       |
|issues                                       |                    |
|Political support required for gender issues |KwaZulu-Natal       |
|Social regeneration and economic empowerment |Gauteng             |
|Filling of vacancies                         |Mpumalanga and      |
|                                             |Western Cape        |
|Budgetary constraints                        |Mpumalanga and      |
|                                             |Western Cape        |
|Unfunded mandates from provincial and/or     |Mpumalanga          |
|national Government Departments              |                    |
|Getting the gender machinery operational and |North West and      |
|strengthening the gender machinery           |Western Cape        |
|Understanding the role and the operational   |Western Cape        |
|methodology of the OSW                       |                    |
|Strengthening relations with NGOs            |Western Cape        |


                        National Gender Focal Points

1.  Structure

1.1 Capacity of GFP in terms of staff complement

Most Departments (namely 11)  report  that  the  GFP  is  staffed  with  one
person.   Six Departments reported that their GFP  was  staffed  with  3  or
more persons, i.e. with at least 2 people  assigned  to  professional  posts
and  one  administrative  post.  Two  Departments   (Foreign   Affairs   and
Agriculture) need to fill the post of the person responsible for doing  GFP-
related work and one Department (Labour) reported that its GFP needs  to  be
re-established.  This is because the one that had initially been set up  has
become dysfunctional.

1.2 Location
The Gender Policy recommends that the GFP should reside  within  the  office
of the Director-General so  as  to  afford  the  GFPs  easy  access  to  all
programmes  and  programme   officials,   thereby   creating   an   enabling
environment  for  gender  mainstreaming.  Only  4  Departments  (i.e.   Land
Affairs, Agriculture and Justice and Constitutional Development  and  Social
Development) reported that their GFPs are located within the office  of  the
Director-General.  Twelve of the other Departments reported that their  GFPs
were located elsewhere in the organisation, with Human  Resource  Management
being a popular site of location.

1.3 Level of appointment

The Gender Policy recommends that the GFP co-ordinator is appointed  at  the
level of director  and  that  persons  appointed  to  this  level  have  the
commensurate  skill  level  required  for  gender  mainstreaming.   Of   the
Departments that indicated the level of appointment, only 7  have  appointed
a director to drive  the  GFP  (Correctional  Services,  Education,  Health,
Foreign Affairs, Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Science and  Technology
and Trade and Industry).  Seven  Departments  (Arts  and  Culture,  Defence,
Labour,  Agriculture,  Housing,  Minerals  and  Energy   and   Science   and
Technology[12]) reported  that  they  had  appointed  someone  at  a  deputy
director level and 3 Departments (Environmental Affairs  and  Tourism,  Home
Affairs and  the  National  Treasury)  made  appointments  at  an  assistant
director level.  The Public Service Commission has appointed a senior  human
resource practitioner to take responsibility for gender issues.

1.4 Area of focus

In many instances, it was not  expressly  stipulated  whether  the  GFP  was
responsible for key performance areas other than gender. Only  in  the  case
of  4  Departments  (i.e.  Correctional  Services,  Education,  Justice  and
Constitutional Affairs, and Trade and Industry),  could  it  be  ascertained
that the GFPs focused on gender alone.  Eight departments  expressly  stated
that the GFP is responsible for areas of competency in  addition  to  gender
(namely, Arts and Culture, Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Home  Affairs,
Labour, Housing, Science and Technology, the Public Service  Commission  and
Water Affairs and Forestry).  The  additional  areas  of  responsibility  in
these cases are HIV and Aids, Employee  Assistance  Programmes,  disability,
children, youth and employment equity.  On average, most of the  Departments
concerned are mandated  with  between  three  to  five  of  these  areas  of
responsibility. This is a serious impediment to focusing on  gender  in  any
substantive and meaningful way as the combination of  taking  responsibility
for so many areas of competency together  with  the  lack  of  capacity  and
resources, limits the impact of the  GFP  in  terms  of  its  gender-related
work.

2.  Budget

The Gender Policy indicates that the costs  entailed  in  the  planning  and
implementation of programmes for women’s empowerment and gender equality  at
Departmental level, need  to  be  incorporated  into  existing  Departmental
budgets.  This needs to be achieved, inter alia,  by  the  re-prioritisation
of  spending  and  efficiency  savings.    Expenditure   on   gender-related
initiatives and programmes need to be planned in advance and where  this  is
not the case, plans need to be reviewed and adjusted to  meet  the  specific
needs  of  women.   The  gender  policy  further  advises  that  the  gender
structures need to have  adequate  financial  resources  so  that  they  are
capacitated to do their work.

Seven departments indicated that their  GFPs  have  a  dedicated  budget  of
their  own  (i.e.  Defence,  Education,  Health,  Land  Affairs,  Trade  and
Industry and Justice and Constitutional Affairs).  The National  Prosecuting
Authority and the South African Sports Commission  also  make  reference  to
available budgets, but it is not entirely clear  as  to  whether  these  are
used exclusively for gender-related work.   Eight  departments   (i.e.  Arts
and Culture, Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Home  Affairs,  SAPS,  Water
Affairs  and  Forestry,  Agriculture,  the  Public  Service  Commission  and
Housing) indicated that their GFPs draw their resources from a  budget  that
they do not control and manage. Six Departments failed to  indicate  or  are
unclear as to whether their GFPs have their own budgets or not.

The table below reflects the amounts allocated for  gender-related  work  by
Departments that provided this information.

Amounts allocated for the financial year 2003/4
|Department                        |Amount                            |
|Defence                           |R 89 211                          |
|Education                         |R 1.5 million (of this R 200 000  |
|                                  |is for programmatic work)         |
|Health                            |R 1 892 000 (of this R 688 000 is |
|                                  |for non-administrative costs)     |
|Land Affairs                      |R 1.577 million                   |
|ICD                               |R 66 000 (allocated to ‘special   |
|                                  |programmes’). It is not clear how |
|                                  |much is specifically for          |
|                                  |gender-related work.              |
|NPASA                             |R 2 5 million (allocated to the   |
|                                  |Sexual Offences and Community     |
|                                  |Affairs Unit, of which R 24       |
|                                  |million is for human resource     |
|                                  |related expenditure)              |
|Science and Technology            |R 1 million – SARG                |
|                                  |R 1 million – SA Women in Science |
|                                  |Awards                            |
|                                  |R 260 000 – research project      |
|                                  |(only different project budgets   |
|                                  |are provided)                     |
|SASC                              |R 100 000 (not clear if this is   |
|                                  |solely for gender-related work or |
|                                  |not)                              |
|Social Development                |R 580 000                         |
|Trade and Industry                |R1.5 million for internal         |
|                                  |gender-related work and R 2       |
|                                  |million to SAWEN and              |
|                                  |R 6 million to TWIB               |
|Justice and Constitutional Affairs|R 3 119 000 (R 1 095 000 for      |
|                                  |programmatic related work),       |
|                                  |also R 3 000 000 (donor funding)  |

From the above, it is clear that on the whole, most GFPs either do not  have
direct control over managing their own financial resources  or  have  access
to very limited amounts of financial resources.   A  number  of  Departments
raised the lack of resources as one  of  the  greatest  impediments  to  the
effective  implementation  of  their  work.  This  needs  to  be   seriously
addressed.

3.  Policy and Gender Action Plan

In terms of the Gender Policy, some of the key functions of the GFPs are:

    • To ensure that each Department implements the national gender policy.
    • To ensure that gender issues are routinely considered in  Departmental
      strategic planning exercises.
    • To ensure that Departments  reflect  gender  considerations  in  their
      business plans and routinely report on them.
    • To review Departmental policy and planning in line with  the  national
      gender policy.
    • To monitor and evaluate Departmental projects and programmes to assess
      whether they are consistent with the national gender policy.

Most Departments acknowledge that  their  GFPs  should  be  responsible  for
implementing the national gender policy,  for  developing  gender  sensitive
policies and for reviewing Departmental policies from a gender  perspective.
 Some Departments further reflect that these functions are  key  objectives.
However, most make no mention as to how they are striving to  implement  the
national gender policy and whether they are involved  in  either  developing
or reviewing Departmental policies from a gender perspective.

3.1 Developing policy

Eleven departments make no mention of playing a role in the  development  of
gender-sensitive policies. Twelve departments report that they are  involved
in policy development that promotes gender equity in the  Department.  These
departments and the policies that they have developed are reflected  in  the
table below:

|Department                        |Policy                            |
|Defence                           |Sexual harassment policy,         |
|                                  |gender-based violence policy,     |
|                                  |promotion of gender equity policy |
|                                  |(draft form), pregnancy policy    |
|                                  |(draft form).                     |
|Education                         |Policy guidelines on sexual       |
|                                  |harassment, policy guidelines on  |
|                                  |learner harassment                |
|Environmental Affairs             |Sexual harassment policy          |
|Health                            |Policy guidelines for health      |
|                                  |sector                            |
|Independent Complaints Directorate|Gender policy, policy guidelines  |
|                                  |on gender, selection, recruitment |
|                                  |and equity                        |
|National Prosecuting Authority of |Draft sexual harassment policy    |
|South Africa                      |                                  |
|SAPS                              |Sexual harassment policy          |
|Science and Technology            |Sexual harassment policy, will    |
|                                  |develop a gender equity           |
|                                  |mainstreaming policy by mid 2004  |
|South African Sports Commission   |Policy guidelines on women, sport |
|                                  |and recreation                    |
|Trade and Industry                |Revision of ‘Gender and Women’s   |
|                                  |Empowerment Policy Framework’     |
|Water Affairs                     |Gender policy, sexual harassment  |
|Justice and Constitutional Affairs|Gender Policy Statement,          |
|                                  |mainstreaming gender              |
|                                  |implementation guidelines and the |
|                                  |developing of mainstreaming of    |
|                                  |gender reporting protocols.       |



From the above, it can be seen that most Departments have opted  to  develop
a  sexual  harassment  policy.  Very  few  Departments  have  developed   an
overarching gender  equity/gender  mainstreaming  policy  that  defines  the
organisational framework within which gender equity will be  promoted.  This
is problematic, as notwithstanding the fact that the national gender  policy
serves as the framework within which Departments should  engage  in  gender-
related work, it is important that each Department develop a  gender  policy
of its own, which spells out its commitment to eradicating gender inequity.
One Department, namely the Department of Home Affairs, reports that its  GFP
does not participate in the development of  polices  and  in  selection  and
procurement processes in the Department.  This should  be  explored  further
with the Department.

3.2 Reviewing policy

Most Departments make no mention of the role that  they  play  in  reviewing
and analysing Departmental policies to ensure that they take  cognisance  of
gender issues. Only 7 departments (Defence,  Arts  and  Culture,  Education,
Health, Labour, Public Serve and Administration, Trade and Industry)  report
that they are/should play a role in the reviewing of  Departmental  policies
from a gender perspective.  Of these, only 3 (Arts and Culture,  Health  and
Labour) appear to be  actively  engaged  in  reviewing  policies.  The  rest
merely report that policy review is one of the objectives of  the  GFP,  but
do not report on any work being done in this regard.

3.3 Gender Action Plan

The Gender Policy encourages the development of a  programme  of  action  or
gender action plan based on the  policy.   The  GFPs  are  the  implementing
units of the national plan.  GFPs at national level are therefore  meant  to
facilitate the programme and be the centre of co-ordination at  Departmental
level.   With the exception of 1 Department,  no  mention  is  made  of  the
development of gender action plans.  Only Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  and
Justice and Constitutional Development have developed a draft gender  action
plan,  but  reports  that  there  have   been   ‘serious’   impediments   in
implementing this as a consequence of capacity problems.

4.  Gender Mainstreaming

The Gender Policy holds that  Government  Departments  should  embark  on  a
rigorous  gender  mainstreaming  strategy.   Eight   departments   (Defence,
Education, Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Health, Home  Affairs,  Public
Service and  Administration,  Science  and  Technology,  Water  Affairs  and
Forestry, Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the  South  African  Sports
Commission) make specific mention of their role in this regard and  some  of
these report  on  related  initiatives.   Of  these,  the  attempts  of  the
Department of Home Affairs in this regard appear to be at a  proposal  stage
at this point  and  have  therefore  not  yet  been  implemented.    Only  2
Departments (Science and Technology and Justice and Constitutional  Affairs)
indicate how they strive to mainstream gender into Departmental  programmes,
policies, procedures, outputs and the like. Only 2 Departments (Defence  and
Environmental Affairs and Tourism) make mention of specific structures  that
have been put in place to assist  with  the  mainstreaming  of  gender  into
Departmental work

On the whole, the information provided on the mainstreaming of  gender  into
Departmental programmes, procedures, etc. is very sketchy.  The  reason  for
this need to be determined and further analysis in this regard is  critical.


5.  Programmes

Given that the methods for reporting on programmatic  work  by  the  various
Departments are so diverse, it  has  been  very  difficult  to  collate  the
information in this regard. However, a few observations  can  be  made  with
regard to the programmes being implemented:

5.1 Internal vs External Programmatic Work

Many Departments focused on the internal projects and programmes  that  they
are implementing, i.e. work related  to  transformation  in  the  Department
itself,  such  as  employment  equity  issues,  recruitment  and   selection
practices and internal policies. Many Departments make little or no  mention
of programmatic work done externally, i.e.  the  gendered  initiatives  that
they are implementing to improve the Department’s service delivery.   It  is
important that both the internal transformation  and  the  external  service
delivery issues are both addressed in terms of their gendered implications.

5.2 Limited scope of external programmes

Where external work is done, it is to a large extent this is centred  around
the commemoration of calendar events such as National Women’s  Day  and  the
16 Days of Activism on No Violence Against Women.  This is problematic as  a
comprehensive programme of action needs to encompass far more than this.

5.3 Links between programmes and gender

In many instances, Departments report on programmatic  work  that  is  being
done, but the ways in which this work strives to promote  gender  equity  is
not clear.  It is important that the ways in which gender  equity  is  being
promoted is clear in all programmatic initiatives
5.4 Gender planning

In most cases, very little mention is  made  of  how  programmatic  work  is
planned.  This suggests that there is a need to look into the ways in  which
gender planning methodologies are utilised  to  inform  planning  processes.
The  Gender  Policy  recommends  the  project  life  cycle  as  a  tool  and
organising instrument for gender planning.  Each phase has  gender  specific
activities, which makes it easier for Departments to audit the  activity  of
each of the tasks they execute, whether the  task  relates  to  internal  or
external transformation.

5.5 Programme design

In many instances, the links between the objectives,  methods  and  intended
outputs of programmatic work is not clear.  The design of  programmes  aimed
at facilitating gender equity therefore needs to be carefully considered.

5.6 Impact assessments

Almost no mention is made of attempts to assess the impact  of  programmatic
work.  This is critical in  developing  interventions  that  are  effective.
The design and usage of effective evaluation mechanisms therefore  needs  to
be emphasised. The Gender Policy recommends that monitoring  and  evaluation
are key to measuring the success and  impact  of  programmes  that  seek  to
implement gender equality principles.

5.7 Development of key performance indicators

Similarly, no mention  is  made  of  the  development  of  programmatic  key
performance indicators for the  measuring  of  progress  made.   The  Gender
Policy recommends the usage  of  indicators  to  measure  transformation  in
programmes.  These indicators encompass, inter alia, the following:

    • The number and quality of  sector-related  gender  analysis  training
      programmes in place.
    •  The  extent  to  which  sector-based  gender  analysis  and   gender
      disaggregated data is effectively used in programmatic design.
    •  The  extent  of  technical  support  and  guidelines  provided   for
      responsive review of sector programmes.

5.8 Lack of resources for programmatic work

On the whole,  it  appears  that  the  resources  allocated  to  work  of  a
programmatic nature are dismally insufficient.  This needs to  be  addressed
urgently.


6.  Challenges

Most Departments did not report on  the  challenges  faced  by  their  GFPs.
Because this information is critical in defining the problems faced by  GFPs
and in seeking appropriate interventions to these, it is critical that  this
information be elicited.  The table below constitutes challenges  that  were
raised that are of a serious nature:

|Nature of challenge               |Raised by                         |
|Restructuring in Department       |Correctional Services, Labour,    |
|                                  |Land Affairs                      |
|Budgetary constraints             |Education, Health, SASC, Trade and|
|                                  |industry                          |
|Lack of human resources           |Health, Trade and Industry        |
|Staff capacity (in relation to    |Environmental Affairs and Tourism |
|skills)                           |                                  |
|Lack of strategic direction wrt   |Health                            |
|gender mainstreaming              |                                  |
|No full-time GFPs in provinces    |Health                            |
|Need to clarify role, powers and  |Health                            |
|functions of provincial GFPs      |                                  |
|Lack of co-operation from senior  |Health                            |
|management                        |                                  |
|Lack of support from male         |SASC                              |
|counterparts                      |                                  |
|Need to implement policy          |Trade and Industry                |
|Implementation of gender action   |Water Affairs and Forestry        |
|plan affected by capacity problems|                                  |

                 Provincial Departmental Gender Focal Points

Information provided by the provincial OSWs on the structure, budget
allocation, policies, programmes, gender mainstreaming strategies, etc. of
GFPs was inadequate. The limited amount of information gathered does not
allow one to form a comprehensive, reliable and valid picture of GFPs. OSWs
had been asked to provide information on the status of GFPs in provinces,
yet it is unclear why the information was not forthcoming. As stipulated by
the Gender Policy, one of the functions of the provincial OSWs would be to
coordinate the gender machineries in the provinces. Provincial OSWs should
thus be best placed to provide a comprehensive overview of the provincial
GFPs, including their structure, location, level of appointments,
programmes, gender mainstreaming strategies, budget allocation,
achievements and challenges. This said limited inferences could be made
about the provincial GFPs.

1. Structure of GFPs

1.1 Capacity of GFPs in terms of staff complement

The Eastern Cape OSW indicated that 9 Departments, out of the approximate
11, have established GFPs. In Mpumalanga 6 out of an estimated 11
Departments in Mpumalanga have established GFPs. This means that just over
half of the Departments have established GFPs, which is unsatisfactory as
it impacts on the ability of the individual Departments and ultimately on
the province’s ability to address gender issues and to ensure that
Departmental programmes benefit not only men but women as well. Head of
Departments should be asked to account for nearly half of the GFPs not
being established in their Departments.

The situation in the North West appears to be problematic. Only 3 out of 10
Departments have established GFPs. This means that 70% of the GFPs have not
been established in accordance with the Gender Policy. Without the
appropriate gender structures in place, the empowerment of women and the
eradication of discrimination against women, will not become a reality in
this province.

The situation in the Western Cape appears slightly more positive than in
other provinces. Twelve Departments have GFPs in the province. These
structures, however, vary between being formalised GFPs and those, which
are accorded the GFP function on an ad hoc basis. It appears as if formal
structures have been established in at least 8 Departments, with 1
Department not having this function at all and the position being vacant in
another.  However, the provincial OSW has indicated that there are
significant challenges pertaining to the formalising of structures.

1.2 Location

The location of the GFPs in the Eastern Cape varies from being located in
the Head of Departments’ offices, as is recommended in the Gender Policy,
to being placed in the Human Resources Department. In the Western Cape,
most of the GFPs are located in the Human Resources sections of the
Departments. Again, this is not in accordance with the recommendations of
the Gender Policy and has been mentioned as a challenge by the Western Cape
OSW.

The implications of being located in the Human Resources is that firstly,
the GFP persons would not have an integral understanding and bird’s eye
view of the programmes and projects undertaken in the Department. Thus, it
would be difficult to mainstream gender into projects. Secondly, it affects
their ability to influence decision-making at a macro level, which would
ensure that decisions filters and are implemented at micro-levels in the
Department.

1.3 Level of appointment

GFP coordinators in the Eastern Cape and the North West are appointed at
assistant director level. This is not in accordance with the
recommendations of the Gender Policy, which states that GFP coordinators
should be appointed at director level.

The Mpumalanga OSW asserted that in the established GFPs, the persons
employed have inadequate job descriptions and there are no structures in
place. The level of appointment was, however, not indicated.

The rank of GFP coordinators in the Western Cape varies between senior
officer to assistant director to deputy director. None of the Departments
currently employ the coordinator at the recommended rank of director. This
has been recognised as a challenge for the provincial Departments.

It has been stated repeatedly that appointing GFP persons at ranks other
than director impacts on their ability to influence decision-making.
Furthermore, it implies that people with all the skills required for the
position are not necessarily appointed.

2. Budgets

With the exception of the Western Cape and Gauteng, the Provincial OSW
reports do not provide any information on whether provincial GFPs have
dedicated budgets. Within the Western Cape GFPs, most (8 out of 11
Departments) reportedly have dedicated budgets for their gender desks in
2004/05. It is observed that most of the Departments that have formalised
GFPs have dedicated budgets. This is the exception in the Departments of
Housing and Culture Affairs and Sports, where the gender function is an
additional function, yet they have dedicated budgets. The OSW cites
inadequate resourcing of the GFPs as one of the problems.

The Mpumalanga OSW has indicated that there are no budgets in Departments
to undertake gender responsibilities. This is certainly indicative of the
priority given to gender issues and tasks undertaken in the Department,
which addresses gender equality and equity issues. This impacts
significantly on the Department’s delivery of services but also on it
ability to address transformation within the Department.

In Gauteng, the Directorate indicated that all provincial Departments have
gender budgets. The outputs of these gender budgets reflect gender
sensitive indicators for all programmes and projects, which are in line
with the core functions of the Department. Whilst all the necessary
information on this initiative is not available, it is clear that the steps
taken by Gauteng allows them to monitor how the money is being spent and
the impact that it has on men and women in the province.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

The Gender Policy recommends that provincial GFPs should be established to
mirror those at the national level. Some of the functions accorded to the
provincial GFPs are to:

    • Ensure that Departments implement the (national) provincial gender
      policy.
    • Review Departmental policy and planning in line with the (national)
      provincial gender policy.
    • Ensure that gender issues are routinely considered in Departmental
      strategic planning exercises.

Given that provincial gender policies are not the norm, this would impact
on the functions assigned to the GFPs. This might also lead to uncertainty
and confusion around the role and functions of the GFPs. The question thus
arises whether the national Gender Policy is guiding the work of the GFPs
in the provinces where provincial Gender Policies are absent.

Furthermore, provincial OSWs gave no indication of whether GFPS have
reviewed their Departmental policies to ensure that it is in line with
provincial or national Gender Policies and that it takes cognisance of
gender issues and the gendered impact of these policies.

With regard to the development of policies that impact on men and women,
the Free State Department of Social Development is said to have an internal
HIV and AIDS policy and the Department of Education has developed a Sexual
Harassment Policy. The Directorate in Gauteng also indicated that
provincial Departments are in the process of finalising their respective
policies on sexual harassment.

Gender Mainstreaming

At provincial OSW level, gender mainstreaming strategies are in operation
in the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, Gauteng, and possibly the Free State
and North West. Theoretically, the GFPs in these provinces should thus have
a framework in which to mainstream gender into the policies, programmes and
activities of the Departments. They are thus in a more advantageous
position than those provinces that do not have strategies.

The Western Cape OSW is the exception and reports that most of the GFPs in
the Departments have draft gender equality and women empowerment strategies
in place. Critique cannot be offered in this report on these processes in
the Western Cape, as detailed information is not available. On the other
hand, the Free State OSW has clearly indicated that GFPs don’t have the
necessary capacity to achieve gender equality. As a direct result of this,
gender strategies, programmes and activities with a gender dimension are
not incorporated in the strategic plans of the Departments. This is a
matter of concern as it impacts on the delivery of services, the ability of
programmes to set and achieve gender targets, etc. Furthermore, this could
imply that the position and the skills currently available for fulfilling
that position, is not commensurate.

4. Programmes

The information supplied by the provincial OSWs on the work undertaken by
the Departments varied. In instances where information was supplied, it was
not detailed to the extent of delineating the aims and objectives of the
programme as well as the methods and intended outputs. Furthermore, no
information was supplied on the planning of the project and how gender was
incorporated into all the phases thereof. Thus, the analysis in this regard
is limited.

5.1 Internal versus External programmatic work

Most of the programmes mentioned focused on the external work undertaken in
the Departments i.e. in the service delivery aspects of Departments. This
is in contrast with the National GFPs reporting in this document, which
focused more on the internal programmes. Whilst reference is made to
internal programmes in the provincial GFPs, the weight of the reporting
certainly is placed on the external service delivery aspects. Whilst it is
important to focus on service delivery initiatives, internal programmes
with a focus on gender issues, have to be undertaken. This is important to
ensure that transformation is not only geared towards the outside, but also
internally for women and men within the Department. Programmes and policies
of this nature is thus essential. These pertains, amongst others, to sexual
harassment policies, HIV and AIDS policies, issues of recruitment and
retention of staff and the employing of women in senior management
positions.

5.2 Scope of the external programmes

One of the activities that were consistently raised by some of the
Departments was that of commemorating national events. This is problematic
when this becomes the sole activity undertaken by the Department. If these
activities fall within a comprehensive and substantive programme with clear
aims, objectives and outputs, and culminate in the celebratory event, it
would be less problematic.

Some Departments are undertaking a number of other substantive programmes.
These include awareness raising, the establishing of trauma rooms,
initiatives with rural women, addressing gender based violence, youth
initiatives, etc.

5.3 Links between gender and programmes

At face value, some of the programmes reported on seem to have as its
intended outcome, the empowerment of women. However, due to the limited
information at hand, it is not possible to say to what extent programmes
address gender equality and equity issues.

5. Challenges

A host of challenges that are experienced by the provincial GFPs were
raised by the provincial OSWs. These are listed in the table below.

|Nature of challenge             |Raised by                       |
|The appointment, location and   |Eastern Cape                    |
|allocation of resources to GFPs |                                |
|are not uniform.                |                                |
|The location of GFPs is         |Mpumalanga and the Western Cape.|
|problematic.                    |                                |
|GFPs have not been established  |KwaZulu-Natal, North West and   |
|in all Departments.             |the Western Cape.               |
|GFPs are not appointed at the   |Eastern Cape, Mpumalanga and the|
|recommended rank.               |Western Cape.                   |
|GFPs don’t have the necessary   |Free State                      |
|capacity to achieve gender      |                                |
|equality.                       |                                |
|The lack of GFP capacity leads  |Free State                      |
|to gender not being mainstreamed|                                |
|into strategic plans of         |                                |
|Departments.                    |                                |
|The resources allocated to GFP  |KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, North|
|are insufficient.               |West and the Western Cape.      |
|GFPs are tasked with issues     |Mpumalanga                      |
|other than gender.              |                                |
|GFPs report to several persons. |Mpumalanga                      |
|There is problem between        |North West                      |
|national and provincial         |                                |
|Departments.                    |                                |
|There is a lack of understanding|Western Cape                    |
|of GFPs responsibilities.       |                                |



A number of the challenges raised above serves as common problems to other
GFPs, even though they were not reported on at this hearing. This comment
is made against the backdrop of study tours undertaken by the JMC during
2000 – 2003. Common challenges included the appointment, structure,
location and rank of GFPs as well as the resources allocated to them. This,
together with a skill shortage in the GFPs, leads to the GFPs being less
effective in performing their functions and thus addressing issues of
gender equality.



                         Section 4: Recommendations

                   National Office on the Status of Women

    • The Gender Policy lists, as one of the tasks of the OSW,  leading  the
      process  of  developing  a  National  Gender  Action  Plan.    It   is
      recommended that the OSW give effect to the Gender Policy and  develop
      this National Gender Action Plan, which would guide the  provinces  in
      their development and  implementation  of  provincial  gender-specific
      action plans.
    • The OSW  is  assigned  the  task  of  developing  key  indicators  for
      measuring the  national  progression  towards  gender  equality.  This
      implies that the national OSW has a monitoring role to  fulfil.  Thus,
      the question of whether the OSW has the capacity to  do  this  arises.
      This necessitates that the Office be equipped with the necessary human
      resources to give effect to this function. The second  issue  that  it
      raises, is what enforcement powers the Office has. This  is  in  light
      structures not complying with, among others, the implementation of the
      Gender Policy. The OSW should thus monitor but also  be  afforded  the
      necessary powers to enforce certain recommendations. In addition,  the
      OSW should be in a position to ensure that the Gender Policy  is  used
      at a provincial and national  level,  in  the  absence  of  provincial
      Gender Policies.
    • It is recommended that there be a more effective co-ordinated approach
      to the programmes of the national OSW, provincial OSW as well  as  the
      national  and  provincial  GFPs.  In  this  respect,   provinces   and
      Departments should be required to table their reports based  on  their
      programmes, etc. This will lead to  more  substantive  programmes  and
      hopefully eradicate only events-based activities.
    • In order to facilitate the work of the JMC, it is recommended that the
      OSW brief the JMC on a quarterly basis.  In  this  respect,  they  are
      requested to provide the JMC  with  all  the  necessary  and  relevant
      documentation. It  is  further  suggested  that  the  JMC  be  briefed
      timeously  on  urgent  matters  as  well  as  on  reports   (including
      international reports) that requires the JMC to provide input.
    • The national OSW should undertake a skills audit within  the  OSWs  as
      well as national and provincial GFPs. This will enable  the  necessary
      structures to make decisions regarding, amongst others,  the  rank  of
      GFP coordinators, the skills required within GFPs or OSWs, etc.
    • It is recommended that the national OSW be  provided  with  additional
      staff, with the necessary skill level required for the  positions,  to
      enable the Office to fulfill all its functions.
    • The budgetary requirements of the OSW should be commensurate with  the
      tasks, programmes and output envisaged by the Office. Furthermore, the
      budget should be increased to make provision for the national  OSW  to
      assist the provincial OSWs.
    • Local Government should be assisted to establish gender  machinery  at
      this level. In this respect,  the  OSW  should  be  working  with  the
      National Department of Provincial  and  Local  Government,  provincial
      OSWs as  well  as  the  South  African  Local  Government  Association
      (SALGA).
    • Legislatures  should  be  encouraged  to  establish  Joint  Monitoring
      Committees on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of  Women,
      which would monitor provincial progression towards gender equality.
    • It is recommended that the National Gender Machinery hold a  strategic
      planning session to evaluate the  progress  of  the  Gender  Machinery
      within the 10  years  of  democracy  period,  as  well  as  to  assess
      implementation and the development of action plans.


Provincial Office on the Status of Women

1. Recommendations pertaining to the structure of the OSWs

1.1 Capacity

Given the functions of the OSW, sufficient human capacity is essential if
the Office is to be effective in fulfilling its tasks. It is thus
recommended that the staff capacity be increased, as a matter of urgency,
to at least 3 staff members, with 1 person providing administrative
support. This is vital for provinces such as the Western Cape. Furthermore,
it is essential that the numerous and significant positions that are vacant
be filled (KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga).

1.2 Location

As stated in the Gender Policy, the OSWs should be located within the
Premiers’ Offices. Considering the responsibilities assigned to the OSW and
the level of decision-making, it is essential that the OSWs be placed in
the Premiers’ offices. In addition, other than the necessary status that
the OSWs are afforded by being placed in the Premiers’ Offices, it also
affords them a bird’s eye view of programmes, projects and activities that
are conducted throughout the province, and the OSW can thus play a
significant role in these.

1.3 Level of appointment

Whilst the Gender Policy is silent on the level of appointment of OSW
coordinators, it does recommend that the GFP coordinator be appointed at a
director level. It is thus recommended that the head of the OSW be
appointed at the level of director. Cognisance should, however, be taken of
the skill requirements for such a position and the person should only be
appointed at this level if he or she has the skills commensurate with the
position. In this regard, it might be necessary to undertake a skills audit
of all the staff in the provincial OSWs and to match the position with the
necessary skills required. Furthermore, it might be necessary to undertake
extensive capacity training for staff members in order for them to
effectively execute their current job requirements or to prepare them for
tasks at a higher level.

1.4 Functions of the OSWs

Whilst this area was not reported on comprehensively by the OSWs, the JMC
needs to ascertain whether the OSWs are able to deliver on the functions
assigned to them, and the factors that are aiding or hampering their
progress. Provinces should furthermore be able to enforce decisions arising
from their monitoring of the progression towards the achievement of gender
equality for women.

1.5 Establishment of a Gauteng OSW

Gauteng provided a comprehensive report on the gender policies, programmes
and activities for the Province. It is evident that the Directorate
fulfilling the function of the OSW is very effective in most areas.
However, there is a need for the Province to establish an OSW which could
carry out these functions. The reasons for this not being the case need to
be taken up with the political leadership in the province.

2. Budget

The JMC has to ascertain what the respective budgets for the OSWs in the
provinces are. Included in this, should be whether the OSWs have a
dedicated budget and a breakdown for the budget disaggregating the
percentages and amounts for the different programmes and administrative
functions (salaries, infrastructure, etc). OSWs should furthermore give an
indication of the amount allocated to the OSW together with the amounts
allocated to other programmes in the Office of the Premier. This is
necessary as the JMC wishes to get an understanding of how gender is
prioritised. The resources allocated to structures dealing with gender
issues will be a good indication of this.

As indicated earlier, it is difficult to say that an amount of R1.2 million
is sufficient or insufficient to cover the expenditures of an OSW.
Therefore, it is recommended that a budget be allocated to the OSWs based
on the strategic and business plans of the Office and that this budget
allows the Office to effect its plans.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plans

3.1 Developing policy

It is essential that OSWs provide additional information on whether they
have developed provincial gender policies and provide information on these
gender policies. Gender policies are essential to providing a framework of
how gender equality is to be achieved within provinces. All operations
undertaken by the province will thus be guided by such a policy and serve
as a mechanism by which government officials and other stakeholders could
be held accountable.

Gender policies need to be developed by those provinces, which do not have
such policies. This forms part of the tasks of the provincial OSWs.  It is
further recommended that the national OSW, as well as provinces such as
Gauteng that have Gender policies in place, provide assistance to the
provincial OSWs in the development of such policies.

3.2 Gender Action Plan

As only 2 OSWs speak specifically about gender action plans, it is
imperative that this is followed-up on. As in the case of the developing of
gender policies, the JMC and the national OSW should investigate the
reasons behind provincial OSWs’ lack of such plans. If the problem pertains
to capacity within the provincial OSWs to develop such action plans, the
necessary technical support should be provided.

3.3 Gender Audits and Monitoring Mechanisms

Provincial OSWs are responsible for developing key performance indicators
by which the progression towards gender equality can be measured. While 3
OSWs made reference to conducting gender audits, it is essential that
performance indicators and mechanisms be developed by the Office, which
could be used by provincial GFPs in the Departments.

Whilst it is important to have monitoring mechanisms in place, OSWs should
start looking towards conducting evaluations of their specific programmes.
This would assist OSWs with making changes to programmes that are currently
underway and thus improve the effectiveness of programmes.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

Very few OSWs indicated that they have gender mainstreaming strategies in
place. The JMC needs to investigate whether these strategies have been
developed and where they don’t exist, investigate whether this is as a
result of a lack of capacity or human resources. Furthermore, it is
recommended that:

    • Provincial OSW staff receives training in the development of gender
      mainstreaming strategies.
    • The national OSW assists or coordinates this capacity building
      training.
    • Provincial gender strategies are developed for those provinces, which
      do not have such strategies in place.
    • The outputs and key performance indicators be documented.
    • Provincial OSWs should provide the national OSW with an annual report
      on the status of women in their provinces.


5. Programmes

The Gender Policy outlines the functions of the provincial OSWs from which
programmes could be developed. Provincial OSWs thus need to provide the JMC
with the following information:

    • An overview of their programmes, with the corresponding aims and
      objectives of programmes, outputs, monitoring indicators, challenges
      and budgets.
    • Information on whether these programmes have been informed by
      provincial needs assessments.
    • The manner in which programmes impact or the potential impact of
      programmes on men and women.

5. Areas to follow up with individual OSWs

Apart from the recommendations cited above, the JMC can use the information
provided in the table below to follow-up with the respective OSWs:
|OSW                             |Area                            |
|Eastern Cape                    |No mention was made of the      |
|                                |location of the OSW.            |
|                                |Establish whether the OSW has a |
|                                |dedicated gender budget and a   |
|                                |breakdown of the budget for the |
|                                |2003/04 and 2004/05 should be   |
|                                |provided.                       |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender policy is in place, and  |
|                                |the nature thereof.             |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender action plan is in place, |
|                                |and the nature thereof.         |
|                                |The report did not give an      |
|                                |indication of the link between  |
|                                |the provincial OSW and the      |
|                                |programmes of the GFP.          |
|                                |Insufficient information on the |
|                                |work of the OSW.                |
|Free State                      |What is the rationale behind    |
|                                |administrative staff            |
|                                |outnumbering staff implementing |
|                                |programmes?                     |
|                                |No mention was made of the      |
|                                |location of the OSW.            |
|                                |Establish whether the OSW has a |
|                                |dedicated gender budget and a   |
|                                |breakdown of the budget for the |
|                                |2003/04 and 2004/05 should be   |
|                                |provided.                       |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender policy is in place, and  |
|                                |the nature thereof.             |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender action plan is in place, |
|                                |and the nature thereof.         |
|                                |Investigate whether the province|
|                                |has developed strategies to     |
|                                |mainstream gender.              |
|                                |The report did not give an      |
|                                |indication of the link between  |
|                                |the provincial OSW and the      |
|                                |programmes of the GFP.          |
|                                |Insufficient information on the |
|                                |work of the OSW.                |
|KwaZulu-Natal                   |Establish whether the OSW has a |
|                                |dedicated gender budget and a   |
|                                |breakdown of the budget for the |
|                                |2003/04 and 2004/05 should be   |
|                                |provided.                       |
|                                |No mention was made of          |
|                                |strategies to mainstream gender.|
|                                |The report did not give an      |
|                                |indication of the link between  |
|                                |the provincial OSW and the      |
|                                |programmes of the GFP.          |
|                                |Insufficient information of the |
|                                |work of the OSW.                |
|Gauteng                         |Is the Directorate located in   |
|                                |the Premier’s Office and will   |
|                                |the new Gender programme be     |
|                                |located within the Premier’s    |
|                                |office?                         |
|                                |Establish whether the           |
|                                |Directorate has a dedicated     |
|                                |gender budget and a breakdown of|
|                                |the budget for the 2003/04 and  |
|                                |2004/05 should be provided?     |
|                                |No mention was made of          |
|                                |strategies to mainstream gender.|
|Mpumalanga                      |In which ways does the location |
|                                |of the OSW assist or hamper the |
|                                |office?                         |
|                                |Establish whether the OSW has a |
|                                |dedicated gender budget and a   |
|                                |breakdown of the budget for the |
|                                |2003/04 and 2004/05 should be   |
|                                |provided?                       |
|                                |No mention was made of a Gender |
|                                |Policy.                         |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender action plan is in place, |
|                                |and the nature thereof.         |
|                                |No mention was made of          |
|                                |strategies to mainstream gender.|
|                                |The report did not give an      |
|                                |indication of the link between  |
|                                |the provincial OSW and the      |
|                                |programmes of the GFP.          |
|                                |Insufficient information on the |
|                                |work of the OSW.                |
|North West                      |Do all the positions in the OSW |
|                                |have exclusively gender         |
|                                |responsibilities?               |
|                                |In which ways does the location |
|                                |of the OSW assist or hamper the |
|                                |office?                         |
|                                |The JMC should advocate for the |
|                                |OSW having a dedicated gender   |
|                                |budget.                         |
|                                |No mention was made of a Gender |
|                                |Policy.                         |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender action plan is in place, |
|                                |and the nature thereof.         |
|                                |No mention was made of          |
|                                |strategies to mainstream gender.|
|                                |The report did not give an      |
|                                |indication of the link between  |
|                                |the provincial OSW and the      |
|                                |programmes of the GFP.          |
|                                |Insufficient information of the |
|                                |work of the OSW.                |
|Western Cape                    |Is the OSW located in the       |
|                                |Premier’s Office?               |
|                                |Establish whether the OSW has a |
|                                |dedicated gender budget and a   |
|                                |breakdown of the budget for the |
|                                |2003/04 and 2004/05 should be   |
|                                |provided?                       |
|                                |Investigate whether a provincial|
|                                |gender action plan is in place, |
|                                |and the nature thereof.         |
|                                |No mention was made of          |
|                                |strategies to mainstream gender.|



   National Gender Focal Points


   1. Recommendations with regard to the structure of the GFPs


   1.1 Capacity


   It is recommended that where resources can be appropriated, GFPs  should
   be staffed with at least 3 staff members.  This is so that the  GFP  can
   realistically give effect to its role with regard to the development and
   review of policies,  in  mainstreaming  gender  into  the  work  of  the
   department and in effecting both internal and  external  transformation.




   1.2 Location


   As per the recommendations of the Gender Policy, the  GFP  needs  to  be
   located in the Office of the Director General if its  impact  is  to  be
   maximised.  This is not the case in most Departments and the feasibility
   of so doing needs to be explored.


   3. Level of appointment


   The Gender Policy recommends appointment of GFP coordinators at director
   level.  Most Departments have not given effect to this and  the  reasons
   for this should be explored further.


   The Gender Policy further provides that GFP staff must have commensurate
   skills.  Given that the reports submitted sometimes reveal a superficial
   understanding  of  basic  gender-related   concepts   such   as   gender
   mainstreaming, and given the poor quality of gendered programmatic  work
   in some instances, there is possibly a need to conduct a skills audit to
   ensure that the GFPs are capacitated with appropriately skilled people.


   1.4  Area of focus


   It can be seen from the reports, that the  GFPs  that  focus  on  gender
   alone appear to be having a  far  greater  impact  than  those  who  are
   responsible for other areas  of  competency  as  well.  It  is  strongly
   recommended that GFPs focus primarily on gender. This will empower  them
   to make a meaningful impact, as opposed to focusing on a broad range  of
   areas in very superficial ways.


   2.  Budget


   It is recommended that the GFPs that  do  not  have  dedicated  budgets,
   strive to move towards a situation where the GFP has a budget of its own
   and consequently has direct control over how its financial resources are
   managed.


   Given that on the whole, meagre resources are allocated to  GFPs,  there
   is a need to conduct a needs assessment in this regard so as to  compare
   what is needed with  what  is  allocated.    Strategies  for  increasing
   resource allocation to GFPs need to be further explored.
   3. Policy and Gender Action Plan


   1. Policy


   GFPs have a critical role to play in both the development and  review  of
   Departmental policies.  As far as policy development is concerned, it  is
   advisable that the GFPs play a role in  securing  an  overarching  gender
   policy for the Department.  This policy will provide the framework within
   which the Department articulates  its  commitments  to  promoting  gender
   equity.


   It is also important that GFPs play a role in reviewing all  Departmental
   policies to consider their gendered impact and repercussions.  Given that
   many GFPs are not doing this, this should be monitored.


   Given that policy analysis is a  specialist  area  of  expertise,  it  is
   important that the GFP has the related skills for  engaging  in  work  of
   this nature. Where this is not the case, training must be provided.


   3.2  Gender Action Plans


   Given that most Departments make no mention of having developed a  gender
   action plan, it is important that this is pursued.  If  most  Departments
   have not produced such a plan as a result of capacity problems, then  the
   possibility of providing technical support  and  advice  in  this  regard
   should be considered.


   4.  Gender Mainstreaming
   On the whole, this was very poorly reported on and appears to be an  area
   of weakness in the work of most GFPs.  For this reason the  following  is
   recommended:


     1) The training of staff in gender mainstreaming where required.
     2) The development of clear strategies and plans that are documented.
     3) The development of key performance indicators in this regard.

   Because gender mainstreaming is a critical  part  of  eradicating  gender
   inequity, the mainstreaming initiatives of  GFPs  need  to  be  monitored
   periodically.

   4. Programmes


   The  following  is  recommended  with  respect  to  the  development   of
   programmes that promote gender equity:


     1) The development of  both  internal  (organisational)  and  external
        (service delivery) programmes.
     2) The ways in which programmatic work impacts on men and  women  need
        to be made clear.
     3) The development of ‘engendered’ programmes needs to be informed  by
        sound gender planning methodologies.  Where necessary, staff should
        be trained in gender planning.
     4) Programmatic work should have  clear  objectives,  methods,  target
        groups, key performance indicators and evaluation mechanisms.

   5. Areas for follow up with individual Departments


   The following table lists potential areas of follow-up with  the  various
   departments:




   |Department          |Area                                         |
|Arts and Culture    |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|                    |No dedicated budget.                         |
|Correctional        |No mention made of budget available.         |
|Services            |No mention made of policy -related work.     |
|                    |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |Statistics provided for staff component need |
|                    |to reflect the number of black and white     |
|                    |women.                                       |
|                    |Ways in which some of the programmes listed  |
|                    |promote gender equity are not clear.         |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Defence             |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |Need more information on how gender is       |
|                    |mainstreamed.                                |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Environmental       |Does not have dedicated budget, not clear how|
|Affairs and Tourism |much resources is being put into             |
|                    |gender-related work.                         |
|Health              |Need more information on how gender is       |
|                    |mainstreamed into the work of the Department.|
|Home Affairs        |Need to follow-up on why the GFP does not get|
|                    |involved in any policy-related work.         |
|                    |The usage of the term ‘add-ons’ in describing|
|                    |the work of the GFP is not clear and could be|
|                    |interpreted as detracting from the importance|
|                    |of gender-related issues. The usage of this  |
|                    |term should therefore be clarified.          |
|                    |No dedicated budget.                         |
|                    |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|                    |On the whole the GFP does not appear to be   |
|                    |doing much, judging from the information     |
|                    |provided in the report. The report           |
|                    |constitutes a series of proposals/ intended  |
|                    |work. This needs to be further explored.     |
|ICD                 |Need to elicit information on how the ICD    |
|                    |monitors the implementation of the DVA.      |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Labour              |No mention made of policy -related work.     |
|                    |Does not report on budget.                   |
|                    |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |Statistics provided for staff component could|
|                    |not be interpreted, need to resubmit this.   |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Land Affairs        |No mention made of policy -related work.     |
|                    |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |The ways in which the some of the            |
|                    |programmatic                                 |
|                    |work has a gendered impact is not clear.     |
|                    |Programme objectives and methodology not     |
|                    |clear.                                       |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Public Service and  |It is not clear whether the GFP has a budget |
|Administration      |of its own or not.                           |
|                    |Need further information on policy-related   |
|                    |work.                                        |
|                    |Report does not touch on the systems and     |
|                    |methods for gender mainstreaming.            |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|NIA                 |Has not established a GFP.                   |
|NPASA               |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Public Enterprises  |Has not established a GFP.                   |
|Safety and Security |Has not established a GFP.                   |
|Secretariat         |                                             |
|Social Development  |No mention made of policy -related work.     |
|                    |No mention made of gender action plan.       |
|                    |Reports that there are there have been       |
|                    |difficulties in developing indicators for    |
|                    |gender mainstreaming.  Further information   |
|                    |required here.                               |
|                    |Very little programmatic work is reported,   |
|                    |this problematic particularly in light of the|
|                    |fact that social development has very        |
|                    |important gendered implications.             |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|SAPS                |Budgetary allocation for gender-related work |
|                    |not stipulated.                              |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |The objectives of some of the programmes are |
|                    |not clear.                                   |
|                    |The intended gendered impact of some of the  |
|                    |programmes are not clear.                    |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |
|Science and         |Not indicated whether GFP has budget or not. |
|Technology          |No challenges have been identified.          |
|SASC                |Not clear whether the budget mentioned is    |
|                    |intended solely for gender-related work.     |
|                    |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|                    |Very little information provided about       |
|                    |programmatic work.                           |
|Trade and Industry  |No mention made of strategies to mainstream  |
|                    |gender.                                      |
|Water Affairs and   |No information budget allocated to           |
|Forestry            |gender–related work.                         |
|                    |No challenges have been identified.          |

Provincial Departmental Gender Focal Points

1. Recommendations pertaining to the structure of GFPs

1. Capacity

The provincial GFP has a critical role to play as part of the gender
machinery. As such, it has very specific roles assigned to it and forms an
integral part in ensuring that the goals of gender equality and the
empowerment of women are met. Thus, it is of critical importance that GFPs
be established within the Departments and be staffed with persons with the
necessary skills, which are outlined in the Gender Policy. A disservice
will be done to all the women and men in the provinces if structures are
established, but the incorrect people are employed in these positions.

It is also necessary to ensure that more than 1 person is appointed to the
GFPs. The tasks assigned to them are mammoth and thus appointing 1 person
to the GFP is unrealistic and sets it up for failure.

Furthermore, Premiers, MECs and the Heads of Departments should be held
accountable for failing to establish properly resourced GFPs in their
Departments. In addition, Provincial OSWs, the National OSW as well as the
respectively National Department can play an integral role in guiding the
establishment and setting up of GFPs at a provincial level.

1.2 Location

One of the concerns about the location of GFPs is the impact that the
location has on the ability of the persons in the GFP to influence decision-
making or to take decisions that have wide ranging impact. Furthermore, the
location of the GFPs grants the coordinators the opportunity to either have
a holistic and comprehensive idea of what is happening in the Department,
or restricts their knowledge to the particular directorate or sub-
directorate that it is located in. GFPs should thus be located in the Head
of Department’s office, as is recommended by the Gender Policy.

2. Rank of GFPs

As with all the other aspects pertaining to the setting up of the GFPs, it
is important that GFP coordinators be appointed at director level, as is
recommended by the Gender Policy. However, this implies that the incumbents
should have the necessary skills that are commensurate with a position at
this level.

It is furthermore recommended that the skills within existing GFPs be
assessed to ascertain whether current personnel can perform at the rank of
director, whether the personnel can acquire these skills or whether
additional personnel with the required skills need to be employed.

3. Area of focus

Although this theme has not emerged as dominant in the reports made by the
provincial OSWs, it is essential to note that the impact of GFPs could be
far greater if GFPs focus on gender issues exclusively and gender is not be
seen as an add on function. This will allow for a more consistent and
powerful impact.

2. Budget

Establishing GFPs with no resources would amount to not having GFPs in
provinces. Therefore, the establishing of GFP should be done in conjunction
with the adequate resourcing of these structures. The budget allocation
should be commensurate with the plans, programmes, and outputs envisaged by
the GFPs.

Budgetary concerns have been raised in the existing GFPs. It impacts on the
ability to meet goals and objectives. It is thus recommended that an
assessment be done of all the existing budgets of GFPs and the necessary
resources be allocated which would enable them to fulfill their functions.
It is essential to allocate the necessary resources to programmatic
functions and not only to salaries.

3. Policy and Gender Action Plan

Against the backdrop of the functions assigned to GFPs as these pertain to
policies, it is essential that the following information be elicited from
the Departments:

      • What progress has been made by GFPs to review Departmental policies
        in order to ensure that it is in line with the national or
        provincial Gender Policy?
      • What role do GFPs play in the strategic planning process of
        Departments to ensure that gender is taken into account?

In addition, it is recommended that provincial OSWs and National GFPs
assist provincial GFPs to acquire the necessary skills, which would enable
them to review existing policies, as well as the development of gender
sensitive policies for the respective Department.

4. Gender Mainstreaming

Given the limited information collated on gender mainstreaming in
provincial Departments, it is recommended that in-depth information be
collected on this topic. Secondly, it is suggested that provincial OSWs, in
conjunction with national GFPs provide guidance to provincial GFPs on
developing strategies to mainstream gender in Departments. GFP coordinators
furthermore, would need to equip themselves with the necessary skills to
fulfill this function of their work.

 6.  Programmes


Based on the analysis of the results, it is recommended that further
information be elicited from Departments by the provincial OSWs as well as
the JMC on the programmes within the Departments, their aims, objectives,
outputs, measurement indicators and budget allocations. GFPs would further
benefit from training on the utilization of gender planning techniques to
inform their planning of projects, programmes, etc.

Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
of Women

Very specific recommendations are made above to the various structures of
the gender machinery. The following is thus suggested as very specific
recommendations to the JMC in order to ensure that the process of
monitoring the work of the OSWs and GFPs and making interventions where
necessary, is taken forward:

    • The JMC needs to discuss the problems raised in the report and
      identify ways of dealing with these in terms of its oversight role.
    • The JMC needs to hold consultative meetings with the OSW as well as
      the CGE to consider the report and the recommendations made. The
      different roleplayers need to decide on their roles and
      responsibilities in ensuring that the recommendations are carried
      forward and the implementation of recommendations are monitored.
    • It is proposed that the JMC elicit information that was not
      forthcoming from the OSWs and GFPs. This could be done in the form of
      a questionnaire that is sent to all OSWs and GFPs and this data could
      be used to collate a more comprehensive report.
    • The JMC should set a date by which to hold similar hearings. This
      should then be communicated to OSWs and GFPs so that they are able to
      work towards this and are in a position to show the progress made from
      reports submitted at the end of 2003 (which can be used as baseline
      data) to when they next report.
    • It is essential that the JMC meet with the various Premiers to share
      their findings of this report. It is essential that their concerns
      around the status of the provincial OSWs be raised with Premiers.
      Among other concerns, the JMC should raise the issue that the OSWs are
      not being placed in the Premiers’ offices, lack of staff in the OSWs
      and the insufficient budgets allocated to the OSWs.
    • The JMC, as part of the budgetary process, needs to intervene on
      behalf of the Gender Machinery to ensure that the various budget votes
      allocate sufficient resources to the various gender structures for the
      implementation of policies, programmes, etc.
    • As part of the annual reporting of Departments, it is strongly
      recommended that Director-Generals report on how the respective
      Department had progressed towards improving the status of women and
      the relevant programmes that pertain to women. This should be
      monitored by the JMC.
    • In addition to the above recommendation, part of the Director-
      General’s performance assessment should include their progress on
      addressing gender issues and meeting gender targets.

Conclusion

In conclusion, the hearings have proved to be a very useful exercise in
investigating what gender machinery structures have been established at
national and provincial level. Furthermore, it has also given an indication
of what these structures have been doing to promote gender equity in their
respective contexts. The hearings have been particularly useful in bringing
to the fore the problems, obstacles and challenges that exist in enabling
the GFPs and OSWs to execute their mandate. These have been articulated in
the report and the JMC has a pivotal role to play in identifying
appropriate interventions in dealing with these.

Given that there have been certain instances where information was
unavailable, it is imperative that outstanding information is sourced and a
more comprehensive report is compiled. The information collated here thus
serves as important baseline data to the follow-up report. In addition,
this document serves as an important instrument against which the progress
of GFPs and OSWs can be measured, when next they report.

                                 References

Fourth World Conference on Women Platform for Action.
www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/platform/declar.htm

Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
of Women (September 2003). Report on the study tours undertaken to
Provinces (2000 – 2003) to monitor the implementation of the Domestic
Violence Act [Act No.116 of 1998] and the Maintenance Act [Act No.99 of
1998].

Parliament of South Africa (2002). Women & Lawmaking: A study of civil
society participation.

Reports of Departments received and distributed at hearings of 21 November
2003.

The Office on the Status of Women. South Africa’s National Policy Framework
for Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality.

[13] Report compiled by Ms.  Carmine  Rustin  and  Ms.  Joy  Watson  of  the
Information Services Section, Research Unit, Parliament of South Africa.



                        WEDNESDAY, 28 SEPTEMBER 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements on the Office of the Auditor-
        General for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 193-2005].


2.    The Minister of Transport
    (a)     Report on the National Freight Logistics Strategy – September
        2005.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
        Rescue (SASAR) organisation for 2003-2004.


3.    The Minister of Labour


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Police, Security, Legal,
        Justice and Correctional Services Sector Education and Training
        Authority (POSLEC SETA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 101-
        2005].


4.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
         Authority of South Africa (NPA) for 2004-2005, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
         2005 [RP 156-2005].


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

            The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
    dated 20 September 2005 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
    Provinces informing Members of the Council of the employment of the
    South African National Defence Force in the Democratic Republic of
    Congo:

            EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN THE
         DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, FOR SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE
         INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS
         THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

            This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
         authorised the employment of the South African National Defence
         Force (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC),
         in accordance with the Tripartite RSA/DRC/Kingdom of the
         Netherlands Agreement regarding provision of support in the
         integration of armed forces of the DRC.

            This employment was authorised in accordance with the
         provisions of section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic
         of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with sections 52,
         53 and 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

            A total of (70) members will be employed from mid September
         2005 for a period of six months.

            The total estimated cost to be borne by South Africa for the
         deployment of personnel, from the current allocation for Peace
         Support Operations, is R 28 626 692.

            I will communicate this report to the National Assembly and to
         the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence, and
         wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the notice of
         the National Council of Provinces.

            Regards

            signed
                 PRESIDENT T M MBEKI

                         THURSDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
      (a)         Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by
           the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 29
           September 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
           and Constitutional Development and the Select Committee on
           Security and Constitutional Affairs.


      (b)         Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill, 2005,
           submitted by the Minister for Provincial and Local Government on
           29 September 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Provincial and Local Government and the Select Committee on
           Local Government and Administration.


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

  1.  Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following changes have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
        Select Committees viz:
      Land and Environmental Affairs:
        Appointed: Adams, Mr F; Mack, Mr N J (Alt)


        Local Government and Administration:
        Appointed: Mack, Mr N J; Adams, Mr F (Alt)


             Public Services:
               Appointed: Adams, Mr F; Mack, Mr N J (Alt)


               Security and Constitutional Affairs:
        Appointed: Mack, Mr N J; Adams, Mr F (Alt).




TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
        Services
         (SARS) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 211-2005].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Statistics South Africa for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 166-2005].
     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
        Centre for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 176-2005].


    (d)     Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
        Deposits for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


    d) Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of Collective
       Investment Schemes for the year ended 31 December 2003.


2.    The Minister of Transport


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund (UTF)
        for  2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 207-2005].


3.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
        Provincial and Local Government for 2004-2005, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for Vote 5 for
        2004-2005 [RP 200-2005].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
        Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
        Linguistic Communities (CRL Communities) 2004-2005, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
        2005 [RP 183-2005].


4.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
        Agriculture for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 26 for 2004-2005 [RP
        165-2005].

5.    The Minister of Communications


     a) Report and Group Annual Financial Statements of South African Post
        Office Limited for 2004-2005, including the Report of Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media
        Institute of South Africa (NEMISA) for 2004-2005, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
        2005 [RP 150-2005].

6.    The Minister of Labour


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Mining Qualification
        Authority (MQA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 98-2005].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
        Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and Training
        Authority (MAPPP SETA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 96-
        2005].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector Education and
        Training Authority (ESETA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
        88-2005].


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Education and
        Training Authority (TETA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
        103-2005].

7.    The Minister of Housing


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
        Reconstruction and Housing Agency (NURCHA) for 2004-2005.

8.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of Minerals
        and Energy for 2004-2005, including the Report of Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements of Vote 31 for 2004-2005 [RP 44-2005].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 55-2005].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Electricity
        Regulator (NER) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 184-2005].


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear Regulator
        (NNR) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 56-2005].


     e) Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
        Council (MHSC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 141-2005].


     f) Annual Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund (CEF) Group
        of Companies for 2004-2005, including the Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        for 2004-2005 [RP 143-2005].


     g) Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity Distribution
        Industry Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2004-2005, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
        2005.


     h) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond Board
        (SADB) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 59-2005].


     i) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear Energy
        Corporation (NECSA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 168-
        2005].

                          FRIDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (i)     Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2005]
               (National Assembly – sec 74) [Bill published in Government
               Gazette No 27962 of 26 August 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as well
         as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 30 September 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 15 – Department of
             Education for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 15 for 2004-2005
             [RP 162-2005].

    (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report. The
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of South African National
             Parks (SANparks) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration and report. The
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
             Technology Agency (Proprietary) Limited (SITA) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 39-2005].

    (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report. The
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Ingonyama Trust Board
             for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 134-2005].
     (5)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys
             Art Gallery for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
         Rights Commission (SAHRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
         208-2005].

2.    The Presidency

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for
         2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of Vote 1 for 2004-2005 [RP 191-2005].

3.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
         Corporation (PIC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 147-
         2005].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
         Development Programme Fund for 2004-2005, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
         169-2005].

     (c)    The Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank on
         24 August 2005.

     (d)    Report of the South African Reserve Bank on the eighty-fourth
         ordinary general meeting of shareholders for 2004.

4.    The Minister of Transport

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
         Transport for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 33 for 2004-2005.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
         Safety Authority (SAMSA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements (including the Maritime
         Fund) for 2004-2005.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
         Aviation Authority (CAA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
         82-2005].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
         (RSR) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

5.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National House of
         Traditional Leaders (NHTL) for 2004-2005.

6.    The Minister for Public Enterprises


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 – Department of Public
        Enterprises for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 9 for 2004-2005.

7.    The Minister of Social Development


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of Social
        Development for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 19 for 2004-2005 [RP
        210-2005].

8.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration
     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 10 – Department of Public
        Service and Administration for 2004-2005, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 10 for 2004-
        2005 [RP193-2005].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of South African Management
        Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2004-2005, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
        [RP 198-2005].


9.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 – Department of Land
         Affairs for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 30 for 2004-2005 [RP 132-2005].




10.   The Minister of Communications


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service Agency
        (USA) for 2003-2004, 2004-2005 and the Report and Financial
        Statements of the Universal Service Fund (USF) for 2004-2005,
        including the Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements of the Universal Service Agency (USA) for 2003-2004,
        2004-2005 and the Universal Service Fund (USF) for 2004-2005 [RP
        196-2005].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service Agency
        (USA) on the Universal Agency Fund (USF) for 2003-2004, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
        2003-2004 [RP 15-2005].

11.   The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
         Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2004-2005, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for 2004-2005.

12.   The Minister of Home Affairs
     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publications
         Board for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

     (b)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Mozambique regarding the
         Waiver of Visa Requirements for Holders of Ordinary Passports,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No
         108 of 1996).

13.   The Minister of Arts and Culture

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 – Department of Arts
         and Culture for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 14 for 2004-2005.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council of
         South Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 180-2005].


    (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the National English Literary
         Museum for 2004-2005, including the including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


14.   The Minister of Science and Technology

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of
         Science and Technology for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 18 for 2004-
         2005.

15.   The Minister of Housing


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of Housing
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements of Vote 29 for 2004-2005 [RP 142-1005].

16.   The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 – Department of
        Justice and Constitutional Development for 2004-2005, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
        24 for 2004-2005 [RP 190-2005].

17.   The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
        Service for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 139-2005].

18.   The Minister of Correctional Services


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Department of
        Correctional Services for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 178-
        2005].

19.   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of Water
        Affairs and Forestry for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 34 for 2004-
        2005 [RP 130-2005].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission
        (WRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 116-2005].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
        Authority (TCTA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

20.   The Minister of Health
     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of Health
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements of Vote 16 for 2004-2005 [RP 136-2005].

21.   The Minister of Sport and Recreation


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Department of Sport
        and Recreation for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 20 for 2004-2005.

National Council of Provinces
1.    The Chairperson


    (a)     Written comments received from the public and provincial
        legislatures on the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B 33 -
        2005], submitted by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
        Development in terms of section 74(6)(a) of the Constitution, 1996.

            Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Affairs.


                           MONDAY, 3 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

        1) South African Abattoir Corporation Act Repeal Bill [B 21 – 2005]
           – Act No 17 of 2005 (assented to and signed by President on 30
           September 2005).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Social Development


     (a)          Report and Financial Statements of the National
          Development Agency (NDA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
          the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
          197-2005].

 2. The Minister of Communications


     (a)          Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of
          Communications for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements of Vote 27 for 2004-2005 [RP
          212-2005].


                           TUESDAY, 4 OCTOBER 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in the Presidency


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Youth Commission
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 173-2005].


                          WEDNESDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

    1.     The following papers are referred to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Public Services for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
             Corporation (RTMC) for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP
             26-2004].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
             (RSR) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 81-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
             Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
             Development Board (CIDB) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
             [RP 206-2005].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Build
             Environment (CBE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
             [RP 177-2005].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of Thubelisha Homes for 2004-
             2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing
             Foundation for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the People’s Housing
             Partnership Trust (PHPT) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005.


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
             (RHLF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          j) Report on the National Freight Logistics Strategy – September
             2005.


          k) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
             Rescue (SASAR) organisation for 2003-2004.


          l) Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund
             (UTF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 207-
             2005].


          m) Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
             Reconstruction and Housing Agency (NURCHA) for 2004-2005.

    2.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department for
             Safety and Security for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             187-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Independent
             Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
             Vote 23 for 2004-2005 [RP 771-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
             Authority of South Africa (NPA) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 156-2005].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
             Unit (SIU) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 181-
             2005].


    3.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Local
        Government and Administration for consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister of Public Service and Administration
             dated 16 September 2005 to the Speaker of the National
             Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance
             Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay
             in the tabling of the Annual Report of South African Management
             Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2004-2005.

    4.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
             Marketing Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 1-
             2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural
             Development Bank of South Africa (Land Bank) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 164-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort Biological
             Products Limited for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    5.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education Recreation for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
             Foundation (NRF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of GODISA for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of
             South Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences
             Research Council (HSRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
             [RP 140-2005].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Library for the Blind for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.



   6. The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Economic
        and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of
             Foreign Affairs for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 3 for 2004-
             2005.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Ntsika Enterprise
             Promotion Agency for the nine months ended 31 December 2004,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for the nine months ended 31 December 2004.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial
             Development Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2004-
             2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (d)      Report of the South African Council for the Non-
             Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction for the period 1
             July 2003 to 30 June 2004.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of
             Minerals and Energy for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 31 for
             2004-2005 [RP 44-2005].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for
             Geoscience for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 55-
             2005].


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Electricity Regulator (NER) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 184-2005].


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
             Regulator (NNR) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             56-2005].


        (i)      Annual Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund
             (CEF) Group of Companies for 2004-2005, including the Reports
             of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 143-2005].


        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity
             Distribution Industry Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005.


        (k)      Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity
             Distribution Industry Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005.


        (l)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Nuclear Energy Corporation (NECSA) for 2004-2005, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             for 2004-2005 [RP 168-2005].

    7.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

        (a)      Draft Directives regarding Complainant Participation in
             Correctional Supervision and Parole Boards, tabled in terms of
             section 299A of the Criminal procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of
             1977) as amended.


    8.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Security
        and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Police, Security,
             Legal     , Justice and Correctional Services Sector Education
             and Training Authority (POSLEC SETA) for 2004-2005, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             for 2004-2005 [RP 101-2005].

   (9)      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

         (a)     Report and Group Annual Financial Statements of South
             African Post Office Limited for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005.


         (b)     Institute of South Africa (NEMISA) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 150-2005].

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
             Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and
             Training Authority (MAPPP SETA) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 96-2005].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government
             Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 172-2005].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of Sentech for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


    10.    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs and the Joint Standing
         Committee on Defence:

        (a) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 20
             September 2005 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
             Provinces informing Members of the Council of the employment
             of the South African National Defence Force in the Democratic
             Republic of Congo.

    11.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
                 Services (SARS) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             211-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Statistics South Africa for
             2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 166-2005].
          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
             Centre for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 176-
             2005].


          d) Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
             Deposits for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005.


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of Collective
             Investment Schemes for the year ended 31 December 2003.

          f) Report and Financial Statements on the Office of the Auditor-
             General for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 193-
             2005].

   12.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
             Provincial and Local Government for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             Vote 5 for 2004-2005 [RP 200-2005].

   13.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration and the Select Committee on Education
         and Recreation for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
             Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious
             and Linguistic Communities (CRL Communities) 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 183-2005].


   14.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Economic
         and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Mining
             Qualification Authority (MQA) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 98-2005].


        (b) Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector Education
             and Training Authority (ESETA) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 88-2005].

   15.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Public
         Services for consideration and report:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Education and
           Training Authority (TETA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
           [RP 103-2005].


   16.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs and the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and
             Safety Council (MHSC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
             [RP 141-2005].




TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for the
          Arts for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.



                          THURSDAY, 6 OCTOBER 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
     1. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
   a) Proclamation No R.47 published in Government Gazette No 27986 dated 31
      August 2005: Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the Public Funding
      of Represented Political Parties Act, 1997 (Act No 103 of 1997).


                           FRIDAY, 7 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills returned to Executive

      On 5 October 2005 the Speaker, after consultation, referred the
    Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29 – 2005], introduced in the National
    Assembly as a section 75 Bill on 2 September 2005, back to the Minister
    of Minerals and Energy, as it contains both section 75 and section 76
    provisions.




                           MONDAY, 10 OCTOBER 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
(a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African Language
Board (PanSALB) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 205-2005].

2.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)               Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the Decentralised Development
            Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
            Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (b)               Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Decentralised Development Programme.


     (c)               Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the Promotion of Rural
            Livelihoods in Eastern Cape Province Project, tabled in terms
            of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of
            1996).


     (d)               Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Promotion of Rural Livelihoods in Eastern Cape Province Project


     (e)               Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the Training and Support for
            Natural Resource Management (Transform) Project, tabled in
            terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108
            of 1996).


     (f)               Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Training and Support for Natural Resource Management
            (Transform) Project.


     (g)               Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the Broadening Agricultural
            Services and Extension Delivery Project, tabled in terms of
            section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (h)               Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Broadening Agricultural Services and Extension Delivery
            Project.


     (i)               Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the Training System for
            Education, Training and Development Practitioners (ETDP SETA)
            Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
            1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (j)               Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Training System for Education, Training and Development
            Practitioners (ETDP SETA) Project.


     (k)               Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the Trade and Industrial Policy
            Secretariat (TIPS) Consultancy Project, tabled in terms of
            section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (l)               Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Trade and Industrial Policy Secretariat (TIPS) Consultancy
            Project.


     (m)               Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning Assistance for the National
            Housing Finance Corporation (NHFC) Programme, tabled in terms
            of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of
            1996).


     (n)               Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
            Assistance for the National Housing Finance Corporation (NHFC)
            Programme.


     (o)               Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the Municipal Finance Management
            Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
            Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (p)               Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Municipal Finance Management Programme.


            Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
            South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
            Germany concerning the Provincial Administration Support
            Programme in the Eastern Cape, tabled in terms of section
            231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (r)               Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Provincial Administration Support Programme in the Eastern
            Cape.


     (s)          Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
            of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
            Germany concerning the Vocational Education and training Fund
            Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
            1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (t)          Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
            the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Vocational Education and training Fund Project.
     (u)               Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the Urban Upgrading and
            Development Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
            Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (v)               Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Urban Upgrading and Development Programme.


     (w)               Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the Planning and Implementation
            Management Support Systems for Municipalities Programme, tabled
            in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No
            108 of 1996).


     (x)               Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Planning and Implementation Management Support Systems for
            Municipalities Programme.


     (y)               Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the Economic and Development
            Policy Advisory Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
            the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (z)               Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Economic and Development Policy Advisory Programme.


     (aa)              Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the HIV/AIDS Cross-Sectoral Fund
            Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
            1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (bb)              Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            HIV/AIDS Cross-Sectoral Fund Project.


     (cc)              Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the Advisory Support for the
            Consolidation of the Mpumalanga Provincial Administration
            Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
            1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (dd)              Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Advisory Support for the Consolidation of the Mpumalanga
            Provincial Administration Project.


     (ee)              Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
            Republic of Germany concerning the Basic Employment and Skills
            Training Programme in the Free State and Eastern Cape
            Provinces, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
            Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (ff)              Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
            Basic Employment and Skills Training Programme in the Free
            State and Eastern Cape Provinces.


     (gg)              Exchange of Letters between the Government of the
            Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of
            Norway regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
            Administrations, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
            Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (hh)              Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters
            between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
            Government of the Kingdom of Norway regarding Mutual Assistance
            between their Customs Administrations.


     (ii)              Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
            South Africa and the Government of the Republic of Turkey
            regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
            Administrations, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
            Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


     (jj)              Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the
            Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
            of the Republic of Turkey regarding Mutual Assistance between
            their Customs Administrations.
     (kk)              Government Notice No R.794 published in Government
            Gazette No 26868 dated 12 August 2005: Determination of amounts
            for purposes of the Act, in terms of the Military Pensions Act,
            1976 (Act No 84 of 1976).


     (ll)              Government Notice No R.860 published in Government
            Gazette No 27976 dated 2 September 2005: Determination of limit
            on amount of remuneration for purposes of determination of
            contribution in terms of section 6, in terms of the
            Unemployment Insurance Act, 2002 (Act No 4 of 2002).


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Trade and Economic Agreement between the Republic of South
        Africa and the Republic of Turkey, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 van 1996).

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Trade and Economic Agreement
        between the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of Turkey.



                          TUESDAY, 11 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces

1.          Referrals to Committees of papers tabled
    1.      The  following  paper  is  referred  to  the  Joint  Monitoring
        Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women for
        consideration and report:

        (a)            Office on the Status of Women contained in the
                Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency
                for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
                on the Financial Statements of Vote 1 for 2004-2005 [RP 191-
                2005].

    2.      The following papers are referred to the Joint Monitoring
        Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children,
        Youth and Disabled Persons for consideration and report:


         (a)      Office on the Rights of the Child and the Office on the
             Status of Disabled Persons contained in the Report and
             Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements of Vote 1 for 2004-2005 [RP 191-2005].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Youth
             Commission for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 173-
             2005].


    3.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

         (a)           Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 –
             Department of Justice and Constitutional Development for 2004-
             2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements of Vote 24 for 2004-2005 [RP 190-2005].


         (b)           Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 –
             Department of Correctional Services for 2004-2005, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             for 2004-2005 [RP 178-2005].


         (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
             Rights Commission (SAHRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005 [RP 208-2005].


      4.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
             Corporation (PIC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             147-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
             Development Programme Fund for 2004-2005, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005 [RP 169-2005].


          c) The Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank
             on 24 August 2005.


          d) Report of the South African Reserve Bank on the eighty-fourth
             ordinary general meeting of shareholders for 2004.


    5.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration and report:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
             Transport for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 33 for 2004-2005.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
             Safety Authority (SAMSA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements (including the
             Maritime Fund) for 2004-2005.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
             Aviation Authority (CAA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005 [RP 82-2005].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
             Rescue (SASAR) organisation for 2004-2005.


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
             (RSR) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          f) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of
             Housing for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 29 for 2004-2005
             [RP 142-1005].

    6.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Local Government and Administration for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National House of
             Traditional Leaders (NHTL) for 2004-2005.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 10 – Department of
             Public Service and Administration for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
             Vote 10 for 2004-2005 [RP 193-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of South African Management
             Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 198-2005].


    7.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

        (a)            Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 –
               Department of Public Enterprises for 2004-2005, including
               the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
               Statements of Vote 9 for 2004-2005.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service Agency
             (USA) for 2003-2004, 2004-2005 and the Report and Financial
             Statements of the Universal Service Fund (USF) for 2004-2005,
             including the Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements of the Universal Service Agency (USA) for 2003-2004,
             2004-2005 and the Universal Service Fund (USF) for 2004-2005
             [RP 196-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service Agency
             (USA) on the Universal Agency Fund (USF) for 2003-2004,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 15-2005].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
             Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    8.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration and report:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
             Social Development for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 19 for 2004-
             2005 [RP 210-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
             Health for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 16 for 2004-2005
             [RP 136-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publications
             Board for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


    9.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of
             Water Affairs and Forestry for 2004-2005, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 34
             for 2004-2005 [RP 130-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research
             Commission (WRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             116-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
             Authority (TCTA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.




          d) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 – Department of Land
             Affairs for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 30 for 2004-2005
             [RP 132-2005].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
             Service for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 139-
             2005].


    10.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services:


          a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Mozambique
             regarding the Waiver of Visa Requirements for Holders of
             Ordinary Passports, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


    11.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 – Department of Arts
             and Culture for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 14 for 2004-2005.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council of
             South Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 180-
             2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National English
             Literary Museum for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.
          d) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of
             Science and Technology for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 18 for
             2004-2005.


          e) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Department of
             Sport and Recreation for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 20 for 2004-
             2005.




                         WEDNESDAY, 12 OCTOBER 2005


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Council of Provinces


1. Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on  the  Road  Accident
Fund Amendment Bill [B 64B – 2003] (National Assembly - sec  75),  dated  12
October 2005:

The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered  the  subject  of
the Road Accident Fund Amendment Bill  [B 64B – 2003] (National  Assembly  –
sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


                          THURSDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 20 September 2005 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section
         75 Bill:


            i) Auditing Profession Bill [B 31 – 2005] (National Assembly –
               sec 75)


2.    Membership of Committees


      1) The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
         Committees, viz:


        Defence:

        Appointed: Montsitsi, Mr S D


National Council of Provinces

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


     (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 13 October 2005 and
        transmitted for concurrence:


             i) National Credit Bill [B 18B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
                76)


              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on
              Economic and Foreign Affairs of the National Council of
              Provinces.


          ii) Forestry Laws Amendment Bill [B 24B – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 76)


              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Land
              and Environmental Affairs of the National Council of
              Provinces.


         iii) Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain
              Laws Bill [B 25B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76)


              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on
              Security and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council
              of Provinces.



-----------------------
[1] Eastern Cape, Free  State,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Gauteng,  Mpumalanga,  North
West and the Western Cape.
[2] Fourth World Conference on Women Platform for Action.
www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/platform/declar.htm
[3] Due to time constraints in the hearings, NIA informed the JMC that  they
did not have a Gender Desk. No further presentation was made by the NIA  and
no report was available.
[4] As with the NIA,  Public  Enterprises  delivered  only  a  short  report
indicating that they don’t have a GFP and that transversal issues,  such  as
gender, youth and disability issues are addressed. No report was available.
[5] The implementing agencies  are  the  provincial  OSWs  as  well  as  the
national and provincial GFPs.
[6] The OSW in Mpumalanga did not make a presentation to  the  committee.  A
written submission was received.
[7] The Western Cape OSW did not make a presentation to the committee.
Written submission was received.

[8] Meaning ‘to comfort’
[9] This report only provided information on the structure, reporting  lines
and budget of the GFP.
[10]  The Secretariate had not made  a  report  available  at  the  time  of
compiling this document. Only a short oral  presentation  was  made  by  the
Secretariat.
[11] As indicated earlier, the Gauteng Province currently does not have an
OSW but instead has a Directorate fulfilling the function. They are in the
process of establishing a Gender/HIV unit. These are the positions that are
reported on here.
[12] The Department of Science and Technology has appointed an external co-
ordinator at Director level and an internal co-ordinator at a Deputy
Director level.


