---
title: 'National Assembly - 02 November 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-11-02
---

WEDNESDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                        APPOINTMENT OF UNDERSECRETARY


                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed with today’s business, I
wish to indicate that the post of the Undersecretary: House Plenaries Unit
in the NA Table division has been vacant for some time now. It is my
pleasure to announce to the House that the Secretary to Parliament has,
with effect from 1 November, appointed Mr Masibulele Xaso to the post of
Undersecretary: House Plenaries.

In that capacity he will be responsible for all procedural and related
support services to plenary meetings of the NA, as well as the
parliamentary programme. Congratulations, sir. [Applause.]

Hon members, I wish to acknowledge the presence in the gallery of a
delegation of the CPA parliamentarians led by Ms N Kim. Hon members,
welcome to Parliament. [Applause.]


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY


                                  ECONOMICS
                                  Cluster 3

MINISTERS:

                      Mine dust pollution on East Rand

128.  Rev K R J Meshoe (ACDP) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:

       (1)  (a) How many complaints per month have been received by her
           department since 2001 about dust from mine dumps on the East
           Rand and (b) who is responsible for the prevention, mitigation
           and management of mine dust pollution in the area;

       (2)  whether her department has instructed relevant mining companies
           to implement preventative techniques to prevent dust pollution,
           specifically during the dry and windy seasons; if not, why not;
           if so, when;

       (3)  whether such an instruction was carried out; if not, why not; if
           so,

       (4)  whether the measures that have been implemented to date to solve
           the problem of mine dust pollution have proven to be
           satisfactory; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details?                                     N2175E


The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The
answer to the first question is as follows: The Gauteng regional office of
the Department of Minerals and Energy has a complaints register file, which
is updated on a regular basis. The complaints that actually reached the
department are far and few. The number of complaints per month on average
since 2001 would therefore be less than one complaint per month, with only
one or two complaints being received per year.

The reason for the low incidence of complaints is not because there is no
dust problem, but rather because of effective multiparty forums in place to
address these problems.

The answer to (b) is as follows: Mining companies who hold rights, or are
currently operating in terms of applicable mining legislation, are the ones
responsible for the prevention, mitigation and management of mine dust
pollution in terms of environmental management programmes, which are
approved by the department.

In relation to the second part of the question, the answer is: Whenever
holders of rights are in contravention of the relevant provisions of the
law the department normally issues instructions to the relevant holders to
take corrective steps. The department would then investigate and monitor,
and if complaints are valid or they are in contravention of the law, we
could even close those mining operations.

With regard to (3), it is not possible to respond to this because we were
not given the specific name of the company that is referred to here. There
are numerous mine dumps in the East Rand. So, we were not sure which
instruction the hon member was referring to.

And, regarding the last question: The systems of environmental management
programmes - are the measures in place to manage the mining environment,
including dust pollution? Gauteng province has a historic legacy where
mining has been taking place for approximately 117 years, long before
environmental management was introduced into the legislation in 1991. So,
ever since then, there is a requirement for the mining industries to lodge
their environmental management programmes with the department when they
apply for licences. I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, about four years ago I put
a similar question to the then Minister of Minerals and Energy who said
that the problem of dust pollution falls within the jurisdiction of the
said department. This House was told that inspections are done continuously
to monitor the status of dust prevention programmes. I therefore find it
strange that when the assistant director of environment is asked about the
measures the department is taking to address the dust mine pollution
problem on the East Rand, she claims that the Department of Minerals and
Energy head office does not have direct access to the requested
information.

Is it not the Department of Minerals and Energy that should be doing the
inspections and monitoring the status of dust prevention programmes? And as
the problem of mine pollution falls within its jurisdiction, we believe
that the department should keep proper records so that when we ask for
answers, the department could give them without referring us to the
regional directors.

We believe, because mine dust is impacting on the health of our people, the
department must make sure that all the mining companies are adhering to the
standards that are agreed upon and that where they are not adhered to that
proper action should be taken because we are concerned about the health of
the people who are subjected to dust every day of their lives. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am not sure
what the hon member is talking about, because when I stood here I clearly
stated that the Department of Minerals and Energy services those provinces
through its regional offices. That’s how we function; we’ve got nine
offices in every province through which we service those provinces. So, the
information on problems of dust pollution or whatever problems with mine
dumps will be located at the regional office. And, it is that office that
has been able to give me a very clear and concise description of how they
have been working in terms of containing dust pollution. So, it is
definitely a responsibility of my department. We are doing that, and we are
keeping a record. I said that we do keep a register, which is updated on a
regular basis. So, I am not very sure of what the hon member is talking
about.

Further, at our offices we have records of mining activities taking place,
as well as measures that mining companies have put in place, to ensure that
they would be able to prevent or mitigate whatever goes wrong in the
surrounding communities.

So, from my point of view, the department is very much on top of this. As I
have already explained, there is a committee that sits and deals with the
concerns. That is why there isn’t so much reporting in the East Rand
because of this East Rand Mine Dust Eradication Committee. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon member, hon Minister, in his question mentioned
a response that he got from an official about four years ago – or something
like that. Would the hon member please send that to the Minister so that it
would be easier for her to refer to it, otherwise if we just say that you
spoke to an official she may not know to whom you are referring, OK? Thank
you.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Madam Chair, about two or three years ago, Mr Duma Nkosi,
the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy was out
at the dump site of the East Rand Proprietary Mines; so was Mrs Mary
Metcalf. They were all involved in this, and at that time the Minister said
to us that they would rehabilitate those mine dumps. This is why the public
is still complaining that it has not been done.

What we should investigate and come forth with is the rehabilitation fund
of ERPM. Is it still up to the level where it should be? Has it been
depleted? Why has this specific dump not been rehabilitated, even though
our officials were out there? And at that time they said to us they only
have five inspectors to inspect, countrywide, where all these dumps are and
whether the dumps are being rehabilitated.

About three months ago, on the same mine site, a person fell into an open
shaft. We were also told in this House that all the shafts have been
sealed. So, it seems to me that the rehabilitation is not taking place in
accordance with what the Minister explained to this House two years ago.
Could the Minister please inform the House whether the inspections have
been done or whether that fund is still available?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I
definitely wouldn’t be able to give responses about ERPM,  which is a
completely new issue that is being asked about. The question in place also
didn’t ask any question about a fund which three months ago somebody said
something about it.

What I can say is that the department has a programme of rehabilitation of
both derelict and ownerless mines, and that the programme has the funds
allocated to it and that it is being implemented. Unfortunately, whether it
is done at the East Rand Proprietary Mines or not, I cannot answer that
question.

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The new Act, hon Minister, is
expected to address most of these historic legacies during this period; a
legacy, which you stated is 117 years old and which you are expected to
clean it up with this new Act, which has just been passed. Could the
Minister share the information on how this new Act is going to address this
and most likely try to put in place some punitive measures to enforce that
people must be sensitive to these environmental issues? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. As I
have already said, hon member, mining has been taking place for about 117
years and that during all those years there was no legislation in place to
make sure that as people mine they do it in a way that is environmentally
friendly. So with the passing of what we call the Mineral and Petroleum
Resources Development Act, we came up with a process whereby when people
come to convert from their old order mining rights to the new order mining
rights, they must also lodge with the department what we call environmental
management programmes.

So, these programmes are expected to help us ensure that people comply with
environmental damage and degradation legislation. And, if they don’t do so,
obviously it would be a breach of the conditions of their licences. We are
hoping that through this new arrangement we will ensure that as mines open
they also lodge with us a plan in terms of which rehabilitation is going to
happen.

Most of these plans contain a detailed description of the existing
environment where the mining operation takes place. Their plan must also
demonstrate how the mining activities are going to impact on the defined
environment and also explain how the mine is going to manage such impacts,
including all activities that would be conducted to remedy the impacts, and
their timeframes.

So, we hope that through this new legislation there won’t in future be what
we today call ownerless and derelict mines because everyone who is mining
will have a responsibility to rehabilitate the mines they have been mining.
Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.


                    Challenges regarding public transport


136.  Mr J P Cronin (ANC) asked the Minister of Transport:

     Whether any major initiatives were undertaken in the course of October
     2005 to highlight challenges with regard to the provision of public
     transport; if not, why not; if so, (a) what are the relevant details
     and (b) what lessons have been learnt.

      N2188E

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (for the Minister of Transport): Madam
Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Transport has apologised. He’s unable to be
here, but he did ask me to answer the questions. I’ll do my best.

I’ve got a very comprehensive answer here, hon member, but the long and
short of it is that there was an extensive campaign, in the month of
October, around public transport. This followed a Transport lekgotla that
was organised in conjunction with the MECs, the SA Rail Commuter
Corporation, Airports Company and a number of other agencies linked to
public transport.

The objectives of this transport month were to raise awareness of the
important role and benefits of public transport in the economy and society;
to ensure popular participation and partnerships with public transport;
transformation showcasing the government initiatives for immediate
improvement in public transport; to prepare the public for impending
measures to control private car use in favour of public transport in
metropolitan areas; and to highlight the shortcomings in public transport,
in particular, the lack of regular public transport in most rural areas in
South Africa.

With regard to the specific events, hon member, there’s a very long list
here, which I won’t read out, but I’m sure we would supply you with it.
These initiatives were essentially designed to highlight some of the
current deficiencies and shortcomings in our public transport system.

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I thank the Minister for that response
and I obviously look forward to seeing the more comprehensive response to
the question.

I think, in retrospect, that it was perhaps a pity that we highlighted the
notion of a car-free day in the course of October. It set us up for an
apparent failure when, in fact, I think, the whole campaign was extremely
successful. If we had called it “A day of solidarity with public transport
users”, I think we might more accurately have described what actually
happened, which is that Ministers and MECs, and many others, boarded public
mode of transport and experienced the many problems that commuters face on
a daily basis.

The question I’d like to ask the Minister, by way of follow-up, is: Would
he agree that, often, public transport and the provision of it is for
traders a social delivery issue, which it certainly is? Mobility is an
important human right. However, there is also a very strong case, a hard-
nosed economic case, that if we are going to achieve the 6% sustained
growth that we are talking about, it’s not going to be possible if workers
battle to get to work, if the travel experience is difficult and if the
productivity of workers is undermined. So would the Minister agree that
sustained spending on and subsidising of public transport is an important
element of our growth objectives?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think I can
safely speak on behalf of government and the Minister concerned, that we
strongly agree with that viewpoint. As you can also see in the terrain
between public enterprises and transport, we are dividing the commuter rail
out of Transnet, forming a new entity, because we acknowledge that public
transportation, not only in South Africa, but worldwide, needs subsidies.
It is crucial for the working of the economy.

The safer and more efficient public transport is, the more effective our
workforce is, and the more secure our citizenry. So I think that the
emphasis now being placed on public transport by government as a whole, and
by the Ministry of Transport in particular, is a very strong commitment and
realisation that we have to take exceptional steps to improve the system.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, arising from the hon Minister’s reply,
the ACDP appreciates the Minister of Transport’s recent concession at the
railway safety conference in Somerset West, where he said, and I quote:
“Neither infrastructure nor assets have been adequately maintained”, and
that there was, I quote, “a total absence of track maintenance”.

In view of that concession and the recent collision between the Blue Train
and the Shosholoza Meyl, I was going to ask him what initiatives could we
expect to improve rail commuter safety? And, possibly, the Minister of
Finance can repeat what he said regarding the medium-term expenditure
relating to railway improvements. So that was the question I was going to
put to him. I don’t know whether you are in a position to respond to that
question. Could I have your response, whatever it is, Minister?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Deputy Speaker, whatever the
Minister of Finance said was very sensible, because he’s about to . . .
[Laughter.] . . . So I’m sure we support it.

At that safety conference, which was a very interesting, worldwide
conference, the Minister of Transport outlined the changes we intend making
on the rail safety regulators. And yes, it is an area that we have to pay
special attention to.

The current commuter rail structure, where you have provision of a service
from Transnet and the SA Rail Commuter Corporation owning the
infrastructure, is not a satisfactory one. This is the reason we are
merging these into a common structure so as to improve rail maintenance and
rail safety.

Regarding the particular incident you’re speaking about, we have to
ascertain exactly what happened there. However, there is a general
improvement in expenditure on rail infrastructure and rail safety, which is
an important aspect.

We are facing some very special problems. Those of you who are familiar
with the commuter rail system in Gauteng, in particular, around
Johannesburg, will know that all too often we go through large informal
settlements, and this has created a number of problems for us, which we
have to begin to address.

Mr S B FARROW: Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s a pity that the Minister of
Transport is not here, but hopefully between the clustered Ministries of
Ministers Erwin and Manuel they’ll be able to help me with this one. You
were starting to lead into railway issues. I just wanted to follow up on
the recent revelations by Minister Manuel in regard to the cost of the
Gautrain, which is part, I assume, of commuter transport, where he
indicated that this project was going to cost nearly R20 billion.

Conservative calculations that were done at the time, when it was still
running at R7 billion, were that there was going to be a level of subsidy,
which would have to go into that project, the same way it goes into buses
and rail anyway, to the tune of about
R1,9 billion a year. Accordingly, the department’s budget only subsidises,
as I said, buses and rail to about R4,7 billion. If the Gautrain project
goes ahead, how does he intend to subsidise the Gautrain, when taxis, which
are used by 60% of the commuters, are not?

Also, does he believe that the Gautrain service will in any way benefit and
be affordable to our poorer communities? And if not, does he think that the
R20 billion to be spent on a single-line service of 60 kilometres, as in
the case of the Gautrain, might not be better spent on improving the
existing Metrorail services in that particular area, which is currently
under his control anyway? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think the hon
member “tata machance”, but I’m not sure that he can “tata mamillions”
here. [Laughter.] So I really think that you’re stretching the matter a
little bit; that’s a completely new question, requiring the Minister of
Transport to apply his mind to it. I’m sure the Minister of Finance will
help him. So I’d suggest that you put that question on the Question Paper
for the future. Thank you very much.

Prince N E ZULU: Deputy Speaker, we are not very sure of the support the
Minister of Transport got this month in his campaign on the use of taxis.
However, what we are sure of is that the Minister’s campaign on the use of
public transport raised awareness in the minds of many road users in that
government takes an interest in this mode of transport.

Now the question is: Does the Minister of Transport contemplate another
road show before the start of the December month, which includes the
Christmas period, and which in some circles is called “carnage month”?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Deputy Speaker, I can’t give a
specific response, but I’m almost certain that through the Arrive Alive
Campaign and the extra effort that we put in around that month, the
Minister will be very, very active. I’m sure he did get a lot of support on
the car-free day. On my way to an appointment in a car, I felt very guilty.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: And so you should!

        Progress in achieving Growth and Development Summit target on
                                unemployment

149.  Mr C M Lowe (DA) asked the Minister of Labour:

      (1)   Whether his department is on track in meeting the 2003 Growth
          and Development Summit target of halving unemployment by 2014; if
          not, (a) why not and (b) what steps will be taken to address the
          problem; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   what is the unemployment figure which (a) has been used for the
          purposes of responding to this question and (b) will be used to
          measure the success or failure of this endeavour in 2014?
                                                        N2201E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Madam Deputy Speaker, the implementation of the
Growth Development Summit is not a matter only for the Department of
Labour, it is also a matter for all government departments, organised
labour, business and community organisations. They all say in one voice: We
are on track.

Mr C M LOWE: Hon Minister, you can do better than that. With respect, sir,
you may well be right about everybody being responsible, but you, sir, are
the Minister of Labour and it is your job to create the jobs. The fact is
that if you look at every labour force survey that has been conducted in
the last two years we have got between four million and eight million South
Africans still unemployed. Nothing has changed, nowhere is there any
evidence of the between 800 000 and 1 600 000 new jobs that need to be
created every year if we are to meet that target. So, with respect, sir, I
must ask whether you are accurate in the information you are putting before
us.

The only way to seriously tackle unemployment, Mr Minister, is to remove
the artificial constraints that prevent the efficient functioning of the
labour market. You know that, sir, and I know that. Now, in order to be
able to hire you have to be able to fire in South Africa.

Now, do you not agree with the concerns recently expressed by your
predecessor, Governor Tito Mboweni, namely that there are a number of
negative unintended consequences arising from the labour laws that have
been promulgated and that the time has come to consider amending those laws
so as to address those negative consequences; thereby we can create those
half a million to one million new jobs every year and get back on track.

With respect, sir, I do not believe that your answer is good enough and I
do not believe it is good enough to say it is the responsibility of
everyone here. It is your responsibility to lead it and we are way behind.
What are you going to do? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Even your remarks are not good enough for me. As an
old teacher, my friend, I say you must go back to school.

On page 77 of the Nedlac report which was tabled in Parliament, which I
hope the hon member has read, it says that there are four themes: one theme
is more jobs, better jobs and decent work for all. On the 2004 performance
it tells you that over 500 jobs have been created in the economy whilst not
all of them were as a direct result of the GDS intervention. It tells you
that. It is on page 77, my brother.

Expanded Public Works targets are being exceeded. This is on page 77 of the
same report. You can go to the next theme, sir: “Addressing The Investment
Challenge”. Here the report says that the public finance and monetary
policy chamber has agreed on the need to identify the investments and
institutions that are affected by this agreement. It goes further to say
that we need to address the identified bottlenecks. It is on page 77 of
this report. You must go back to school, sir, please. [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Speaker, hopefully the Minister will not refer me
to the report and send me back to school, but my question, Minister, is, as
follows:

Kamuva nje sibonile oCosatu bebhikisha bethi babhikishela ukusweleka
kwemisebenzi. Babuye basho bathi laphayana ukumbiwa kwegolide kwehle kwaba
seminyakeni yawo-1931. Mhlawumbe uNgqongqoshe angasho lapha eNdlini ukuthi
le mibhikisho yena uyibuka kanjani nokusweleka kwemisebenzi ezimayini
kuhamba kanjani, angasiza yini ukudala imisebenzi uNgoqoshe njengoba
iCosatu isho ukuthi akudalwe imisebenzi? Ngiyabonga. (Translation of Zulu
paragraph follows.)

[Recently, we have witnessed Cosatu protesting against unemployment and job
losses. They also maintain that gold production has decreased, as happened
in 1931. May the Minister address this house on how he views these
demonstrations and job shortages in the mining sector? Can he also help in
creating jobs, as Cosatu is saying that jobs must be created? Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: I am going to stick to the question because the
right to strike is enshrined in the Constitution in Chapter 2, the Bill of
Rights, therefore I am not going to answer that question because the hon
members here passed that Constitution.

In May 2004, sir, the Department of Public Works launched the Expanded
Public Works Programme to cushion the negative effects of unemployment and
to impart relevant skills to potential work seekers.

Although the Expanded Public Works Programme is seen as a short-term
mechanism and the primary objective is to increase employability, to
provide work experience, which a number of young people in this country
need, and create value chains through entrepreneurship. Up to the fourth
quarter, that is in the period from April 2004 to 31 March 2005, a total
number of 223 400 gross work opportunities and 174 800 net work
opportunities were created through the Expanded Public Works Programme.

Allow Cosatu to march. We will continue to create the jobs. [Applause.]

Ms N D NGCENGWANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, South Africa has demonstrated its
commitment by being a signatory to the Millennium Development Goals Agenda
through the 2003 Growth and Development Summit.

Despite the agreement or declaration signed by the stakeholders, eg Nedlac,
the ANC-led government also committed itself to meeting these goals. The
key role of the Department of Labour and the government is to create an
enabling environment for job creation such as skills development.

Some people believe that there is only one silver bullet to solve the
problems of unemployment in this country. Could the Minister elaborate more
on further initiatives taken by his Department to create this enabling
environment for job creation in this country?

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Hon member, we know for a fact that in implementing
the Growth and Development Summit targets there are glaring gaps. The
Nedlac director even said that we needed to “debottleneck the bottlenecks”.
I heard this for the first time from him. I learn every day, unlike the hon
member Lowe who does not want to learn today.

We need to improve the rate of reporting as far as employment is concerned
because for the Growth and Development Summit to create these jobs we need
to advance questions of equity. We need to develop the skills of this
nation. We need to create economic opportunities for all our people and
extend services. All these are part of the Growth and Development Summit
agreement, and action plans are now in place.

There is a committee that is dealing with all these matters but we must
admit that there are, however, a couple of areas where new challenges have
emerged and those challenges are being attended to. In fact, the Deputy
President of this country, Her Excellency Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, this
year, has come up with another remedy and that remedy is to say we want our
economy to grow and the reason is simple: We need to grow the economy and
address the question of skills in order to create more jobs. That is why I
confidently say we are on track; otherwise there is no need for us to
become revolutionaries if we are able to say we are on track. We are on
track, my brother. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Lowe, fortunately there was another slot for a
question.

Mr C M LOWE: Thank you very much indeed, Madam Deputy Speaker. Mr Minister,
thank you very much for your comprehensive reply to my question. Could I
just ask that next time around you actually answer the question that I
posed to you?

Before I ask the question again, Minister, I just think it is important
that you look at your own statistics. I have gone through the labour force
survey, every year from 2003, which is put together by Stats SA. Nowhere
there, sir, is there any indication of the half a million to one and a half
million new jobs every year that we need to create over and above the new
entrants to the market place. It simply is not there. I can see the
Minister of Finance sitting up, but the fact is they are not there. We are
not creating the jobs that we should. We are, at least, a million jobs
behind where we should be.

My question to you, Minister, was whether you agree with the concerns that
have been expressed by your predecessor, Governor Tito Mboweni, who is the
previous Minister of Labour and has now started saying alarm bells are
ringing. There is something wrong with our labour laws. They are not doing
the work they need to do to create new jobs. Mr Minister, do you agree with
those concerns, yes or no? Can we do something to amend those labour laws
to create those one million new jobs that we need?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Minister! If we have a new question altogether
that is not related to the initial question, you are not compelled to
respond to it but if you feel like doing that, please go ahead.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: No, I want to remind him, because firstly he cannot
read, that he needs adult basic education and training. He does not even
understand his own question.

His own question is about whether we are on track in meeting the 2003
Growth and Development Summit. I do not see Tito Mboweni here either. So
there is something wrong with the hon member and I believe we must do
something about it. The Chief Whips of the DA must do something about this
hon member. [Laughter.] [Applause.]


                 Statistics on foreign immigrant employment


122.  Ms S Rajbally (MF) asked the Minister of Labour:

      (1)   What are the statistics in respect of foreign immigrant
           employment in the various labour categories in South Africa;


      (2)   whether, in recruiting people into the labour market, preference
           is given to South African youth, who have been trained and
           educated in skills and professions, over foreign immigrants; if
           not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                             N1932E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Based on statistics, we don’t deal with this
matter; however, we did some research for the hon member. Based on the
statistics provided by the Department of Home Affairs a total of 4 185 work
permits were granted and 11 686 immigration permits were issued between
2003 to 2004; that is in their 2003-04 annual report.

Also based on the Census 2001 results, a total of 217 189, excluding
unspecified migrant workers, was reported. From this 32 861 were employed
in the agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing sector; 62 649 were in
mining and quarrying; 32 142 were in the wholesale and retail trade sector;
the rest of the migrant workers are spread across other economic sectors.
For quick reference: a table is provided and, unfortunately, I am not going
to read the table here; the hon member will get the table.

Mr M M SWATHE: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. There are tens of
thousands of jobs and vacancies for people with skills, needed by both the
government and the private sector. Why are you not producing youth with
skills and reducing the high rate of youth unemployment? What are you doing
about that, hon Minister? Thank you. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Youth unemployment is one of our biggest challenges
in South Africa. Research has indicated that a majority of youth have
reported lack of skills and qualifications as the main reasons for not
being employed. They also say that even though they may be qualified, they
lack experience. At one imbizo that I attended they pleaded with me to open
a university of experience. [Laughter.]

However, we are expected to implement the Skills Development Act in order
to improve the skills of South Africans who are unemployed and
underemployed by placing them in learnership and apprenticeship programmes,
and I am sure that the hon member is aware of these programmes. In July
2005 we recorded 153 738 unemployed youth below the age of 35 years who are
enrolled in learnership and apprenticeship programmes as a result of these
interventions. We hope that these learners could be easily absorbed into
the labour market when they get to completion.

Mnu M J G MZONDEKI: Siyabulela, Sekela-Somlomo. Mphathiswa, kubonakala
ngathi ubuphendula imibuzo emibini. Mna ndingathanda ukuva ukuba ingaba
ikho na indlela ejolise ngqo ekuqesheni ulutsha. (Translation of Xhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Mr M J G MZONDEKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon Minister, it seems you
were answering two questions. I would personally like to know whether there
is a programme specially designed to ensure employment of young persons.]

The question I would like you to respond to, hon Minister, is whether the
Setas are doing well enough to target learnerships that would enable the
young people who go through these learnerships to be able to be absorbed by
the labour market? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: According to the draft National Skills Development
Strategy Implementation Report for 2004–05, the Services Seta, for example,
is still leading with the highest number of learners at 13 600 against a
target of 4 148. This is followed by the Metal and Engineering Seta,
popularly known as Merseta, at 11 268 against a target of 8 831; the Health
and Welfare Seta at 7 988 against a target 2 000; and the Information
Technology Seta at 6 731 against a target of 1 500.

There are Setas that did not meet their targets. However, I am convinced
and confident that we will be able to ensure that Setas attend to the
matter of young people because it is very important.
The whole of this House will regret it one day if we do not attend to the
plight of young people. [Applause.]


           Adherence to Expanded Public Works Programme guidelines


138.  Ms P S Sekgobela (ANC) asked the Minister of Public Works:

      What processes need to be put in place to ensure that all municipal
      infrastructure grant (MIG) projects adhere to the Expanded Public
      Works Programme’s guidelines in order to positively contribute to the
      challenges of poverty alleviation and job creation?
                                        N2190E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, the most important process that
will increase compliance is an auditing process that detects noncompliance
and . . .

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please move closer to the microphone.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, the most important process that
will increase compliance is an auditing process that detects noncompliance
and we will demand that officials account for this lack of compliance. In
this regard we have developed auditing procedures together with the Auditor-
General that will enable this office to audit compliance on both the
municipal and provincial infrastructure grant.

An audit of the provinces was conducted in the last financial year,
specifically on compliance in the Expanded Public Works Programme. However,
the Auditor-General indicated that this requires a significant amount of
resources and as such it will be difficult to conduct separate Expanded
Public Works Programme audits of all 284 municipalities. Therefore
discussions are under way with the Auditor-General to make this part of the
normal auditing procedures, which they conduct annually.

At the same time, the department is conducting training programmes for all
municipal officials to enable them to adjust their projects so that they
are in line with the Expanded Public Works Programme requirements.

The department also provides technical support to municipalities to assist
them with aligning their municipal infrastructure grant, or MIG, projects
with the Expanded Public Works Programme. An intervention that will
therefore speed up the process will be to grant additional funds for those
municipalities that comply and reduce MIG funds for those who do not.

Ms P S SEKGOBELA: Hon Deputy Speaker, what are the details of the programme
mentioned by the Minister that relate to the building capacity of the
municipalities?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: The programme itself involves the training of
local government officials for labour-intensive methods of construction.
This is an initiative to train local government officials in these methods.
Training is being done at NQF-levels 5 and 7 in labour-intensive methods of
construction. This initiative is carried out jointly with the local
government Seta; the SA Local Government Association; the Construction,
Education and Training Authority; and the Department of Provincial and
Local Government.

Funding for the training of officials is provided by the local government
Seta, while the co-ordination of the different stakeholders involved is
being done by the Department of Public Works. This initiative aims to train
1,2 million officials by 31 March 2006. This initiative is progressing well
and by 31 October 2005, 1 092 officials had been trained across the
country. Of this number, 602 were assessed and 564 were deemed to be
competent.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Madam Minister, the reason why infrastructure grants are
needed, is because local government fails to maintain the infrastructure.
The reason why municipal infrastructure has fallen into a state of
disrepair is because of ANC policy, where competent officials were replaced
by cadres who earn exorbitantly high salaries, such as the case of the
Beaufort West city manager. They earn even more than the State President,
and those who left the administration have been rehired at double the cost
as consultants.

The ANC policy of centralised local government authorities has added to
this chaos. Would it not have been better to review the ANC policies that
caused the chaos rather than fixing it with a grant? [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, I do not think that this debate
needs to be politicised, for we are talking about a structure of
government, which works according to rules and regulations. If that
structure of government were to deviate from rules and regulations, a
situation far more chaotic than that which Mr Blanché is talking about
would be the result.

In any situation there will always be the stray dog, and we cannot say that
a whole nation does not know what it is doing just because of one
particular person who does things differently. [Interjections.] If he says
this is happening countrywide, he must send me a detailed list of all those
places where this is happening. [Interjections.][Applause.]


     Adherence to foreign procurement laws by SA state-owned enterprises


154.  Dr P J Rabie (DA) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:
      (1)   What is the policy of the Government regarding South African
           state-owned enterprises breaking foreign procurement laws in
           order to win contracts;

      (2)   whether, in the light of recent media reports, any steps have
           been taken to ensure that state-owned arms manufacturer Denel is
           not implicated in further international corruption scandals; if
           not, why not; if so, what steps?

                            N2208E

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is quite
clear that with regard to the policy of government at state enterprises,
their officials, as with any other citizen, must comply not only with the
rules and law in South Africa, but must also clearly comply with any
foreign jurisdiction in regard to the conduct of business in any sector.

In the event that these rules or laws are contravened, we would obviously
take action and quite clearly, from Denel’s point of view, particularly in
the current period of restructuring of Denel, we are taking some extra
steps to ensure that procedures are being complied with in all the
countries within which we attempt to market our products.

Dr P J RABIE: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, in a very thorough
submission to the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on 18 October,
the chief executive officer of Denel mentioned that there is a possible
loss of R1,6 million, which will be in this particular financial year.

Hon Minister, seen in the light of our very unacceptably high rate of
unemployment and our high degree of poverty in this country, do you think
it is right and fair for taxpayers’ money to be used to foot the shortfalls
of parastatals?

Are you thinking of putting a deadline to the losses of certain
parastatals, or are you contemplating selling off or privatising the
nonprofit-making sectors, especially Denel?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: It does look a little as if the DA is
playing the lottery today, because that seems to be somewhat of an
extension of the original question. However, I am prepared to answer it, as
he is a nice, gentle person, the hon member.

These are always very difficult choices; I mean, there are many thousands
of people employed in Denel and in the defence-related industries. It is an
extremely important technology base for our country and our economy, and
our response to the losses is precisely what the chief executive officer
outlined.

We are proposing a turnaround strategy, which we believe will be
successful, as was indicated in that presentation, but a turnaround
strategy, in fact, involves forming partnerships with private companies and
other companies that are also state-owned around the world. So, we are not
taking a dogmatic position, we are attempting to ensure that we capture the
tremendous capacity and potential of large parts of Denel, and convert it
into a sustainable enterprise. As he indicated, realistically, that cannot
be done overnight; it’s not possible.

Quite clearly, government would not countenance a situation of repeated and
endless losses, but we are of the view that we can turn the enterprise
around, that we can do it more effectively as the single shareholder in the
holding company, but that we would bring in partners into a number of the
underlying activities of Denel.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Adjunkspeaker, ek wil vir die agb Minister sê dat
ek sy benadering betreffende Denel verwelkom. Ons moet ook besef dat daar
‘n enorme hoeveelheid kundigheid in die Denel-groep is, wat tot voordeel
van Suid-Afrika aangewend kan word, nie noodwendig in die vervaardiging van
krygstuie nie, maar ook in verband met ander aspekte.

My opvolgvraag aan die agb Minister is, gesien in die lig van sy antwoord
in terme van die moontlike oortreding van reëls en so meer, of die agb
Minister bereid is om ‘n kommissie van ondersoek aan te stel na die gebeure
met betrekking tot Indië waar daar bewerings gemaak word dat daar
onreëlmatighede plaasgevind het; en, indien hy bereid is om so ‘n kommissie
aan te stel, wanneer hy dié kommissie sal aanstel? (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Deputy Speaker, I want to say to the hon Minister
that I welcome his approach insofar as Denel is concerned. We must also
realise that an immense amount of expertise exists in the Denel group that
can be utilised to the benefit of South Africa, not necessarily in the
manufacture of armaments, but in other respects as well.

My follow-up question to the hon Minister is, in view of his answer
regarding the potential violation of rules and so forth, whether the
Minister is prepared to appoint a commission of inquiry into the incidents
regarding India, since allegations are being made that irregularities have
occurred there; and if he is prepared to appoint such a commission, when
will this commission be appointed?]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Hon member, I would agree with your
comment that there is tremendous capacity, technological, scientific and
engineering capacity, in Denel. It can play, and will play – I’m quite sure
– an extremely important role in many of our industries, particularly in
aerospace, avionics and various forms of LAN systems; and this does have
spin-off effects for the rest of the economy.

With regard to the second part of your question: I’m not going to appoint a
commission of inquiry. It is completely unnecessary. This is a matter
before the courts in India and therefore there will be detailed submissions
that would have to be dealt with in connection with those actions. In the
process, both between the Indian central bureau of investigation and our
activities, we have full access to the information.

This is a matter for litigation and we are contesting that these
regulations were, in fact, violated and, as has been indicated, at
government level we are in contact with our counterparts. Accordingly, I
will not make further comments on this matter, and it would be pointless
and wrong to try and enter into a public debate on a matter that is being
dealt with by due process in both countries.

So, a commission of inquiry is not necessary; it would be counterproductive
and we will continue to deal with the matter as I’ve indicated. I’m quite
certain that we have already ascertained what has happened. The issue in
dispute is whether that was or was not in violation of the regulations in
India and, internally, whether the persons concerned were fully in
compliance with Denel policy, and under what conditions. These are matters
being addressed; there is no need for a commission of inquiry.

Mr C L GOLOLO: Thank you, Minister Erwin, for your very comprehensive
response. In as far as I know, Denel, the state-owned entity, has never
been implicated in any form of corruption, or broken any law in its
procurement dealings, both in this country or abroad. In view of this,
Minister, could you please clarify the matter for us?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Firstly, as I’ve indicated, hon
member, quite clearly if there are people in contravention of our law we
will have to act on that matter and use the correct legal procedures. The
same would apply in the event of that occurring in another legal
jurisdiction.

I should make it clear, as I have done in my earlier answer, that the issue
at stake in India is whether Denel was entitled to, or did use what are
called agents in a particular contract. This is regulatory law; it is
administrative law, to the extent that it is law. So, these are complex
matters and I would not automatically take some of the wild speculation
that is taking place in the media as fact.

The facts will be established through proper processes, as I’ve indicated
earlier, and I’m persuaded that we have a case that we can legitimately and
justifiably put forward for what happened there. To the extent that there
are any procedural matters that are wrong in Denel, we have acted on that
already.

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, I have been partly covered by the hon
Gololo in his question, but I just want to thank the hon Minister for the
detailed explanation.

I fully agree and concur that the courts should settle this matter; that
there is no need for any further investigations. We have been totally and
fully briefed in the portfolio committee, and therefore that part falls
away.

Now, I would just like to ask the Minister whether under these
circumstances he would agree that new management – that is the new
management that we technically have with Denel – should be given a chance
and that they really try and see what they can do to bring this important
facility of South Africa back on track, and, particularly, to make it
economically viable? If there is anything more in terms of the economic
viability of Denel, could he give us any further indication of this?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: I think that the briefing that was
given by Mr Shaun Liebenberg, the chief executive officer, and under the
guidance of Dr Sibusiso Sibisi, the chairperson of the new board, shows
that in the period of time since we have seized on the severity of the
problems in Denel we’ve been able indicate the need for a new strategy that
is a different approach to how Denel should be structured, and that has
been set out in some detail.

We would not attempt to be a full systems integrator for markets outside of
South Africa unless we can find a partner to do that, but inside the
country we would attempt to be a systems integrator. I am also very pleased
to say that my colleague and I, the Minister of Defence, and the Secretary
for Defence, the head of Armscor, the head of Denel and my own director-
general, constitute an ongoing task team where we are further addressing
the total environment of the defence industries and the defence procurement
programmes.

So, I believe we are taking the correct steps. It is not a totally new
management; we have a new chief executive officer and there are many of the
managers of Denel who are still there – very much still there – being
pulled together and given a new set of work programmes, new directions to
take. But, it is important that we keep this capacity there. I think anyone
who had been present at the roll out of the first Grippen, which is being
manufactured for the SA Air Force, would have had a sense of the impact
this highly sophisticated modern aircraft can and will have on the air
force and defence-related industries, and it was wonderful to see our young
pilots - men, women, black, white – being exposed to this extremely modern
technology and all the technical support that it needs.

So, the modernisation of our Defence Force and the defence industry is an
exciting challenge that, I think, we should all relish. It’s important for
our economy.

    Effect of economic growth on job opportunities and social development

124.  Prince N E Zulu (IFP) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      (1)   Whether the growth in the economy will increase job
          opportunities and improve social development; if not, why not;


      (2)   whether rural development and youth unemployment will be given
          priority consideration; if not, why not; if so, what are the
          relevant details;

      (3)   whether labour and business will also benefit in this regard; if
          not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (4)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?         N1948E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Madam
Chairperson, our view is that what we need in South Africa is a higher rate
of economic growth that is developmental in character and capable of
resulting in massive job creation, redistribution and the promotion of
sustainable livelihoods to lift people in the second economy out of
conditions of poverty and marginalisation.

A rise in the rate of economic growth is an objective, but we need to
recognise that the growth per se does not necessarily automatically
translate into job creation, nor does it guarantee a redress of economic
inequalities inherited from apartheid. The Deputy President has therefore
established a task team to develop an Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative, which will seek to promote a growing economy that benefits all.

This initiative aims to create the conditions to halve unemployment and
poverty by the year 2014 by optimising public investment; creating a better
environment for private sector growth; and, addressing specific barriers to
growth. Some of the components aimed at addressing barriers include
improved human resource development; creating a developmental macroeconomic
environment; sectoral investment strategies; second economy interventions
including support for micro, small and collective enterprises; and,
governance and delivery issues.

The answer to the second part of the question is that the Department of
Trade and Industry is well aware of the challenges for rural development,
as well as the high rate of youth unemployment. We are currently in the
process of developing a national industrial policy as part of a
comprehensive government intervention to achieve our stated goals of
growth, employment and equity. A more equitable spread of economic
activities and resources, particularly to marginalised areas with
significant economic potential, will form an integral part of this
strategy. Currently, the Community Private-Public Partnership Programme -
housed within the Small Enterprise Development Agency - is one important
intervention.

As statistics indicate that youth unemployment constitutes 75% of the
unemployed, the new industrial policy will give considerable attention to
youth employment. The industrial policy will also be aligned to other
government initiatives in this regard.

The answer to the third part of the question is that the creation of social
partnerships has always been an important element in the policy-making
process in South Africa. Currently, a number of platforms of engagement
exist to allow for stakeholder participation. This includes Nedlac, the
presidential working groups and the DTI’s Industry Forum. Business and
labour are also interactive with the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative and national industry policy processes.

The answer to the fourth part of the question is that as we are currently
in the process of developing a national industrial policy. Government will
be in a position to make a comprehensive statement on the matter as soon as
the policy is finalised. Thank you.

Prince N E ZULU: Madam Chair, thank you, hon Minister, for your
comprehensive and well-balanced answer, which touches all aspects of the
question. Perhaps on a very light note, one could say that the economic
growth, which we all know is quite a complex challenge, depends on many
factors and that one of these factors is capital. Can the Minister
therefore comment or expand on how capital as capital is going to help our
economy reach the set target within the set timeframe; namely capital as
capital, helping the economy to reach our target within the set timeframe?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Thank you, Madam
Chair. I’m tempted to say that on a “heavier note”, I don’t know whether
the hon member means capital as a thing or capital as a social relation.
So, I am a bit constrained. [Laughter.] If he means capital as investment
resources, then the aim of the accelerated growth strategy is clearly to
accelerate the rate of public investment in the economy - that is the
fundamental aspect of it - but also to create conditions to try to increase
the rate of investment by the private sector, partly by relating to the
public investment programmes. That’s clearly part of it.

If he means capital as a social relation, well obviously the process of
engagement around both the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative, as
well as the national industrial policy process, is one that is involved. As
was earlier in reply, these are interactions with key stakeholders,
including private business. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Chairperson, thank you very much for your comprehensive
response, hon Deputy Minister. Obviously, recently, we have just been
updated by hon Minister Trevor Manuel that the reforms of the past decade
are bearing fruit. Hence we are talking of a growing economy. He further
emphasised that we are investing in a shared future and jointly confronting
challenges as South Africans from various sectors. On that note, Deputy
Minister, could you further elaborate on the extent to which, and in what
way, the DTI’s strategy and plan will advance the notion of the Accelerated
and Shared Growth Initiative now that it is publicly acknowledged that our
economy is growing steadfastly?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Madam
Chairperson, I think that the picture is one wherein the rates of economic
growth have definitely improved and they are at levels that are higher than
they have been for the last three decades, and this is a significant
achievement.

However, the rates of growth are still too low to create sufficient
employment and too low to absorb all the productive capacity in the
country; hence the aim is to raise the growth rates yet again and also to
do this in a way that is shared and which reaches the masses of the people
in the country.

I think the point about the Deputy President’s initiative is that it is
actually an initiative that is bringing together all the efforts of all the
different components of government. But, I think, the specific contribution
of the DTI, or one of the specific contributions, is the national
industrial strategy. We are in the process of finalising a document which
we hope to present to stakeholders in Nedlac and other forums before the
end of the year, which will be aimed at producing a more robust industrial
policy. We are going to be building on initiatives of customised sector
programmes that are already under way.

But the answer, as I initially indicated, is that we will be in a position
to make a full statement on that once this work is completed. I can’t just
report that this work is pretty well advanced and well on track. I think we
will be able to make a statement in the not too distant future. Thank you.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Chairperson, Mr Deputy Minister, it is pleasing to
hear your response to that question because, funny enough, you indeed made
the very points that hon member Lowe made in respect of the type of growth
that is needed to reduce the jobless queues. But, what I want to ask the
hon Deputy Minister is this - and I don’t want to get into debate as to how
long those queues are and how many new jobs are being created, but suffice
it to say that I think wherever many jobs are being created we need to, in
fact, double that amount - I wonder if the Deputy Minister would indeed
lean on the hon Minister of Finance in this regard?

Our tax system generally grants incentives for new capital investments by
way of capital allowances. But, funny enough, when it comes to the
investment in human capital we don’t offer such allowances and I wonder
whether, in fact, you would lean on the Minister of Finance to allow
incentives by way of allowances for investment in new jobs?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Well, I think
that there may be an apparent agreement with the hon Lowe only on one
issue, and that is that we actually need to create more jobs. But I think
that the way Mr Lowe thinks we can go about it and the way we think we can
go about it are diametrically opposed. That is about as far as we go.

What I would say is that the question of incentives is a critical issue. I
think the industrial policy process, building on the approach that is
already evident in the customised sector processes, is saying two things.
It is saying first of all that we need to design our incentives much more
around the concrete needs of particular sectors that we are prioritising.
These could include incentives around a range of issues. We have to, of
course, be careful that we are complying with WTO rules, which do not allow
discrimination and things of that sort. But I think we would be looking for
those incentives to emerge from customised sector processes that involve
discussions with those stakeholders.

The other thing that I think was important is that we would see incentives
as being more crafted around specific needs, but also more conditional
around performance by stakeholders. That is the direction in which we would
want to move. Whether they would involve particular incentives for training
and human resource issues, I think that is something that would emerge from
the sector processes themselves. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.


            Progress regarding regional electricity distributors


134.  Mr C T Molefe (ANC) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:

      (a) What progress has been made regarding regional electricity
      distributors (REDs) and (b) what are the (i) key challenges and (ii)
      constraints of the process?                                   N2186E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: The restructuring of the electricity
distribution industry in general and the establishment of rates constitute
an integral part of government’s overall vision of accelerating service
delivery in order to eradicate poverty, achieve sustainable socioeconomic
development and thereby build a better life for all of our people.

In terms of progress made thus far regarding regional electricity
distributors’ rates, the first rates were established in July 2005, and the
remaining rates would be rolled out according to a road map that has a
target of three years. Still, in terms of progress, project plans for the
various milestones have been developed, and ongoing stakeholder involvement
is in progress, with co-operative agreements being signed. Working groups
have been established to deal with all issues, financial or technical.

Coming to the key challenges that are facing the rates at this stage is the
fact, I think, that while the end-state RED model has been agreed to -
which envisages that each metro will form its own RED entity in its area of
jurisdiction, and also the addition of a national RED, which should be
established by June 2007 - the key challenge here is getting the
institutional framework in place to enable these entities to deliver these
services as envisaged.

On the issue of constraints facing REDs: I would say, a constraint
presently is the harmonisation of REDs objectives with a constitutional and
local government legislative framework. We hope that the EDI restructuring
Bill will enable us to overcome these constraints.

Mr M H MATLALA: Thank you, hon Chair. Hon Minister, how would we ensure
greater integration between spatial planning for electricity distribution
and other important spatial initiatives like the metro-led IDPs and the
provincial development plans?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: I think the very decision by Cabinet
to say that, in terms of the metro REDs, a metro RED is supposed to cover
the whole metro, takes into account the issues that the hon member has
raised.

It is also important to mention that EDI restructuring is part and parcel
of the municipalitie’s IDPs, because as they plan their electricity roll
out, and as they look at the electricity needs, they continuously feed into
and refer to this process of ours of restructuring. In that way, the
spatial development challenges are being addressed. Thank you.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: RED 1, which was supposed to be a regional-based RED for
the whole of the Western Province consists currently only of the Cape Town
City Council.

The personnel transferred from the Cape Town City Council and Eskom as well
as the ring-fencing of assets and other functions will only be completed
during the course of next year, nearly one year after the first RED was
introduced, haphazardly. This clearly indicates a fiasco waiting to happen.
What do you intend doing about this, hon Minister?
The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: When RED 1 was established, it was
envisaged that there would only be six REDs in the country. We have now
decided that the new approach will be six metro REDs and one national RED.
So, all the areas that do not yet form part of metro RED 1, which is the
metro RED in Cape Town, are going to be, in time, incorporated into the
RED, save those that will fall under the area of the national RED.

Obviously, a major restructuring of this nature involves a whole lot of
players. There are major implications in terms of transfer of staff,
transfer of assets, and ensuring that those assets are accounted for, when
these new REDs are formed and take over from Eskom.

Regarding all those issues, what I say is that as we move forward, we are
going to decide on them, to see what is the best institutional mechanism to
ensure that these new REDs deliver the services as envisaged.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Minister, not being a member of the portfolio
committee, I am not au fait with some of the issues in this field. During
my normal constituency work around places like Pongola and Empangeni I came
across a situation where new applications have been put in abeyance by
these regional distributors.

The reason given is that there is not enough - hopefully I am using the
correct terminology here – generation; that these regional distributors are
in the state of concluding agreements with countries like Mozambique, to
supply enough power. Is the Minister aware of such situations and if she
is, how far have these agreements gone?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: The Minister for Public Enterprises
might correct me here, but as South Africa we have had, all these years, an
excess supply of energy.

It is envisaged that some time in the future, maybe in 2008, we might run
out of the energy we need as a county. Presently, I am not aware that we
have run out or run short of energy, and that we are waiting for
electricity generated from somewhere else.

What I can explain is that in the process of trying to transfer the
electrification money from the Department of Minerals and Energy to the
municipal infrastructure grant, which is the MIC under the Department of
Provincial and Local Government, there have been delays caused by the fact
that Eskom is no longer going to look to us for the payment of whatever
work they used to do. That is what has caused a delay in many of the plans
that had already been decided upon, and that are not being implemented in
terms of electrification. And as soon as those hurdles have been dealt
with, we are hoping that there will be electrification of those identified
plans.

From my information, it is not yet a shortage of supply, but just a
question of an institutional mechanism of moving the responsibility from
DME to DPLG. Thank you.

Mr M SWART: Hon Minister, the REDs will present a problem especially now
with the new idea of REDs for the rural areas only and the metros being
separate. What is the idea because I don’t know whether this has been
communicated to municipalities throughout the country? What is the effect
going to be on the profitability of the municipalities, and what is the
effect going to be on tariff structure?

When PriceWaterhouseCoopers did the initial investigations, they found that
the electricity tariffs would have to increase by something like 40%, and
the municipality would have to increase their rates and taxes by up to 60%
to actually cover the costs of REDs.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Well, as I have said, the end-state
model has been decided upon, but there isn’t a final model of what the
national RED will look like.

Our belief is that the municipalities have got in their area of
jurisdiction large consumers of electricity as well as small consumers
within which they can subsidise the electricity costs.

The national RED is envisaged to be financed, obviously, in part from the
electricity industry itself, but also in part from allocations. That is
being worked out; the tariff structure is being worked out, and the end
state will obviously be decided upon by the interministerial team that has
been formed between ourselves, the Department of Public Enterprises and
DPLG, as well as National Treasury. Thank you.


         Effects of restructuring of agricultural training colleges


135.  Mrs B M Ntuli (ANC) asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land
      Affairs:

      (1)   Whether, in the light of the restructuring of agricultural
           training colleges, the Department of Agriculture will keep these
           institutions; if not,


      (2)   whether they will be transferred to the Department of Education;
           if so, what are the relevant details; if not,

      (3)   whether any plans are in place to make these colleges centres of
           excellence; if so, what plans?               N2187E
The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, the answer to
the question by the hon member is, yes, we will keep the agricultural
colleges, because they are very important to our own development and also
to skills development in the agricultural sector. However, as we all know,
as part of the reconfiguration of the education system, such colleges will
become part of the Department of Education in the further education and
training sector.

As the Department of Agriculture we are working with our counterparts in
the Department of Education to look at how we could influence the
curricular development, as well as monitor the performance of these
institutions. There are plans in place, because as the department we have
also just launched the agricultural education and training strategy,
whereby we will set up a national education and training task team. Part of
its task will be to propose to the Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs
the modalities for positioning the colleges as centres of excellence in
their respective ecological zones. Thank you very much.

Mrs B M NTULI: Chairperson, hon Minister, in the light of the skills
shortage amongst blacks in South Africa and the increasing demand for
extension services by the new entrants in farming, can these institutions
be used to retrain extension officers so that they can specialise in
different areas of agriculture, and also train the incoming farmers?
Furthermore, can these colleges also be enabled to become centres of the
Agricultural Research Council for information dissemination, working with
the regions or district councils to service the second economy? If yes, can
this matter be treated with the necessary urgency, ukuze abantu bakwazi
ukuziphumelelisa? [in order for people to be able to uplift themselves?]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, hon
Chairperson and hon Ma Ntuli. Indeed we do treat this matter as a matter of
urgency; as you know, in our interaction with the agricultural
stakeholders, particularly farmers, the issue of extension officers has
been raised, as well as the quality of education that some of our extension
officers have had over time.

Therefore we have agreed that part of the work of these agricultural
colleges will indeed be to ensure that the kind of training that is
undertaken by the colleges does improve the quality of our extension
services. Also, they can be colleges where emerging farmers in particular
can be trained in short courses in order to be able to undertake their work
and gain the necessary skills.

It is also interesting to note, if one were to look at the Western Cape
colleges, the work that Elsenburg College in particular has done and the
way in which they’ve positioned themselves, they’ve actually done a lot of
work in terms of training those people, particularly extension officers and
farmers, who are working in the grape industry as well as in viticulture.
This has been done in a way that does not necessarily compete with
Stellenbosch University. As we know, some of our universities do provide
agricultural sciences, but the agricultural colleges themselves will add
more value by giving practical training, but also giving relevant education
to the extension service. Thank you.

Mnr A H NEL: Voorsitter, ek wil net sê ek gaan my vraag in Afrikaans stel.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Dankie, Minister.

Daar is geen twyfel dat ons opgeleide mense in die landbou sal nodig hê
nie. Ek dink u weet waarvan ek praat. U het gister teruggekom van ’n
provinsie waar al daardie probleme uitgewys is. Ons het sulke mense nodig,
en vinnig. Persoonlik sou ek verkies dat die Departement van Landbou beheer
oor die kolleges sal behou; maar is u seker dat die Departement van Landbou
en u as Minister genoeg sê sal hê in die kurrikulum van daardie kolleges
onder die nuwe stelsel? Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr A H NEL: Chairperson, I would just like to inform you that I will be
putting my question in Afrikaans. [Interjections.] Thank you, Minister.

There is no doubt that we will need trained people in agriculture. I think
you know what I mean. You returned from a province yesterday where all of
those problems were pointed out. We need such people, and fast. Personally,
I would prefer the Department of Agriculture to retain control over the
colleges; but are you confident that the Department of Agriculture and you
as Minister will have a big enough say in the curriculum of those colleges
under the new system? Thank you very much.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, hon
Nel. I agree with you. Indeed, I don’t think there will be a problem
between ourselves and the Minister of Education in ensuring that we do
contribute in terms of curricular development as a sector, because indeed
the issues that will be dealt with by the agricultural colleges will
actually, and must, relate to our own agricultural policy. But that does
not mean they necessarily ought to be under the management of the Minister
of Agriculture and Land Affairs.

I’m very happy that the national Department of Education would actually
take on the responsibility of the management of such colleges, which will
deal with issues of governance, but obviously our interests are to ensure
that the input in those colleges will enable us to train good extension
officers as well as to offer short-term courses to our farmers. Thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, the question of learning or education in any
institution goes along with communication. There have been instances where
the people at these further education and training centres complained about
the medium of instruction in which they were being instructed or taught. Is
anything actually being done, or will it be done insofar as the two
departments will have this joint responsibility to make sure that the
students are taught in the language that they think they can best
comprehend whatever they are being taught? Finally, what does it look like
in terms of the proportion of the lecturing staff compared to the students?
Are the figures compatible either way?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Madam Minister, I think the first
part of the question may relate; the second one you may answer if you wish.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, hon
Chair. Indeed, with regard to the second question I would have to do some
investigation, but as you’d know, a majority of these colleges were
located, some of them, in the former homelands and self-governing
territories, where the issues of the levels of funding was a challenge.

So, that is an issue, in which the Minister of Education, as she deals with
the entirety of the configuration of the education system in the country,
is actually engaged with the Treasury department. It’s a long-term issue,
obviously, that you’ll have to engage in, taking into consideration the
resources that we have as a state.

But the issue relating to language, as you have put it, as communication,
is indeed important, but I’m sure you appreciate that South Africa as a
country has 11 official languages and others that we are still improving.
I’m sure you’d appreciate that we may not be able to use all 11 languages
in one institution, as we would like to. Somehow you have to find a medium
of instruction.

I think the Department of Education has been engaged with this issue to
find a way in which the medium of instruction that is used accommodates all
the learners – it shouldn’t actually exclude anyone based on what the
preference in that particular region or institution was before. So, part of
transformation is to deal with those issues and find a way in which you can
accommodate the best language, or languages, which can be used as medium of
instruction in these institutions. Thank you.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, according to the feeding scheme programme,
every school is encouraged to have a garden. Would the Minister’s
department, through the college, assist those schools that have gardens by
sending extension officers to teach and assist them with their gardens?
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Hon Mpontshane, you know
that, indeed, the question you are raising is a new question! But, as you
know, one of the issues that we have been interested in as the Departments
of Education, Health and Agriculture has been the issues of food security
for our nation and for our people. Amongst other things it has also been of
interest to us to ensure that the young people who go to our schools,
particularly those who may come from disadvantaged communities and
families, may at least have access to a nutritious meal once a day. I think
that will be the interest that all of us as South Africans will have; not
just for the children, but for the entirety of the country.

Obviously, extension services will be required, but whether the numbers
that we have currently would be able to assist each and every school is
another matter. It would be difficult, but there are other means of
communication that don’t necessarily need the physical visits of an
extension officer to a site.

We have the agricultural television in the morning, we have the radio
programmes in which we also engage in teaching people practices about
farming, so some of these mediums can be utilised and we hope that some of
the teachers who themselves might have been trained might actually use
their spare time to assist those people in the schools who are engaged in a
form of gardening or some agricultural activity of sorts.

As a teacher, hon Mpontshane, I’m sure you would also be able to encourage
those in the teaching profession who had done some agricultural education
in our schools to be more active in assisting us to actually spread the
knowledge.

                     Use of public transport by Minister


156.  Mr M M Swathe (DA) asked the Minister of Transport:

      (1)   Whether he made use of public transport for every work-related
           activity where transport was required, including transport to
           and from work, on 20 October 2005; if not, why not in each case;
           if so, (a) how many out-of-office appointments did he meet
           making use of  public transport and (b) which modes of public
           transport did he use;

      (2)   whether he made use of a car on that date; if so, for what
           purposes?
           N2210E


The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (for the Minister of Transport):
Chairperson, I can tell you that my colleague, the Minister of Transport,
was “baie besig” [very busy] on that day. He took a few “sho’t lefts” and
he took a “draai” [turn] here and there - in a taxi all the time.
[Laughter.]

I can tell the hon member what the Minister of Transport did: He was here,
there and everywhere. He met the MEC for transport, MEC Jacobs; he had the
mayor, Father Smangaliso Mkhatshwa, with him. Late in the afternoon he did
go by car to Johannesburg for a late meeting, but I think he had the
blessing of Father Mkhatshwa. [Laughter.]
Mr M M SWATHE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Minister, in the light of
the facts that the Minister of Transport is not in the House and that the
Minister even admitted that he never used public transport on 20 October
2005, what commitment does he and his fellow Cabinet Ministers have to
transport month? Did his whole Cabinet use public transport for the whole
month, or only on 20 October 2005? If not, why not? Thank you.
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Well, the answer is very simple. For
practical reasons, we didn’t. I think we are very committed to improving
public transport, as I outlined in my previous answer. And, I think, if we
had the Gautrain we would probably all go back and forth between Pretoria
and Johannesburg by public transport as well.

Mr B L MASHILE: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, now that the car-free
day campaign is over, are there any lessons that we have learnt and
experiences that we can share with this House? If there are any, how will
they inform future campaigns? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Well, I can’t really give you a
detailed reply to that. It would be more appropriate for the Minister of
Transport to do that. But I think as the chairperson of the committee, the
hon Cronin, indicated, we should see this in a broader context of improving
public transport in general and making sure that it works efficiently in
our cities and rural areas. So I’m certain that the Minister of Transport
will, at an appropriate time, make further statements on this. It’s not
possible for me to do that. I can announce, however, at his own request,
that the Minister of Labour actually used a horse on that day.

          Investigations into use of fronting in securing BEE deals

126.  Prof E S Chang (IFP) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      (1)   Whether his department has launched any investigations into the
           use of fronting in securing black economic empowerment (BEE)
           deals; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

        2) (2)   whether his department is considering any measures to
           stopfronting through its various manifestations such as
           shareholder rights, voting rights, racial representation and
           name changes; if not, why not; if so, what measures?

      N2050E


The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Madam
Chairperson, the answer to the first part of the question is: The DTI is
fully aware of fronting complaints and also that fronting constitutes
fraud. However, currently, there is no clear and well-shared definition of
fronting, neither of its interpretation in the economy.
In order to deal with the existing confusion concerning the definition and
interpretation of fronting, the DTI has prioritised the development of
codes of good practice on broad-based black economic empowerment to, among
other things, give clear guidance on this matter. The codes of good
practice have been developed with, among other things, the following
objectives: to identify and specify fronting practices; identify fronting
risk indicators; specify the requirements for reporting on fronting; define
guidelines for the determination and evaluation of fronting risk; and to
specify the consequences of fronting practices.

The answer to the second part of the question is: As part of phase two of
the codes of good practice, the DTI intends to issue statement 040, giving
a clear definition and interpretation of what constitutes fronting. It is
anticipated that phase two of the codes of good practice will be issued in
mid-November 2005, in fulfilment of the public commentary process, and that
the gazetting of all codes will take place early next year.

Overall, the codes will give a clear guidance on how to correctly apply and
implement the principles, definitions, measurements and the elements of
broad-based black economic empowerment, to ensure that enterprises do not
find themselves unintentionally practising fronting.

Furthermore, the codes will recommend the development of institutional
mechanisms aimed at monitoring fronting in the economy. These will include
the verification of broad-based black economic empowerment credentials of
enterprises. As part of their licensing requirements, verification agencies
will report on instances of fronting to the department. Additionally, the
department is currently engaging with the Department of Justice and with
the National Treasury to develop and identify effective legislation and
other institutional arrangements that can be utilised to identify, penalise
and eliminate fronting in the economy. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, hon Deputy Minister. It is
now the turn of the hon Chang . . . hon Bekker, I think.

Mr H J BEKKER: I take it as an honour that I could be referred to as such a
beautiful hon member. But, on behalf of the hon Chang, I wish to thank the
Deputy Minister for his reply and hope we can truly address the issue of
fronting. Fronting, of whatever nature, should be rooted out and the
perpetrators appropriately punished. This is nothing less than fraud and
theft, since bona fide tender applicants are robbed of the contracts that
they should indeed have obtained.

Furthermore, even those non-BEE tender applicants that would qualify are
totally jeopardised by these BEE fronting tender applicants, albeit taking
into consideration the fact that they have to overcome the discounted or
loaded ratio of being, at least, about 10% cheaper on their contracts or
whatever has been specified in the tender documents. I hope that the hon
Minister could give us the assurance that this particular aspect, indeed,
would be further investigated in future, and that strict rules would be
coming forward in the document that you have quoted. I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): I thank Prof
Bekker for the statement of support, which I think is generally along the
same lines as what we propose. We are also of the view, as I indicated in
the answer, that fronting is fraud and an activity in which you are trying
to present yourself as something that you are not, in order to gain
benefits that are derived from this.

I had indicated that we intend to make statement 040 to be exactly the kind
of statement that we think will be able to guide us. I also indicated that
we are co-operating with other departments to make sure that those who
engage in these activities are penalised. Thank you.

Ms D M RAMODIBE: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, the past policies of
segregation and discrimination have left a legacy of inequality and
poverty, and, in more recent decades, low economic growth. The apartheid
system was heavily biased towards providing basic services to the white
minority. This was done to the detriment of the black population, who were
denied the opportunity to accumulate human and physical capital. These are
the same people who are today used for fronting. Is the Minister
comfortable that the measures that have been put in place will enable them
to access funding? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davis): I think that the
codes have been developed through detailed interaction with stakeholders.
There is a lot of very complicated work that has gone into the codes. We
think, at this stage – obviously it remains to be seen in practice – that
these codes will offer a substantial step forward in terms of being able to
wipe out this practice.

Of course, if it proves that people in the economy are able to get around
these codes, then we have to look at them again and we will have to tighten
them up. But we do believe that there is a lot of solid work that has gone
into them and we think that, at least, some of the most common forms of
fronting will be eliminated when these codes are fully implemented.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: I welcome the Deputy Minister’s announcement of
tightened codes to eradicate this scourge from our various companies
regarding fronting and the effect it has had on procurement.

I think the time for the enrichment of an elite group of black ANC cronies
has passed. [Interjections.] It is now imperative that we move to broad-
based black economic empowerment. Will the Deputy Minister then, as part of
these codes, draw up a list of persons who have benefited from narrow BEE
in the past and will not be the major fronts and beneficiaries in future?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): I don’t think
that the issue of fronting, as the hon member is trying to stretch the
definition, is the one that was intended in the question or indeed in the
other two follow-ups. I think we are talking about situations in which
black people are put in nominal positions in companies where ownership
rights are not really exercised by black people in order to access the
benefits that accrue thereto. It’s not a question that there are cronies
and people of that sort.

What I would say though is that the codes that have already been gazetted
or approved by Cabinet do include an additional score for people that have
not been empowered in the past. So there is an intention, even in the
ownership dimension, but there are also broader dimensions, that are in
direct empowerment. These will be coming up in parts of the codes, which
will be published soon for comment. There is an intention that the benefits
should reach more broadly into society than they have up to now.


     Contribution of Salt telescope to equity and redress in SA society


144.  Mr R P Z van den Heever (ANC) asked the Minister of Science and
       Technology:
       Whether the Southern African Large Telescope (SALT) in Sutherland,
       which will be inaugurated on 10 November 2005, will make any
       contribution to equity and redress within the South African society;
       if so, what are the relevant details?  N2196E


The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Chair, the answer is:
Yes, the SALT project will make a positive contribution to equity and
redress, although one should stress that this is not its primary purpose.

The Department of Science and Technology is finalising an astronomy
frontier programme. The programme is the result of a broad consultative
process with the research community over the past year and will be
implemented through the National Research Foundation. The astronomy
frontier programme encapsulates a capacity-building programme that will
utilise the technological investment to conduct cutting edge scientific
research. The programme will facilitate the integration of efforts to
produce a gender and race-balanced critical mass of young researchers by
higher education institutions and national facilities.

The objective of the programme is to produce a substantial number of
honours, masters and doctoral graduates to enhance the astronomy research
base and start succession planning. This objective will be supported by the
recruitment of postdoctoral fellows and senior research staff. The SALT
collateral benefits programme implemented by the National Research
Foundation has already had a great impact on educational development.

This programme has established two engineering bursaries to be taken up by
young people from Sutherland. It has also concentrated on benefits for the
Karoo Hoogland municipal area and the development of schools. The programme
pays the salary of a mathematics and science teacher in Sutherland and this
teacher also assists in Williston and Fraserburg.

One of the SALT partners, the University of Lancaster, has hosted 700
teachers to be further developed in mathematics and science teaching.
Another partner, the University of Wisconsin, has established an exchange
programme for teachers, also aimed at improving their competencies in
teaching the gateway subjects.

Most of the partner universities overseas receive and host South African
masters and Ph D students as part of an exchange programme. On the economic
front, science tourism has been encouraged in Sutherland. Tours of the
telescope are conducted during the day and the night. Tourists often stay
in the local guesthouses. Silk screening and tulip farming have been
established as viable economic activities in Williston and Fraserburg.

All of this supports the notion that SALT is indeed an example of an
initiative that exploits the geographical advantage of a place and
translates it into regional and national benefits. Furthermore, SALT, as a
world-class facility, is putting South Africa on the global map of science
and technology.

I hope I have adequately portrayed how SALT makes its contribution, now and
in the future, to equity and redress within the South African society.
Thank you.

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER: Chair, I want to thank the Deputy Minister for the
answer. The opening of the large telescope, or SALT, as it is known in
Sutherland, on 10 November, that is next week, is being described as a
major milestone in South African science and technology history. We believe
that the President himself will officiate at this auspicious occasion on 10
November.

While one celebrates the gigantic steps taken by South Africa in astronomy
and space science, our country is in the throes of development and
reconstruction; and I just want to ask the Minister if he is indeed
satisfied that there are enough linkages between SALT and our equity and
redress programmes to warrant the vast expenses incurred in this project?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Chair, yes, I am quite
convinced that the issues surrounding equity and redress and the extent to
which this project can make a positive contribution is being fully
realised, but we should be very aware of the fact that you can’t expect
everything out of every project. This is not its primary intended purpose.

I would like to recall what President Thabo Mbeki said when he spoke at the
opening of the South African Pavilion at the 2000 World Expo in Hanover. He
talked of the gigantic African eye being built in the Karoo town of
Sutherland as a vast gateway through which we can observe our oldest stars;
learn about the formation of our galaxy and the lives of other worlds so as
to get insights into the future.

So, it’s clear that the spin-offs from this project are considerable, but
within the possibilities that exist and given that a lot of money is being
spent on this project, we are doing our utmost to maximise capacity-
building, research capacity-building, the equity and redress, as was asked
by the hon member. Incidentally, only 34% of the total cost was borne by
South Africa, 60% of the cost came from investors from the partner
organisations. Thank you.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chair, hon Deputy Minister, Sutherland is really a good-
news story. Everything about it is exciting, especially that it’s on
African soil and Africa is regarded as the Cradle of Humankind, so it makes
it doubly and trebly thrilling. But I have been to Sutherland, and one of
the most stirring things about it is to look at the sky through the old
telescope, not the new telescope.

In view of the need to stimulate the children of South Africa to become
more interested in science, one practical experience is worth a thousand
words. It’s a long way out and it will be expensive to take school children
and local tourists to Sutherland. A lot of foreign and international
visitors are sure to go there. Is there some way that you can make sure
that there will be a regular bus tour going from Cape Town to take South
Africans and South African school children to Sutherland and that when they
go they will be able to turn the old telescope on the night sky and not
look on a computer screen at the way the stars are being measured with
information technology? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chair, I think these are
nice points. I heard the Minister of Finance heckling in the background. I
know he went there himself, just a few weeks ago, with his own children. I
think they spent the night there and enjoyed those night stars - that night
sight - and the experience that you enjoyed yourself. But his heckle was
about an observatory that is just down the road from us, and so to some
extent, although the Sutherland observatory offers a unique experience, it
is really designed to facilitate top-level scientific research.

It is true that you don’t watch the skies through a telescope. It’s all
digital. It allows astronomy observers to send their questions and their
observation requests to SALT via the Internet and get their data sent to
them via the Internet as well. So, that is why they are such important
international partners, because they are part of the consortium.
Incidentally, I should say that hopefully this would assist us in the
process of succeeding in our square kilometre ray bid, but that is a
discussion for another time.

We take your point about the possibility of organising bus tours to
Sutherland; and we should look into those things, because clearly we want
as many ordinary South Africans, and especially young South Africans, to be
exposed to this ground-breaking project that we have on our continent, on
this Cradle of Humankind if you like.

It will cost money. I think we do need to limit the numbers of people going
to Sutherland. It can’t be a major tourist feature, you can’t have busloads
of people going there all the time; it may have detrimental environmental
effects. But I think to give sufficient numbers of young, interested
learners the opportunity to go to Sutherland is indeed a challenge, which
we will take up. Thank you.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Madame Chair, technically it is important that Sutherland
and its surrounding environment should remain dark at night. That is why it
was identified as a site. The night sky should remain free from urban
lights; it must remain dark. Already we have heard of golf estates probably
being established in the area, or other developments.

To what extent will government contain urban development of Sutherland
where they invested this R360 million in the telescope? Will Sutherland
remain dark at night?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chair, I want to thank the
hon member for that question; it’s an important one. It came as much of a
surprise to me as it did to many other members to read the newspaper
article yesterday and have the hon member of the IFP bring this matter to
our attention; that there supposedly is a golf course development in the
offing in the Sutherland area.

There are many issues of concern around such golf course developments. But
as far as the impact on the telescope is concerned, yes indeed, it is the
light that is of concern, and so a little while ago I spoke to the project
manager, Dr David Buckley, and he has not been able to get a conclusive
answer from either the municipality or the developers. He found out by
accident on a website, in fact, that there is this proposed development, as
you would have seen in the newspaper. But we will take it up very
vigorously.

For the attention of members, we are considering bringing legislation to
Parliament to give it a legislative framework so as to ensure that we have
the ability to control the environment in terms of light and sound in the
case of radio astronomy and the square kilometre ray, and in terms of light
in the case of the optical telescope. We must ensure a legislative
framework to allow for that. But meanwhile we will clearly engage with the
municipality. We cannot possibly have a golf course development jeopardise
an important project of this kind. Thank you.

   Investment by public investment commissioners of Transnet pension fund
                                    money

123.  Mr P J Groenewald (FF Plus) asked the Minister for Public
      Enterprises:

      Whether public investment commissioners have invested any money from
      the Transnet pension fund since 2000; if so, (a)(i) what amount and
      (ii) where has it been invested and (b) what has been the income of
      each of these investments to date?      N1937E

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, the answer is no, the PIC
does not invest money on behalf of the Transnet Pension Fund.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, my opvolgvraag aan die agb Minister is:
wie hanteer dan die beleggings ten opsigte van die Transnetpensioenfonds?
Die rede waarom ek die vraag gevra het, is dat talle lede van die Transnet-
pensioenfonds my geskakel het en gesê het dat hulle die afgelope drie jaar
minimale verhogings gekry het.
Almal dink inflasie is baie laag, maar die probleem is dat munisipale
tariewe styg, die prys van brandstof styg en senior burgers moet die koste
daarvan betaal terwyl hulle pensioentoelaes per jaar minimaal styg.

My opvolgvraag aan die agb Minister is dus: wie beheer die beleggings van
hierdie fondse, en wat is daardie opbrengste, sodat daar jaarliks
behoorlike uitbetalings en verhogings aan die lede gemaak kan word? Dankie,
Voorsitter. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, my follow-up question to the hon
Minister is: who, then, is handling the investments with regard to the
Transnet Pension Fund? The reason why I am asking the question is that many
members of the Transnet Pension Fund have phoned me to complain about the
fact that they received minimal increases over the past three years.

Everybody believes that inflation is very low, but the problem is that
municipal tariffs increase, the price of petrol increases, and senior
citizens must pay these costs while their pensions are increasing minimally
per annum.

Therefore my follow-up question to the hon Minister is: who is in control
of the investment of these funds, and what are the returns on this, in
order for members to receive proper payments and increases every year?
Thank you, Chairperson.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson . . .
Here, nee man, dis te moeilik! Ek kan nie soveel sê in Afrikaans nie. Nee,
hy “heckle” my, man. [Gelag.][No, man, it is too difficult, I can’t say
that much in Afrikaans. No, he’s heckling me, man.][Laughter.]]

The funds are administered by the Transnet Pension Fund administrators. The
current rules make provision for the increase that’s been given. That is a
fairly complex situation, if we are talking about the secondary benefit
fund, which is a closed fund, and it is a defined benefit fund as opposed
to a defined contribution fund.

And yes, there are some matters in that fund that are of concern to us, and
given the nature of the fund and the deficit that exists in it we have to
be fairly prudent in its management. This is a matter that we are
addressing, but it would not be possible, in the current situation,
circumstances and structure of the fund, to make some dramatic improvements
on it. It would create some fairly severe financial problems for the fund
and for Transnet. Thank you.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister, in Julie verlede jaar het die
Transnet Second Defined Benefit Fund ’n pensioen van ongeveer R217 per
maand uitbetaal as gevolg van die lede se bydrae tot die fonds. As ’n mens
dit vergelyk met die maatskaplike pensioenfonds van so R750 per maand in
die ooreenstemmende tydperk vir lede wat nooit ’n bydrae gemaak het tot die
pensioenfonds nie, wil ek graag die vraag aan u stel: is dit dan nie beter
vir die lede van die Transnetaftreefonds, nadat hulle ook reeds hul mediese
voordele verloor het, dat hulle afstand doen van hul fondse, en in die tou
gaan staan vir die R750 ’n maand pensioen saam met diegene wat nooit ’n
bydrae tot die fonds gemaak het nie? Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, in July last year the
Transnet Second Defined Benefit Fund paid out a pension of approximately
R217 per month as a result of members’ contribution to the fund. If one
compares this to the social pension of approximately R750 per month during
the corresponding period for members who have never made a contribution to
the pension fund, I would like to put the following question to you: Would
it not therefore be better for the members of the Transnet retirement fund,
having already lost their medical benefits, to relinquish their funds and
join the queue for the pension of R750 a month along with those who never
made a contribution to the fund? Thank you.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, Transnet’s second Defined
Benefit Fund is a complex fund. These are pensioners that have been put
into a closed fund. And defined benefit funds are difficult and problematic
worldwide. Hence some years ago we made a shift to the Defined Contribution
Fund, which is certainly a better system for the enterprise and ultimately,
in our view, for the pensioner.

Now as I have just indicated in my response, the actuarial position and the
structure of Defined Secondary Benefit Fund is problematic. There is a
considerable exposure in that fund to Transnet because of the rules of the
fund and exactly how they were costed at the time. This is not a
satisfactory situation. It would be, from our point of view, beneficial if
some of the pensioners in that fund did have an increase, and as I have
indicated, this is a matter we are examining. However, it would be
completely unrealistic and not possible to make some dramatic change to
that pension fund in its current position.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, die agb Minister het goeie verduidelikings
gegee. Hy het gesê daar is probleme, en ek verstaan daar is sekere
beperkinge. My opvolgvraag is: kan die agb Minister vir ons sê wat die
probleme is, en wat hy gaan doen om te poog om daardie probleme op te los?
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, the hon Minister gave a number of good
explanations. He said there were problems, and I realise that there are
certain limitations. My follow-up question is this: Can the hon Minister
tell us what these problems are, and how he is going to try to solve them?]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, maybe I should just
explain a bit more carefully what this fund is. It is what is called a
“closed fund”. So it is a fund that pays out pensions to a pool of
pensioners that are in that fund. Accordingly, originally it was endowed
with certain bonds from government, etc, that gave it a base from which to
invest and meet its obligations. So that is what it does.

Now to change that structure is a massive exercise. It is a matter that is
a relatively complex one. It is a matter that we are discussing with
Transnet, including the Treasury. But in its present form we cannot just
pump masses of amounts or new assets into it in order to increase its
income flow and in order to pay higher pensions.

This, I am afraid, is a legacy problem; a specific type of fund that
exists, and we clearly would like over time to phase it out. We are
examining, with Transnet trustees and with the Ministry of Finance, whether
there is a manner in which this could be managed in a slightly better way.

Let me not create any expectations that this is a simple problem that we’ll
solve like that. But I must say that we are all sympathetic to the
relatively low pensions that exist for many of the pensioners there.

I should also just point out that it is possible for a pensioner of that
age to also attempt to get a social pension. So that option is open. They
should take that option and I’m sure they do take it. This is a form of top-
up, by and large, but it’s not a situation that we would have desired
originally as the most favourable option.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M J ELLIS: I have two, Mr Chairman, thank you.

First of all, I move:

  That this House –

  (1) expresses concern at the severity of the fires that are devastating
        parts of the Western Cape;


  (2) commends the fire services and others who are fighting the fires in
        very difficult circumstances; and

      (3)   expresses its sympathies to the families of those who have lost
        their lives in the fires, as well as those have lost their homes and
        belongings, and calls on everyone to do everything possible to
        reduce the risk of fires.


Secondly, if I may continue, I hereby move:

  That this House –

  (1) congratulates Mr Sidney Chauke, an 84-year-old Johannesburg man who
        wrote his first matric examination yesterday. His achievements are a
        testimony to his perseverance, commitment and endurance and it sets
        a very good example to young learners about the value of education;


  (2) commends Chauke for overcoming the disadvantages which prevented him
        from completing his education at a much younger age and for
        believing that one is never too old to achieve one’s goals. I thank
        you.


  [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move the Motion on the Order
Paper in the name of the Chief Whip, as follows:

  That the House, in accordance with section 193 (5)  of  the  Constitution,
  appoints an ad hoc committee to nominate persons to fill vacancies on  the
  Commission for Gender Equality, the committee –
  (1) to consist of 13 members in the following proportions: ANC 8; DA 2;
        IFP 1 and other parties 2;


     2) to exercise those powers in Rule 138 that may assist it in carrying
        out its task; and


  (3) to report to the House by no later than 15 February 2006.

Agreed to.


                                NURSING BILL


                  (Decision of Question on Second Reading)

There was no debate.

Question Put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 218: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Asiya, S E; Baloyi, M
   R; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu
   , M J; Bhengu, P; Bici, J; Bloem, D V; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha, N
   G W; Burgess, C V; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
   Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S
   C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M;
   Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlhamini, B W; Dodovu, T S; Erwin, A; Fihla, N
   B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E;
   Gerber, P A; Godi, N T; Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C H F;
   Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E;
   Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P; Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ;
   Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U;
   Kasienyane, O R; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M;
   Khumalo, M S; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Kota, Z A; Landers, L T;
   Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Likotsi, M T; Lishivha, T E;
   Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N; Mabena, D C; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madella, A F;
   Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B;
   Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C;
   Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S;
   Manuel, T A; Mars, I; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo, R J;
   Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H;
   Matsemela, M L; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M;
   Mayatula, S M; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H
   C; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J;
   Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mohamed, I J;
   Mohlaloga, M R; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
   Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, L N; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D;
   Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E;
   Mzondeki, M J G; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M;
   Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J;
   Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkabinde, N
   C; Nkem-Abonta, E; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B;
   Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Oliphant, G G; Pahad, A G H; Pandor, G N M;
   Phadagi, M G; Phala, M J; Phungula, J P; Rabinowitz, R; Rajbally, S ;
   Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M; Roopnarain, U;
   Rwexana, S P; Schneemann, G D; Schippers, J; Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A;
   Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C C; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P;
   Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S ; Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau, S N; Sigcau , Sylvia
   N; Sikakane, M R; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith , V
   G; Solo, B M; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E; Thomson,
   B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P;
   Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, A;
   Vos, S C; Wang, Y; Zikalala, C N; Zita, L; Zondi, K M; Zulu, N E.


   NOES - 38: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Delport, J T; Ditshetelo, P H K;
   Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M;
   Greyling, L W; Jankielsohn, R; Joubert, L K; Kalyan, S V; King, R J;
   Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T D; Lowe, C M; Masango, S J;
   Mfundisi, I S; Minnie, K J; Morgan , G R; Nel, A H; Nzimande, L P M;
   Opperman, S E; Pule, B E; Rabie, P J; Semple, J A; Simmons, S; Smuts, M;
   Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W;
   Van der Walt, D; Weber, H.


   ABSTAIN - 2: Ngema, M V; Woods, G G.


Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS -OVERSIGHT
 VISIT TO IMMIGRATION OFFICE, CAPE TOWN INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT AND CAPE TOWN
    HARBOUR;OVERSIGHT VISIT TO DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS, EASTERN CAPE;
    NATIONAL CONFERENCE AGAINST CHILD PORNOGRAPHY HELD IN PORT ELIZABETH,
    EASTERN CAPE; OVERSIGHT VISIT TO INDEPENDENT ELECTORAL COMMISSION AND
                    GOVERNMENT PRINTING WORKS IN TSHWANE

Mr H P CHAUKE: Thank you very much, Chairperson, for giving us this
opportunity to highlight some of the work that the Portfolio Committee on
Home Affairs has been engaging on. Let me firstly outline that from the
beginning of this year, the portfolio committee embarked on a number of
oversight working visits around the country.

The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs embarked on a number of programmes
around the monitoring of Home Affairs offices within the country. Not only
did we look at the work of the department, but we also looked at areas like
entities, such as the Film and Publication Board; we did oversight on the
IEC, and we did oversight on the Government Printing Works.

The problem is that the reports we are sitting with today are the result of
work that was done by June and some time in May this year. Most of the
issues that have been identified in the report as part of the
recommendations and problem areas that we have identified have been
addressed by the department.

Our only task today is to note some of the issues that have been
highlighted. I think it will be necessary that Parliament should begin to
look at a system whereby once the committee has adopted the report, it
should immediately be tabled before Parliament and certain recommendations
communicated to the relevant Ministers for attention, so that there is
consistency with regard to our oversight work.

One of the problems that was reported in last week’s newspapers by one of
the learned journalists in one of the local newspapers is that portfolio
committees are rubber stamps of Ministers and they ask sweet questions. I
think it is not correct that we should be dictated to by journalists and
newspapers as to how we should conduct our work. The four reports that are
before Parliament today  . . . [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): Order, hon Chauke! Hon members,
the noise levels are far too high. Could I please ask hon members to take
their seats? Please proceed, hon member.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Thank you very much for your protection, Chairperson. The
four reports that have been tabled today are part of the ongoing work of
the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, and we still have an extra seven
reports that still have to go through this House. It is going to be up to
the programming committee and Parliament to make sure that once we have
finalised those reports they are processed and recommendations are taken
very seriously.

This will clearly demonstrate the work that is done by portfolio
committees, not only when we put questions to Ministers, but when we do our
oversight work around the country, meeting with officials, checking name
tags, checking the cleanliness of the offices, and generally checking
service delivery which is part of the Batho Pele programme of action.

One of the areas that I want to highlight is the issue of migration. As
part of the report on our visit to the Cape Town International Airport, we
identified a number of problems; and because of the launch of the new
immigration branch, the department has immediately responded to and has
started to deal with some of these problems.

These problems cut across a wide area; not only around the Western Cape at
the Cape Town International Airport, but even at the Johannesburg
International Airport we still have the same problems.

One of the reports that are before us today is on the conference that was
held on child pornography in the Eastern Cape in Port Elizabeth somewhere
in June 2005. I just want to highlight a few areas that have been
identified as part of our programme of action and Parliament should
definitely immediately focus on some of these issues.

The general problem of pornography is that our children are exposed to some
of these acts of pornography that are deliberately distributed all over, on
television and in the media. This really corrupts our children and exposes
them to some of these areas. One of the recommendations at the conference
was that we should, as Parliament, start a national debate on child
pornography and child trafficking, which would then filter through, not
only to the national level, but also to the provincial level.
Municipalities should really consider taking on some of these campaigns.

The second area is on the role of these service providers, and that the
portfolio committee has decided, as part of our programme, to invite these
role-players who are going to appear before the portfolio committee on 15
November, to come together and engage on the issues of pornography and see
how best we can deal with these problems.

Last time when I raised the issue of the shop next door, most members were
not happy, especially from the DA side. They were not happy that we are now
leaving what we are supposed to be doing and we are dealing with issues
that do not concern us. I just want to remind members that part of . . .
[Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: . . . . you are not doing what you are supposed to be
doing, that’s what you have been doing for 10 years.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Well, for 10 years, Gibson, I will tell you that the problem
has been that the opposition party did not understand the problems that we
were raising. For 10 years this Department of Home Affairs did not have
senior management, Gibson. It is only now, with the current Minister, and
you have been shouting every day when you get to the podium that this
department does not have senior management. There is a need for us to
employ these people so that they are the ones who must drive this
programme.

Let me tell you about the behaviour of the DA. The behaviour of the DA was:
Let us support the IFP as much as possible the IFP because we want to get
together with them as an alliance. For the past 10 years they have been
doing that. They did not look at the problems faced by Home Affairs.

It is only today that the DA agrees with us. In fact, the member of the DA
who is serving in the portfolio committee - I am not saying you must start
to harass her - understands these issues more than you, hon Gibson. She
understands that Home Affairs is faced with problems, more than you,
because you are just trying to exercise those rights of winning over the
IFP to work with you, and all of that.

I am saying to you today that Home Affairs is changing and it is changing
every day. The directors that we have employed have started to implement
programmes that begin to address service delivery, because the biggest
problem in the Department of Home Affairs has been service delivery. We
have seen a number of programmes. [Interjections.]

What’s wrong with Billy Masetla? No, no, you see, you are just being out of
order. These things are part of the problems that we are dealing with
today; Nkosi Zulu will tell you that he had to run away from the portfolio
committee because we were dealing directly with the problems that are
facing this department.

If you go to KwaZulu-Natal you will find that there is no office of Home
Affairs that this portfolio committee did not visit in this country. We
have been to every single province, every single Home Affairs office and we
know the problems.

These things are not new, and we have been harping on these problems for 10
years, and nobody was listening. It is only now that there are people who
are very serious about changing the Department of Home Affairs. I am just
dealing with the reports of the findings of the Portfolio Committee. I
don’t know why there is such a noise now, because you are still going to do
that. The seventh report is still going to come and you are going to do the
same.

One of the areas that we identified was the problem with regard to
processing of applications for asylum seekers. That is a general problem. A
month ago the portfolio committee initiated the programme where we
interacted directly with refugees in the country. For the first time in any
parliament in the world we invited more than 500 refugees to come to
Parliament and interact directly with members of Parliament. The DA and the
IFP played their role.

We have tried our level best to make sure that the services that we must
provide as Home Affairs are reaching the very same people that we are
trying to target. On that note I would like to say that with these reports
- as old as they may be - and the issues that are raised here, as I have
said earlier, the Minister, together with the DG and the senior leadership
in the department are sort of beginning to address this problem.

On that note, we are not going to recommend anything much. We are only here
to say that the issue of pornography needs to be addressed. Let me share
with members the response from the gentleman who used to run the shop
outside Parliament – the shop is closed because of our intervention - he
addresses me as Reverend Chauke. He said, “We hereby wish to inform you
that the shop will close as from 28 . . . ”

It then clearly shows you that, without this portfolio committee . . .
because this is what these guys from the DA want us to do. They want us to
keep quiet and corrupt our society as much as we can, so that tomorrow they
can stand up and say, “Look at the ANC-led government. Look at what they
are doing to society. There is no morality, there is pornography and there
are all of these things”. That is why we are dealing with those issues.

We are very clear, and we know where we are going. Gradually we are going
to change this Department of Home Affairs. On that note, I want the House
to note this report, and maybe in the next few days I will come with a
motion in the House to request the House to debate the issues of child
pornography and child trafficking.

I want to thank members of the portfolio committee for the role that they
have played. They were not partisan and were very critical on issues we
have dealt with in the department. On that note, I thank them very much and
I wish them well, so that next year we will be coming with a very tight
programme again in making sure that service delivery is still continuing
and reaching out to most of our people. Thank you very much, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chairperson, as a member of the Portfolio Committee on Home
Affairs, I’m often phoned by members of the public who want to air their
frustrations at delays or queues when they visit their local Home Affairs
offices. So, when the programme for our committee this year centred on
oversight visits, I was really pleased, as that would give us a chance to
experience firsthand what the reality on the ground is.

The common complaints at every Home Affairs office that we visited centred
around staff shortages and lack of up-to-date computers, resulting in long
queues and high levels of frustration. No matter where in the country an
application is made, it has to be sent to Pretoria for processing and
finalisation. Applications can take up to three months, if you are lucky,
for something as simple as an unabridged birth certificate.

If every Home Affairs office was properly computerised and linked to the
mainframe in Pretoria, the waiting and processing time would be vastly
reduced to a matter of days. It’s unbelievable that in these days of
information technology that the department still has to catch up.

The staff shortages at most Home Affairs offices are impacting drastically
on service delivery, with the Immigration Unit being most affected. Of
course, four directors-generals in a relatively short space of time have
not helped the cause.

The portfolio committee visited the IEC in June to determine the state of
preparedness for the upcoming local government elections; the briefing was
informative. Given that a definite date for the elections has not been set,
their preparatory work for an unknown deadline is very good. It is
unfortunate that the Minister of Provincial and Local Government Affairs
and President Mbeki have failed to proclaim the election date.

One just cannot understand the secrecy; we all know that it has to happen.
Why can’t they be mature enough to proclaim the date openly so that all
political parties can get on with the job at hand of electioneering instead
of playing childish games – why should the people be the last to know?

I would like to turn my attention to the Government Printing Works. To say
that this entity is a disaster, is putting it mildly. The GPW has had
several qualified audits and a disclaimer to boot last year. Several state
departments owe them large amounts of money, and the GPW does not seem
overanxious to collect its deals.

The site visit was depressing to say the least. This facility is housed in
an old prison and while the spirit and commitment of the staff is beyond
question, the conditions they work under are appalling.

I also wish to dwell on the issue of security and ID documents. In recent
months thousands of fraudulent documents have surfaced both in South Africa
and abroad, and I think the GPW should answer for that. We found it quite
interesting that while IDs and other official documents reflect South
Africa’s new coat of arms, our passports carry the old apartheid coat of
arms. It is my considered opinion that this is a poor reflection on our
democracy and the Minister should remedy this immediately.

The chaos at the refugee reception centres is prevalent throughout the
other country and the Department of Home Affairs has to come up with a more
humane way of handling the crisis that exists presently.

The launch of the National Immigration Branch was rushed and ill-
considered; flashy new cars and new uniforms were on show at the launch but
the new cars are not in place because a particular shade of burgundy paint
is unavailable, and the new uniforms are not being issued because the blue
is not available.

Judging from the department’s response it would appear that colour coding
is far more important than actual service delivery. The Minister needs to
be more serious about the so-called “turnaround strategy” she constantly
refers to. It is unfortunate that we are discussing so many reports in one
slot as the allocated time is too short to do justice to all of them.

However, in conclusion, I wish to acknowledge the collegiality of my
colleagues on these trips, which are quite strenuous and arduous, but
nevertheless quite interesting. Thank you.

Mrs I MARS: Hon Chairperson, colleagues, the number and scope of reports
before this House today are indicative of the seriousness with which the
committee of Home Affairs views its oversight responsibilities. In fact,
oversight has constituted the major part of these committees’ registered
activities and have led to an in-depth interrogation at the Government
Printing Works, immigration services at ports of entry and the IEC and Home
Affairs offices. Most of the visits were unannounced.

On these visits the committee not only interacted with management and
staff, but in the instance of Home Affairs, also with the public. Issues
raised by staff were submitted to senior officials for comment and follow-
up meetings. It was pleasing to note the responses from both immigration
services and Home Affairs at Cape Town’s port of entry. It doesn’t solve
the problem, but at least our visits provoked action.

The issues identified here are the same as other Home Affairs and
immigration service structures, which are first and foremost the shortage
of staff, which in turn leads to heavy loads of extra shifts and poor
support for staff, such as transportation; the lack of adequate technical
support, ie computers and cameras. Some staff are still serving in a
temporary capacity and the salaries currently paid appear to be very low.

More communication between management and staff, including regular
meetings, needs to be considered and implemented. Some of the other minuted
negative observations could easily be remedied in the medium term if more
staff becomes available. And, I am talking here about the issues raised
like cleanliness and courtesy as well.

One issue of great concern is that many staff members do not wear their
name tags. Home Affairs needs to compel its staff to wear them at all times
so that the public can identify them; so that we can be serious about
identifying those members of the Department of Home Affairs who are giving
good and sterling service, and those who are constantly rude and not very
helpful.

The issue of asylum seekers and their difficulties can also be reduced to
inadequate staffing and lack of equipment. Currently PE can only handle 20
applications a day, leading to enormous backlogs leaving applicants to
queue and wait for days before being assisted.

We ascertained from the IEC if sufficient funds for the forthcoming
elections were available, but there were problems with our outreach
programmes in poor and rural areas.

The IFP considers voter education an important issue, and asks that more
resources be allocated. In supporting the recommendations made . . . [Time
expired.]

Sorry, the IFP wishes to reiterate our concern that Home Affairs continues
to be grossly underfunded. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP welcomes the resolutions taken at the
National Conference Against Child Pornography in June, to eradicate the
scourge of child pornography in all its manifestations. We are encouraged
by the fact that the link between child pornography and adult pornography
was acknowledged at this conference.

We as the ACDP have consistently objected to the legalisation of adult
pornography, and have repeatedly highlighted the use of adult pornography
in enticing and forcing children into child pornography activities. We have
also pointed out that many sex offenders have been found to be in
possession of pornography. But, it is not enough to simply hold a
conference and acknowledge the link between child and adult pornography.

How many more despicable acts of sexual violence against children must take
place before antipornography legislation is passed in this country. The
report on the conference states that South Africa has become a dumping
ground for the world’s pornography. It should therefore come as no surprise
that child rape is so prevalent in our country.

The ACDP has always maintained that “pornography is the theory and rape is
the practice”. And, I would challenge hon Chauke – let’s look at this and
see whether we can’t pass some antipornography legislation. I thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, hon Members, because of time constraints, I
will only concentrate on one item – the visit to Port Elizabeth. It came to
light that, as we went to those offices, there was this jostling and
pushing around by the refugees, and that is a real cause for concern.

One would notice that this jostling was caused by the said quotas, where
officials have to interview a certain number - that is 20 per day. And, we
only hope that with the recommendations made by the committee that they
should at least interview 40 refugees per day - that it would serve as a
minimum – they could still do much better.

We feel that there is a need that this Batho Pele ethic should not be seen
to be spoken of, but should be seen to be done at all times. We only hope
that without using this much as blackmail, the question of the African Peer
Review Mechanism will come into the picture here where people, even civil
society, will come to judge and express their views on how the government
officials present their work; on how they perform their duties and deliver
services.

And, it is very, very unfortunate that in these days we still have people
even in high places that seem to have no conscience when it comes to child
pornography. [Time expired.] I thank you.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the PAC wishes to accept the report of the
committee as tabled in this House. The oversight duty of members of
Parliament is a good strategy to monitor and observe the implementation of
our legislation in the country. This department is plagued with many
challenges ranging from the absorption of asylum and job seekers to helping
investors, travellers and students at our respective institutions of
learning.

In Port Elizabeth the department has a lack of staff, whilst the level of
unemployment in the country is a high, especially amongst unemployed
professionals. There is a lack of infrastructure in some areas, such as
Humansdorp. The residents are forced to travel more than 160km to Port
Elizabeth to acquire certain services of the department. To close this gap,
the department uses mobile units in rural areas. Nationally, this is not
different; deep, rural area communities struggle to register the births and
deaths of their loved ones, or apply for identity documents or passports.
Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the findings in the task team’s report
regarding immigration at Cape Town Harbour and Cape Town International
Airport was shocking. The MF requests that the recommendations made in this
respect be taken seriously, so as to correct the loopholes regarding staff
and resources. Once addressed, we are certain that immigration at these
places will be managed more efficiently and effectively.

The immigration of persons to and from our ports needs to be managed
properly, if we note the mismanagement in our population and economy. While
we need to take cognisance, especially of illegal immigration, we open our
doors to those seeking political asylum.

From the reports of the Eastern Cape, it is appalling that political asylum
seekers are addressed in that fashion. The death threats are of great
concern and the MF calls for immediate recommendations to be made to
alleviate this and, in fact, for a total revamp to Home Affairs procedures
and management to ensure greater fulfilment of tasks and efficiency of the
system.

The MF denounces all forms of child pornography and fully supports the
national conference against this, held from 1 to 3 June. The outcome
appears to be promising and the skills extended needs to be expanded. Child
trafficking will be stopped and all avenues to do so will be taken.

Lastly, the report regarding the IEC is noted with all seriousness; noting
the important role this body plays in our democracy for our people and the
need for its effective management. The MF supports that the recommendations
made in all reports and suggests that this be instituted. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Mr M SWART: Chairperson, President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe has governed
his country to the brink of bankruptcy. Small wonder, then, that the South
African embassy in Harare issues more than 1 000 visas daily to Zimbabweans
to visit South Africa. They come to South Africa for economic reasons, and
not for refugee status.

The Refugee Act does not allow refugee status for economic reasons. The
Department of Home Affairs does not have a facility at the border post to
determine whether a person qualifies for refugee status or not. Once the
asylum seeker reaches our borders, he or she is then given travel documents
and told to go to the nearest refugee station, which is in Johannesburg, or
somewhere around there, and we never hear of or see that refugee again.

The thousands of people coming into South Africa are finding jobs to the
detriment of the unemployed people of South Africa, and we need to do
something about this. We also need to make sure that there is a facility at
the border posts where the status of refugees can actually be determined
and where they can be held until such time as their refugee status has been
determined.

I therefore call on the government to actually make sure that there is such
a refugee status facility and a place where these people can be held. A
large proportion of the costs can be carried by the UNHCR, and the DA calls
on the government to please make sure that these facilities are made
available as soon as possible. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M P SIBANDE: Chairperson, hon members . . .

 . . . liqinisile elinye lamaqembu omculo womdabu, i-Ladysmith Black
Mambazo, ngomucu wayo ongasoze wabuna othi: “Uhleka aze aqethuke emizini
yabanye abantu kodwa uma efika kowakhe agqunqe abe mnyama.” [Uhleko.] Kule
Ndlu yeSishayamthetho kunesigeqana samabhoxongwana okuthi uma kunezinselelo
okufanele sibhekane nazo njengesizwe esisodwa, sona sigqunqe sibe mnyama
kuhle kwesimo sezulu sibafazi bedube inyama. [Uhleko.] Kodwa uma befika
kwamanye amazwe noma kukhulunywa ngamanye amazwe afana noZimbabwe, bahleka
baze baqethuke kuze kuvele izinyo lomhlathi. [Uhleko.]

Kubona kubukeka sengathi inhlangano ye-ANC okuyiyona kuphela okufanele
ilethe izinguquko. Le misheshelengwana iyakhohlwa ukuthi nayo ingamalungu
esishayamthetho esikusona. Ngalokho-ke, kufanele ukuthi zonke izinselelo
eziqondene noMnyango wezaseKhaya kube umthwalo wethu sonke. Ngingazi-ke
ukuthi labo bantu abaphila ngokugxeka yonke intuthuko eyenziwa uKhongolose
ngabe bayazi yini ukuthi ngalezi zenzo zabo bajivaza isithunzi sezwe
lakithi. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[ . . . that which is said by the Afropop group Ladysmith Black Mambazo in
its classic hit is true, namely: “He is always willing and happy to share
other people’s things but when it comes to his own he frowns and sees red.”
[Laughter.] In this House there is a sinister syndicate that does not want
to co-operate with us when we are faced with challenges as a nation;
instead they see red. [Laughter.] But when they go to other countries, or
when mention is made of other countries like Zimbabwe, they become so happy
that they laugh and one can even see their wisdom teeth. [Laughter.]

To these people it looks like the ANC is the only party that should bring
about change. This gang even forget that they, too, are members of this
very House. Therefore we all should shoulder all challenges faced by the
Department of Home Affairs. I am not too sure if these people are aware
that by criticising the development brought about by the ANC they are
painting a bad picture of our country.]

With regard to the oversight visit to Tshwane, I will start with the
Independent Electoral Commission, the IEC. I’d like to commend the IEC on
the marvellous job it is doing locally and internationally in terms of
South Africa as the youngest democracy. Today the IEC, under the leadership
of Dr Bam, is among the very important or outstanding institutions in the
world that represent the country locally and internationally.

The commission has already been involved in countries such as Namibia,
Lesotho, the DRC, etc, and is in a partnership with the African Union.

Dokotela Bam ngithi kuwe, “Wathinta abafazi uthinta imbokodo”. [Ihlombe.]
[Doctor Bam, I say to you, “You strike a woman, you strike a rock”.
[Applause.]]

With regard to the visit to the Department of Home Affairs in Tshwane, at
the Department of Home Affairs you cannot distinguish between staff members
from the people who come in for service. Therefore I would like to appeal
to all staff members to wear nametags at all times during working hours.

As far as the oversight visit to Cape Town is concerned, I will start with
the immigration office. The visit was a follow-up to the visit of 22
February 2005. The issues, which prompted the follow-up, were the
conditions of service and the remuneration of immigration staff.

With regard to key political considerations, the department is looking into
declaring the work of immigration officials as an essential service.
Secondly, the level of contract staff employed is extremely high, including
the head of the immigration office. Regarding the oversight visit to Cape
Town Harbour, one of the key challenges is a massive shortage of staff. For
example, it was discovered that there is only one person on duty at night.
There are no computers to process work and there is no control over fishing
yards and fishing vessels. This is a security risk.

With regard to key recommendations, it is recommended that a port terminal
be built at the harbour; that there be training in intelligence matters to
improve security; that there be new regulations to control the movement of
vessels; and, lastly, that there be a formal meeting with harbour
officials.

Kuwe Ngqongqoshe wezaseKhaya, umama uNosiwe Mapisa-Nqakula, noma engekho
nje, ngithi, “Wathinta abafazi wathinta imbokodo.” Ibizo lakho lizohlala
lisemlonyeni wesitjhaba nasesizukulwaneni esizako, ngombana ungumma.
Uqakatheke khulu siyazikhakhazisa ngawe, ube nepilo ehle khulu gadesi uZimu
akutjhudubaze. [To the Minister of Home Affairs, Madam Nosiviwe Mapisa-
Nqakula, even though she is not here, I say, “You strike a woman, you
strike a rock”. Your name will always be recognised by the nation and the
coming generations, because you are a woman. You are very important and we
are proud of you; have a happy life and God bless you.]
I would like to thank the Minister for her urgent response to most of the
above-mentioned challenges. It is a fact that the launching of the
immigration branch was to address the key challenges we have identified
during our oversight visits.

I’d also like to thank the deputy directors-general for having come up with
programmes that harnessed the work that impacted positively on service
delivery. For the past 10 years the department has not had senior managers
at national level. Regarding the speedy appointment of these directors, our
understanding was that the department could not run effectively without
these people.

Ngizwe umama u-Kalyan ekhala ngokuthi uMongameli akamemezeli usuku
lokhetho. Angazi noma ucabanga ukuthi ngokumemezela usuku lokhetho abantu
bazojika bavotele inhlangano yakhe i-DA. Ngeke kwenzeke lokho. Ngaphambi
kokuba ngiphothule inkulumo yami ngizothanda futhi ukugcizelela ukuthi
umphakathi mawuphume ngothi lwawo uyobhalisela ukhetha lomasipala ezigodini
ohlala kuzona. Emva kwalokho bese bekhumbuza onke amaqembu aphikisayo
ukuthi i-ANC iyona kuphela inkunzi ekhonyayo. Kulolu khetho oluzayo i-ANC
izophumelela ngamalengiso. Bona bazohamba baze babambe utalagu. Ngiyabonga.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[I heard Madam Kalyan complaining that the President was announcing the
election date. I am not too sure whether she thinks that as a result of the
election date being announced early, people would vote for her party, the
DA. That will never happen. In conclusion I wish to ask the public to go
out in numbers and register for the local government elections in their
districts. Thereafter people will remind the opposition parties that there
is one reigning political king in South Africa, and it is the ANC. The ANC
will win this election comfortably. Those in the opposition will forever be
wanting. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move:

  That the reports be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports of Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs accordingly noted.

The House adjourned at 17:50.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    Bills passed by National Assembly on 2 November 2005 and transmitted
    for concurrence:


             i) Nursing Bill [B 26B – 2005 (Reprint)] (National Assembly –
                sec 75).


                The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Social
                Services.


2.    Membership of Committees

    (1)    The following changes  have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
         Standing Committees, viz:


         Public Accounts:
      Appointed: Bekker, Mr H J; Vezi, Mr T E (Alt)



COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly



1.    Report on gazetting of draft Financial Management of Parliament Bill,
    dated 2 November 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Finance wishes to report to the House, in
    accordance with Assembly Rules, that it has published the draft
    Financial Management of Parliament Bill in the Government Gazette for
    public comment on 28 October 2005.

   2.  Interim  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Housing  on  the
      Prevention of Illegal Eviction from and Unlawful Occupation  of  Land
      Amendment Bill [B 11 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec  75),  dated  2
      November 2005:


    The Portfolio Committee on Housing, having considered  the  subject  of
    the Prevention of Illegal Eviction from and Unlawful Occupation of Land
    Amendment Bill [B 11 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred  to
    it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75  Bill,
    begs to report the status of the Bill as follows:

     1.     That in its meeting held  on  11  October  2005,  the  Portfolio
         Committee on Housing agreed that the  Bill  be  held  in  abeyance
         until early next year (2006), pending further consultations on the
         Bill by the Department.


     2.     That the decision was informed by  the  Committee’s  observation
        that more time was needed for  consultations  with  other  relevant
        stakeholders, including other government departments and NGOs,  and
        that the Bill needs to be aligned  with  other  related  pieces  of
        legislation; and the Portfolio Committee has  thus  instructed  the
        Departmental drafters to take such matters on board.


     3.     To this end, the Department of Housing requested  more  time  to
        deal with the  matters  the  Portfolio  Committee  has  raised,  as
        highlighted in  this  report,  to  which  the  Portfolio  Committee
        agrees.


    A plan of action on the Bill will be carried out in the Committee
    Programme for 2006.


