---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 17 January 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-01-17
---

MONDAY, 17 JANUARY 2005
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Honourable Chief Justice of South Africa, Justice A Chaskalson, took
the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of silence for prayers
or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


      ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES


The Chief Justice announced the appointment of Mr Z A Dingani as Returning
Officer, and as Assistant Returning Officers, Ms L L Matyolo, Mr B V L
Momoti, Ms J Niekerk and Mr B N Nonyane.

The Chief Justice reminded members that nominations had to be submitted in
the prescribed form and duly seconded.

The Chief Justice informed members that in terms of item 4 Part A of
Schedule 3 to the Constitution no debate would be allowed.

The Chief Justice called for nominations.

Mr Victor Vusumuzi Zibuthe Windvoël, seconded by Ms Elizabeth Dipuo Peters,
nominated Mr Mninwa Johannes Mahlangu for election as Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces.

The Returning Officer reported to the Chief Justice that the nomination
paper had been properly completed.

There being no further nominations, the Chief Justice declared Mr Mninwa
Johannes Mahlangu properly elected as Chairperson of the NCOP.

The PREMIER OF THE NORTH WEST (Ms E Molewa):  Hon Chief Justice, hon
members, I rise to speak on behalf of the ANC, and I suppose that I will
also be speaking on behalf of all the members present here. I do not think
they will oppose that in support of the nomination of hon M J Mahlangu as
our new Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces.

I really do so with great pride, but before I do so, I would like to begin
by paying tribute to the former Chairperson of this House, the late hon
Joyce Kgoali, while in the same vein I would like to formally convey our
condolences to her family and all those who knew her, all those of us who
worked with her. We know that she led this House with great dignity and
ability. I now think, hon members, that it is time that we really reflect
on our new Chairperson. We can also be thankful, once again, that the ANC,
as the ruling party, and all of us as members here today, have agreed and
resolved yet again to elect a very capable person to lead this august House
as a Chairperson. He is a very capable person; a leader indeed, whom we
know has having great and vast experience.

Hon M J Mahlangu is today, hon members, the new Chairperson of the NCOP. He
has been elected here today at this sitting of the NCOP. Mr Mahlangu has
been the permanent Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP since joining the NCOP in
2002, when he came from the National Assembly, where he had served since
1994. He was one of the first public representatives to join the first
South African democratic Parliament in 1994 and he represented the ANC
there.

After the 1999 elections he served as Chairperson of Committees in the
National Assembly, and from 1994 to 2002 he was a member of a number of
committees in the National Assembly, and these include the Parliamentary
Oversight and Accountability Committee, the Constitutional Committee and
the Joint Rules Committee on Budget Committees.

He also co-chaired Parliament’s Internal Arrangements Committee. He was
also actively involved in the negotiations during the transitional period
and in the period leading up to the adoption of the Constitution. Amongst
other things, he chaired the core group of the theme committee of the
Constitutional Assembly, and the theme committee on structures of
government.

May I also say that I personally know that he served us very well, because
I worked with him in that theme committee. He really was very, very good –
a leader.

We are very blessed to have a leader of this nature. We know that the
former Chairperson of this House would have loved to see this House being
actively involved, all of us being amongst the people out there, and we are
very confident that hon M J Mahlangu will lead us into those communities to
do our work as we know that we have to continue to do our work of fighting
poverty, eradicating poverty, fighting underdevelopment and ensuring that
jobs are created. Our people deserve a good life.

We have seen him to be highly exemplary in the past and we are very
confident that this House will continue to redefine its place. We belong
amongst the people as representatives of the people.

So, thank you very much. I think that we can, once again, be thankful that
he has been elected. We, as the ANC, support his election. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon members, this comes as somewhat of a surprise, as I
thought it would be the hon Watson performing this role, but I would like,
on behalf of the DA, to convey our congratulations to hon Mahlangu. We have
experienced his chairmanship already, and he has acquitted himself well.

We convey to you our good wishes. May you be blessed in your role. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Hon Chief Justice, hon Premiers present and hon members of
this House, I also want to join my colleagues who have spoken earlier in
congratulating the hon Mr Mahlangu on his election as the Chairperson of
the NCOP. We have no doubt that he will be able to lead this House as best
he can. It would appear that henceforth this House is going to venture into
new terrains in terms of what the President has said recently, but we have
no doubt that Mr Mahlangu will be able to lead this House to the best of
what we intend achieving.

With these few words I would like to congratulate Mr Mahlangu and his party
for electing a man of his calibre. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K SINCLAIR:  Hon Chief Justice, on behalf of the NNP it is indeed a
privilege and honour to stand here on this very first sitting of this
House. The difficult part of acknowledging the elected chairperson is that
you can’t gossip about him because he understands all official languages of
our country. [Laughter.] So, in doing that I want to do it in Afrikaans,
and say:

Agb mnr Mahlangu, namens die NNP wil ons ons volle ondersteuning vir u gee
op die pad waarop u die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies gaan lei. Ons is
verheug oor u verkiesing en as vennoot van die ANC wil ons vir u baie
sterkte toewens. Ons weet en vertrou dat die pad waarop u ons gaan lei in
hierdie jaar voorspoedig sal wees. Dit sal wees om ons baie edel visie,
Visie 2009, uit te voer, en die NNP sal dit met u deel. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Hon Mr Mahlangu, on behalf of the NNP we would like to give you our full
support on the road along which you are going to lead the National Council
of Provinces. We are delighted with your election, and as partner of the
ANC we wish you all the best. We know and trust that the road along which
you are going to lead us will be prosperous this year. It would be to give
effect to our very noble vision, Vision 2009, and the NNP will share it
with you. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms A N D QIKANI:  Hon Chief Justice … Baba Mahlangu, I-UDM
iyakucongratulata kakhulu ikubonile ezeDeputy Chairperson indlela
obusebenza ngayo. Ithi ithatha apho umam’uKgoali ayeke khona. Ithi uqine
womelele. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [Mr Mahlangu, the UDM congratulates you
heartily and have observed the way you worked as the Deputy Chairperson of
the NCOP. We say pick up where the late Ms Kgoali left off. Be strong.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

The CHIEF JUSTICE:  those are the comments on behalf of the parties
represented in this honourable House and it is time now for me to vacate
the Chair and to request the hon the Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces to assume the Chair of this House. [Applause.]

The Usher conducted the Chairperson to the Chair and placed the Black Rod
in position at the Chair.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP:  We have already prayed, we can sit down.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL:  Chairperson, I plead for your indulgence
because there has been consultation with all the other parties with regard
to the item we have just passed in terms of whether they would like to say
a word of congratulation to you. Up to the minute I came into this House my
office hadn’t received any indication from parties like the ID and IFP, but
I have since been informed that they would also like to say a word or two.
I leave to you to make a ruling whether we can allow them to do so, so that
it does not create the impression that there was any intention to exclude
them. My view, as the Chief Whip of this Council, is that in the spirit of
participatory democracy we just allow them a minute each just to say a few
words. Thank you, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP:  Should I call the Chief Justice back?
[Laughter.] I now offer this opportunity to the IFP.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI:  Hon Chairperson, hon members and colleagues, I am very
sorry that this process omitted us. We didn’t know about the whole
procedure. Well, I don’t know what happened. But I would like to say thank
you very much for the opportunity you are offering us because as we have
been working with Mr Mahlangu for as long a time as we did with our late
chairperson, we definitely would like to say something.

We associate ourselves with the sentiments of all colleagues, parties, who
have expressed their gratitude to the election of our dear colleague here,
Mr Mahlangu. You have been in these boots for a long time and I pray that
God be with you and that he would give you strength, wisdom and power to
lead such an august House. The NCOP is not a very light House, it’s a very
heavy House. It’s only the Almighty God who will enable you to lead
successfully.

Siyabonga futhi siyamdumisa uNkulunklu ngokukhethwa kwakhe. Umunwe
omkhombile ubumfanele ngempela ngoba usehlalile kulesi
sikhundla kungelula, kodwa ngamandla kaNkulunkulu simbona emile futhi
siyethemba ukuthi uzosihola kahle, sibambisane naye, sisebenzisane kahle
ngokuthula siphinde sibhekele abantu abasikhethile ukuthi sibe lapha.
Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Thank you, we also thank God for his election. The finger that pointed him
out was indeed right, because he has occupied this position for so long,
though it has not been easy. Through God’s strength he stands and we hope
that he would lead us well, that we would work together peacefully with him
and serve the interests of the people who elected us to be here. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Rev E ADOLPH:  Hon Chief Justice, hon newly elected Chairperson, thank you
very much for this opportunity. Maybe you thought I have lost my identity
and that the ID lost its identity in the whole process. [Laughter.]

On behalf of the ID I would like to congratulate you on this distinguished
appointment. For the past ten months we have been working together and what
came through to me as an individual and as team of the NCOP is the fact
that you are a very humble person. I really like and appreciate your
leadership style – that of developmental leadership which we so desperately
need in South Africa. I want to give you and the NCOP Vision 2009 the full
support to make this House a People’s Parliament – that you will make it a
dream come true through your capable leadership.

We are fortunate that we have a person like you to lead this House with
such diverse backgrounds and political affiliations, and, of course, to
lead us as a team. And I call on each and every member in this House, to
support this Chairperson and his Deputy and work together for the
betterment of South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S W MXOLOSE (Salga):  Chairperson, His Worship Chief Justice, the
Premiers of our Republic, MECs of the provincial governments, special
delegates, comrades and ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of our chairperson,
the Executive Mayor of Johannesburg, Councillor Amos Masondo, and members
of the National Executive Committee of Salga, we wish to congratulate you,
Chairperson.

Hardly a year since you stood here in this podium to congratulate our late
chairperson, Ms Joyce Kgoali, we meet again to congratulate her successor.
Our congratulations are therefore extended to the newly elected
chairperson, Mr M J Mahlangu. We are certain that we give you all the
support that this House needs. And Salga has made an undertaking to support
all the initiatives that are taken by our government as a collective to
eradicate poverty in our country.

Chairperson, once more, I wish to thank you on behalf of our organised
local government. Thank you very much. [Applause.]











                     ADDRESS BY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP:  Thank you very much. I think everybody has
had a chance to say something. I am guided by the Secretary that I should
also say something. Do you agree? [Interjections.] I see.

Ngithanda ukuthoma ngokuthi ngiyanilotjhisa noke enyakeni omutjha ka-2005.
Ngithanda ukuthi kini uZimu uyikakaramba engahlulwa lilitho, uZimu
ungusomandla akehlulwa lilitho. Nasiragela phambili ngomberego wethu
emnyakeni ka-2005 ingathi le kakaramba engikhuluma ngayo engusomandla
ingaba nani noke kileNdlu ehloniphekileko yeSibethamthetho se-NCOP.
Ngikutjho lokho ngoba sinomberego omnengi phambi kwethu kilomnyaka, ayikho
ikomo ezodosa kabulula, nazibotjhelweko zidosa zoke azehlulwa lilitho.
(Translation of isiNdebele paragraph follows.)

[Firstly I would like to greet you all in this new year  of  2005.  I  would
like to  say  to  you  that  God  is  Almighty,  who  never  fails;  God  is
omnipotent, he never fails. While we proceed with our  duties  in  the  year
2005, I wish that this Almighty God I’m talking about,  who  is  omnipotent,
would be with all of you in this honourable House of the  NCOP.  I’m  saying
this because we have a lot of work ahead of us  this  year.  No  one’s  work
will be easy, but if we pull together we will fail at nothing.]

Chief Justice, Premiers, Speakers, Deputy Speakers, permanent delegates and
special delegates, I feel highly honoured and heavily indebted to the
members of this House for the confidence that they have shown in me and
expressed this afternoon by electing me to lead the House of the National
Council of Provinces.

I must say that I am very humbled. You will be aware that all former
Chairpersons have led this House with great distinction, great loyalty,
sacrifice, determination and devotion, and that is where this House is
today. Perhaps you are aware that I am stepping into the shoes of a great
leader who has just passed on. It’s going to be very difficult for me to
fill those shoes. But with this teamwork, I can’t fail. I know you are
there to support not only me, but also this institution. I think that’s the
crux of the matter. [Applause.]

With your support, I pledge to continue the work that this House is tasked
with and ensure that the goals that we have set ourselves for this term of
our Parliament are met. As I indicated when we rose last year - some of you
who were here will remember - we have a very busy year ahead of us this
year. This is the year in which we must ensure that the work that is
contained in our programme of action for 2009 is carried out, and I mean
it. That’s why all of us must pull up our socks.

In that programme of action, we committed ourselves to intensifying our
oversight work. And that’s precisely what we are going to do. We said that
by 2009 we must have improved on this role to such an extent that it must
have reached a target of 70% of our work in the NCOP. Therefore, in our
planning we should make sure that we make available time and resources to
carry out this responsibility. Part of this programme of action includes
the very important mandate of ensuring that people participate in the
affairs of Parliament. This is their Parliament, it’s the people’s
Parliament. Therefore we have to make them feel that they are part and
parcel of this Parliament.

We will continue to ensure that we improve public involvement in Parliament
by ensuring that people across South Africa do have the opportunity to
participate. I am very happy that a number of Premiers are here today. I am
very happy … [Interjections.]  Only women Premiers? Yes, it’s like that and
I think I should emphasise it. [Applause.] Thank you for your support. It’s
only the women Premiers, I don’t know what happened to the male Premiers.
But I am happy that the Premiers are here today, and I emphasise that it is
the women Premiers who are here today.

I would like to appeal to you as you go home that the interaction between
the NCOP and the provinces should increase; that we must work together;
that we must make our people in the provinces, in those small villages,
feel our presence, because I believe that is what is important.

I am very happy that so far we have seen all the Premiers in the nine
provinces supporting this institution. Perhaps I should emphasise that it
is your institution. If you don’t participate as Premiers, and if you don’t
make this institution work, it will not work, because this institution
represents the interests of the provinces. Without your involvement the
institution will not function perfectly, as we want it to function.
Therefore, I invite you, as we take up this work in 2005: Let’s join our
hands together and move together. We are there to support whatever we
should do.

The only way that we can ensure that our people participate in Parliament
and through many other ways is by taking Parliament to the people. We are
going to the people in March. I will not announce the province today. We
will first discuss it in the programming committee and then I will make an
announcement soon. We are already preparing for that.

When we took over last year, we pledged ourselves to do a number of things.
These include deepening and further consolidating the gains that this House
made in the last Parliament, as well as broadening the scope of
participation by provincial and local government in determining the
national agenda. I am happy that Salga is here. I have already spoken to
the chairperson of Salga at national level. We are also going to strengthen
that participation with them. A lot of our work in 2005 will have to focus
on local government.

We said we should actively contribute to the process of delivery to better
the lives of our people by strengthening our oversight function. We will
continue to do these things and we will put them high on the agenda. The
NCOP is a concrete expression of co-operative governance. I have said this
myself in many forums. Therefore, it stands to reason that, as we have done
in the past, we should remain key players in the promotion and
strengthening of intergovernmental relations.

We occupy an important place in our country because this is where all the
spheres of government meet and deliberate on national policy. The national
policy will become a key thing that we will often and regularly put on the
agenda of the Council for debate, because this is a national forum for
debate on these policies. This is a role mandated to this House by the
Constitution – if some of us have forgotten.

One of our responsibilities will be to ensure that our committees have
capacity to deliver on the work they are supposed to do. Our select
committees are the engine of this House. Hence this week we are going to a
workshop that will deal with the management of our committees, so that they
might improve their way of dealing with the function that lies ahead of
them.

I believe that, in order to do their work, members need to have the
necessary capacity and skills required. I challenge you, I challenge all of
you, to join me, and the new Deputy Chairperson, who will be elected very
soon, in ensuring that the work before this House is done and that we
improve the quality of what we are doing. If we have to talk, let’s talk
for two days and work for three days. Talk little, do much work. The people
will realise what we are doing.

I thank my political party that has had the confidence to nominate me to
take over this hectic position. But I also want to thank all the political
parties that supported my nomination and that   supported these elections.
I invite you as well: Come, let’s work together, because the NCOP is about
catering for the interests of the provinces. Jointly, we are going to do
that and we must succeed. We can’t fail. We are elected by the people. We
can’t fail those masses of the people who have sent us here. We have to say
to them at the end of the day: Your last hope is us. We are better placed;
we are in a better position to assist; we can speak on your behalf; we can
change your lives. I thank you all. [Applause.]

   ELECTION OF THE PERMANENT DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
                                  PROVINCES

The Chairperson called for nominations.

Ms Frances Beatrice Marshoff, seconded by Ms Nosimo Balindlela, nominated
Ms Peggy Maud Hollander for election as Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces.

The Returning Officer reported to the Chairperson that the nomination paper
had been properly completed.

There being no further nominations, the Chairperson declared Ms Peggy Maud
Hollander properly elected as Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL:  Your Worship the Chief Justice, hon
Premiers present here, hon representatives of Salga and hon permanent
delegates, it gives me pleasure – but not pressure – to stand here,
speaking on behalf of all the provincial delegations and also on behalf of
our glorious organisation, the ANC, and also on behalf of the Whippery.
[Interjections.] Kgoshi Mokoena even confirmed that I am also speaking on
behalf of the chairpersons.

I want to express our profound and sincere words of congratulation to the
hon Peggy Maud Hollander on your unanimous election to the position of
Permanent Deputy Chairperson of this House. We believe that with your
experience as a former MEC for social development in the Northern Cape and
subsequently as a Deputy Speaker in that province which is rich with
diamonds. You will not be bringing the richness of those diamonds here, but
in fact the expertise that you acquired during your tenure in those
positions that I have mentioned. On behalf of the above-mentioned
institutions and organisations, we believe, as the brand new Chairperson
has said, that as a team we will not only maintain the momentum with which
we closed, and put into the NCOP, but will also add enhanced participatory
democracy. This will increase our oversight in all the departments. I want
to believe his worship the Chief Justice that if we as this institution
perform oversight over the transformation of the judiciary, no one will say
that we are interfering. We will be doing our constitutional duty as the
NCOP to perform oversight duties and ensure that transformation in the
second decade of our freedom and democracy does go forward.

With these few words we want to wish you, together with the leadership of
this institution, hon Mr M J Mahlangu, all the best for 2005. We will be
there to support you. If I can put it in the form of a parable: Together
with the Chairperson of the NCOP, the Permanent Deputy Chairperson, not
forgetting the Rotating Deputy Chairperson, are drivers holding the
steering wheel. Where you see that we are moving into darkness, you will
switch on the lights. Where you see there is rain, you will switch on the
wipers. My office is available as the gearbox and our committees are there
as the engine of this NCOP. Let the wheels spin for a better life for all.
[Applause.]


                   ADDRESS BY PERMANENT DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander):  Hon Chief Justice,
our new Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Premiers and hon members of this
august House, I am deeply humbled this afternoon by my election. I want to
say that without you I would not have been here. Without the Chief Whip and
the chairpersons under whom I have served and their leadership given to me,
I do not think I would have been here this afternoon as the elected
Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP.

I would like to thank my former mentors – the previous Premier of the
Northern Cape and the present Premier of the Northern Cape and all the
leadership of the Northern Cape for their inputs and their leadership shown
towards me in the past. Sometimes we had our fights and sometimes we did
not, but despite that, that is the only way in which we can learn and will
be able to learn. I know that I will not be able to fill the shoes of our
new chairperson. His shoes are too big for me. I will assist him and do my
very best. I want to thank my Almighty God for being with me all the way of
my life so far and for leading me and for giving me the wisdom to know what
to do in every situation. I thank you. [Applause.]

The Council adjourned at 14:50.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
                                    ____


                          FRIDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Mineral and Energy Laws Amendment Bill, submitted by the
         Minister of Minerals and Energy on 5 November 2004. Referred to
         the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy and the Select
         Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs.


     (2)    Co-operatives Bill, submitted by the Minister of Trade and
         Industry on 11 November 2004. Referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on Economic and
         Foreign Affairs.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Veterinary
         Council for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Annual Financial Statements from the National Agricultural
         Marketing Council on the Statutory Levy Administrators on
         Agricultural Products for 2001-2002 and 2002-2003, including the
         Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2001-2002 and 2002-2003 [RP 1-2004].

2.    The Minister of Transport


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 - Department of
         Transport for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
         Aviation Authority (CAA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
         [RP 164-2004].

3.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration


     (a)    African Union Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
         Corruption, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
         1996.

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the African Union Convention on the
         Prevention and Combating of Corruption.

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Trade and Investment South
         Africa (TISA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
         164-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
         Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for the year ended June
         2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for the year ended 2004.

     (c)    Sustainability Report of the Industrial Development Corporation
         of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2004.

    d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
       Board for 2003-2004,
                   including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
Financial Statements for 2003-
      2004.


                         WEDNESDAY, 24 NOVEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Calling of Joint Sitting of Parliament

     The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the Acting
     Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in
     terms of Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
     Parliament for Wednesday, 24 November 2004, at 14:00 to pay tribute to
     the late hon Ms Joyce Lesawana Kgoali, Chairperson of the National
     Council of Provinces, who passed away on Sunday, 21 November 2004.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Sectional Titles Amendment Bill, submitted by the Minister for
         Agriculture and Land Affairs on 17 November 2004. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and the Select
         Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Government Notice No R.2458 published in Government
              Gazette No 26945 dated 29 October 2004: Draft Regulations
              published for public comment in terms of the Local Government:
              Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

         (b)     Amendment to the exemptions made in Government Notice No
              R1596 published in Government Gazette No 24176 dated 20
              December 2003, under section 74 of the Financial Intelligence
              Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).

         (c)     Explanatory Memorandum on the second reporting exemption
              in terms of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act
              No 38 of 2001).

         (d)     Government Notice No 1156 published in Government Gazette
              No 26866 dated 14 October 2004: Setting out particulars of
              areas demarcated by municipalities of Johannesburg and Cape
              Town, which shall constitute urban development zones, in terms
              of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises:


         (a)     Report and Group Annual Financial Statements of the South
              African Post Office Limited for 2002-2003, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Group Annual
              Financial Statements for 2002-2003.

         (b)     Report and Group Annual Financial Statements of the South
              African Post Office Limited for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Group Annual
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Report on the removal from office of Magistrate P P
              Mkalipi on account of his incapacity to carry out his duties
              of office efficiently.

         (b)     Government Notice No R880 published in Government Gazette
              No 26601 dated 23 July 2004: Magistrates' Courts: Amendment of
              the Rules of the Court, in terms of the Rules Board for Courts
              of Law, 1985 (Act No 107 of 1985).


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


         (a)     Southern African Development Community (SADC) Mutual
              Defence Pact ("the Pact"), tabled in terms of section 231(2)
              of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Southern African Development
              Community (SADC) Mutual Defence Pact ("the Pact").

         (c)     United Nations Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
              Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
              Conflicts, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
              Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the United Nations Optional
              Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
              Involvement of Children in Armed Conflicts.


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services:

         Report and Financial Statements of the South African Housing Fund
         for the period ended 31 March 2004, including the Reports of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004, 2000-
         2003, 1998-2000 and 1994-1998 [RP 154-2004].


                           MONDAY, 17 JANUARY 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Finance Bill [B 13 - 2004] - Act No 26 of 2004 (assented to and
         signed by President on 28 November 2004).

2.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Health


         (i)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op Sterilisasie [W 12 - 2004]
              (National Council of Provinces - sec 76)

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
         Sterilisation Amendment Bill [B 12 - 2004] (National Council of
         Provinces - sec 76).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and Chairperson


     (a)    Activity Report of the Auditor-General for 2003-2004 [RP 211-
         2004].

     (b)    Special Report of the Auditor-General on the delays in the
         tabling of Annual Reports and Consolidated Financial Statements of
         National Government for 2003-2004 [RP 208-2004].

     (c)    General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcome for
         2003-2004 [RP 210-2004].

2.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
         on the Registrar of Friendly Societies for 2003.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Government Employees
         Pension Fund for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP
         1-2004].

     (c)    Government Notice No R1289 published in Government Gazette No
         26938 dated 5 November 2004: Determination of amounts in terms of
         sections 1 and 5 of the Military Pensions Act, 1976 (Act No 84 of
         1976).

     (d)    Government Notice No R1334 published in Government Gazette No
         26981 dated 19 November 2004: Exemption of Telkom SA Limited and
         its subsidiaries and any entities under its ownership control in
         terms of section 92 of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
         (Act No 1 of 1999).

     (e)    Government Notice No R1353 published in Government Gazette No
         27011 dated 19 November 2004: Amendments to the exemptions made in
         Government Gazette No 24176 dated 20 December 2003, in terms of
         section 74 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No
         38 of 2001).

     (f)    Government Notice No R1354 published in Government Gazette No
         27011 dated 19 November 2004: Second Reporting Exemption in terms
         of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of
         2001).

     (g)    Government Notice No R1354 published in Government Gazette No
         27012 dated 19 November 2004: Amendment of prescribed fees, made
         in terms of section 36 of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24
         of 1956).

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Sedibeng Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Ikangala Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Lepelle Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Magalies Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Rand Water Board for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (g)    Report and Financial Statements of the Bushbuckridge Water Board
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (h)    Report and Financial Statements of the Umgeni Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (i)    Report and Financial Statements of the Overberg Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (j)    Report and Financial Statements of the Botshelo Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (k)    Report and Financial Statements of the Bloem Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (l)    Report and Financial Statements of the Pelladrift Water Board
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (m)    Report and Financial Statements of the Namaqua Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (n)    Report and Financial Statements of the Amatola Water Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (o)    Report and Financial Statements of the Albany Coast Water Board
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

4.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


     (a)    The following person has been appointed by Cabinet as a member
         and chairperson of the South African National Parks Board, in
         terms of section 8 of the National Parks Act, 1976 (Act No 57 of
         1976):

         Ms C Carolus.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
         Service for 2002-2003, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP 221-2003].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
         Service for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 176-2004].

     (d)    Government Notice No 2483 published in Government Gazette No
         26969 dated 5 November 2004: Invitation to apply for experimental
         longline fishing permits for the catching of Patagonian toothfish
         (Dissostichus SPP), tabled in terms of the Marine Living Resources
         Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

5.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry Company
     Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent-Auditors
     on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


     (a)    The following statement has been submitted to the National
         Council of Provinces by the MEC for Local Government, Housing and
         Traditional Affairs in KwaZulu-Natal in terms of section 106(3) of
         the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of
         2000).

         Investigation at the Umzinyathi District Municipality

         The statement is referred to the Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration.

         Copies of the statement are available from the office of the Clerk
         of Papers.


     (b)    Notice received from the MEC for Local Government and Housing in
         the Free State Province regarding the intervention in the Moqhaka
         and Phumelela Local Municipality in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
         the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108
         of 1996).

         The notice is referred to the Select Committee on Local Government
         and Administration for consideration and report.

         Copies of the notice are available from the office of the Clerk of
         Papers.


     (c)    Close-out report of the MEC for Housing, Local Government and
         Traditional Affairs in the Eastern Cape to the National Council of
         Provinces - Intervention by the Provincial Government into the
         affairs of the Quakeni Local Municipality in terms of the
         Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of
         1996).

         The report is referred to the Select Committee on Local Government
         and Administration.

         Copies of the report are available from the office of the Clerk of
         Papers.


     (d)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
         dated 26 November 2004 to the Acting Chairperson of the National
         Council of Provinces informing Members of the Council of the
         employment of a member of the South African National Defence
         Force:

         EMPLOYMENT OF A MEMBER OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE
         IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF
         SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE GOVERNMENT OF MOZAMBIQUE

         This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
         authorised the employment of a member of the South African
         National Defence Force (SANDF) to the Republic of Mozambique as
         part of the Southern African Development Community Electoral
         Observer Mission in fulfillment of the obligations of the Republic
         of South Africa towards Mozambique during the forthcoming
         elections in Mozambique.

         This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions
         of section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
         Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 93 of the
         Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

         One person will be employed from 24 November 2004 to 4 December
         2004.

         The total cost of the deployment is R 17 233, 00 will be funded
         from the Department of Defence's current allocation for the Joint
         Operations Division.

         I will communicate this report to the Members of the National
         Assembly and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
         Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
         the notice of the National Council of Provinces.

         Regards

         SIGNED
         T M MBEKI




