---
title: 'National Assembly - 13 December 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: DECEMBER
month_slug: Dec
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-12-13
---

TUESDAY, 13 DECEMBER 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 10:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                    UPGRADING OF AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM


                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed with today’s business, I
wish to bring to members’ attention the fact that the air conditioning
system is being upgraded, and that this process will be completed by the
end of January next year.

The contractors have now suspended their work to enable the House to meet
today and tomorrow. The entire public and press gallery facilities will
however not be able to be used for the two days, as the construction area
is blocked off with scaffolding which could pose a health and safety
hazard.

Arrangements have been made for members of the public to be accommodated in
the Old Assembly Chamber and Committee Room E249. Proceedings are being
relayed via our in-house feed to these two venues. The press will utilise
the seats to the left of my Chair.

     APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF JUSTICE LANGA AS CHANCELLOR OF NELSON MANDELA
                           METROPOLITAN UNIVERSITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

    That the House –


      1) notes that Chief Justice Pius Langa has been appointed the first
         chancellor of the Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University in Port
         Elizabeth; and


      2) conveys its heartfelt congratulations to Chief Justice Langa and
         wishes him every success with his appointment and commends the
         university council on an inspired choice.
Agreed to.
 AWARDING OF MERIT AWARD OF OFFICER OF THE ORDER OF THE LEGION OF HONOUR ON
                              PROF KADER ASMAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTYCHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
without notice:

   That the House -


     1) notes that -


           a) President Jacques Chirac of France has bestowed the highest
              award for merit, the rank of Officer of the Order of the
              Legion of Honour, on the hon Prof Kader Asmal, MP; and


           b) in bestowing this honour on Prof Asmal President Chirac
              stated that it -


                  i) honours a great figure of the struggle against
                     apartheid, who was subsequently given high
                     responsibilities in South Africa;


              (ii)     rewards the tenacity with which he pursued the cause
                     of human rights;


              (iii)    rewards also the vital role that he has played, in
                     conjunction with the French representatives at Unesco,
                     to bring about the successful conclusion of the
                     Convention on Cultural Diversity; and


                 iv) rewards the quality of the services he has rendered to
                     France; and


   (2)      resolves to congratulate Prof Asmal on receiving this honour.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon member.

Agreed to.


             AWARDING OF PRINCE CLAUS AWARD TO JONATHAN SHAPIRO


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that –


        (a) Jonathan Shapiro, popularly known as Zapiro, won the Prince
            Claus Award in the Social and Cultural category in Amsterdam on
            Wednesday, 7 December 2005; and


        (b) Zapiro also teaches young cartoonists in Cape Town thus helping
            in the development of a new generation of cartoonists who are
            motivated to continue the satirical traditions;


   (2)      recalls that his satire highlights social and political issues
        and challenges dogma;


      3) recognises that this is a further recognition by the international
         community of the high quality of South African cultural work;


      4) applauds Zapiro’s great contribution to our country’s artistic and
         cultural life; and

     5) congratulates Jonathan Shapiro on winning the award and wishes him
        good luck in his work.

Agreed to.

        AWARDING OF NOBEL PEACE PRIZE TO MOHAMED EL BARADEI AND IAEA


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
without notice:


         That the House –


   (1)      notes that –


         (a)      last Saturday, 10 December 2005, Mohamed EI Baradei and
             the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) were jointly
             awarded the Nobel Peace Prize; and


         (b)      this award is in recognition of the work they continue to
             do to halt the spread of nuclear weapons;


   (2)      recognises that the award will serve as a further boost in the
        efforts of the world peace movement to create a better and a safer
        world; and


   (3)      congratulates the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
        Mohamed EI Baradei on winning the Nobel Peace Prize award and
        wishes them well in their good work.

Agreed to.


                       CONCERNS AROUND DOHA AGREEMENT


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes with concern the lack of progress, including reluctance on
         the part of the developed countries to ensure progress, in the
         current round of negotiations on the Doha Work Programme in
         Geneva;


      2) reiterates the urgency to meet the commitment of the Doha mandate
         of placing the needs and interests of developing countries and, in
         particular, least developed countries, at the heart of the WTO
         Work Programme;

      3) believes that a development-centred outcome in the negotiations
         will engender a more viable, equitable and durable multilateral
         trading system that would contribute to the attainment of the
         Millennium Development Goals by our countries;

      4) resolves to support unequivocally the positions that have been
         adopted in the Cairo Declaration and the road map on the Doha Work
         Programme; and

      5) calls upon parliaments throughout the world to ensure their
         participation in the 6th WTO Ministerial Conference in Hong Kong
         in December 2005 and to campaign for fair global trade so as to
         protect the development rights of poorer countries.

Agreed to.


                        DEATH OF SOPHIE THOKO MGCINA


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: This is the last one, I assure you,
Madam Speaker. I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes –


         (a)     with profound sadness and grief, the untimely death of
              Sophie Thoko Mgcina on Friday, 2 December 2005; and


         (b)     that this doyenne, stalwart and cultural activist had a
              rich career spanning more than three decades in musicals,
              film, television and theatre;


   (2)      recalls that Sophie Mgcina had her first taste of international
         fame in 1960 playing Petal in the London run of King Kong;


   (3)      remembers that she received many awards, amongst them -


         (a)     the Obie Award for best achievement in 1981;


         (b)     from President Thabo Mbeki the order of Ikhamanga
              (silver), the highest form of recognition for excellence in
              the field of arts, culture and sport;


         (c)     the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Arts and Culture
              Trust; and


         (d)     in November this year, an award at The night of the 50s by
              the Minister of Arts and Culture to honour and celebrate the
              luminaries of the era; and


   (4)      conveys its condolences to her family, friends and to the
         broader arts and culture community of our country.

Agreed to.




                          HOURS OF SITTING OF HOUSE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, we move
the motion as it stands printed on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief
Whip of the Majority Paper, as follows:

   That the House, notwithstanding Rule 23(2) which stipulates hours of
   sitting, and noting the agreement by the Joint Programme Committee on the
   16 November 2005 for the House to sit in the morning on 13 December 2005,
   condones the starting time of 10:00 for today’s sitting.

Agreed to.


                            ANC HOUSING DELIVERY




                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr J D ARENDSE (ANC): Die ANC-regering streef voortdurend daarna om te
verseker dat die regte van mense om te kan kies waar hulle woon, geskikte
huisvesting te ontvang en hul gesinne in veiligheid en sekuriteit op te
voed, gerespekteer word.
Meer as ‘n duisend families in De Doorns het in haglike omstandighede
gewoon - met geen toegang tot water en toiletgeriewe nie. Hierdie families
het geen toegang gehad tot dienste wat deur ander gemeenskappe ontvang word
nie. As gevolg van inisiatiewe van die Minister van Behuising in die Wes-
Kaap om die lewe van mense te verbeter, het die Breedevallei Munisipaliteit
‘n proses begin om geskikte huise te bou vir hierdie gemeenskappe in De
Doorns.

Eenhonderd families is alreeds gehuisves in areas met toegang tot water en
sanitasiegeriewe. Die tweede fase beoog om meer as ‘n duisend families teen
die einde van Maart 2006 in areas te huisves wat toegang het tot water en
sanitasie.

Die ANC prys die Wes-Kaapse regering en die munisipaliteit vir hul goeie
werk en wil ons mense aanmoedig om saam met die regering te werk om
dienslewering te versnel. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr J D ARENDSE (ANC): The ANC government is always striving to ensure that
the rights of people to choose where to live, to receive adequate housing
and to rear their children in safety and security, are respected.

More than a thousand families in De Doorns lived in appalling conditions –
with no access to water and toilet facilities. These families had no access
to services that other communities are receiving. As a consequence of
initiatives by the Minister of Housing in the Western Cape to improve the
lives of people, the Breede Valley Municipality started a process of
constructing adequate housing for these communities in De Doorns.

One hundred families have already been accommodated in areas with access to
water and sanitation facilities. The second phase aims to accommodate more
than a thousand families, by the end of March 2006, in areas with access to
water and sanitation.

The ANC praises the Western Cape government and the municipality for their
good work and wants to encourage people to work with the government to
accelerate service delivery. Thank you. [Applause.]]


                         FUEL CRISIS IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv H C SCHMIDT (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the South African public is not
interested in excuses being offered for the fuel crisis at filling stations
around the country and at the Cape Town International Airport. You cannot
fill your tank with excuses.

There has clearly been a lack of planning, which contributed to this chaos,
and the DA believes someone should stand up and take the blame. The failure
of long-term planning, efficiency of contingency planning and effectiveness
of implementation strategies are contributing to the threatening crisis.

The Minister of Minerals and Energy should investigate the circumstances
which have led to this fuel shortage. The Minister is the person with a
political responsibility for fuel supply in South Africa. The conversion to
cleaner fuel is long overdue as South Africa is one of the last countries
in the world to discontinue the use of leaded petrol for environmental and
health reasons. The conversion process is clearly lacking, regarding
effective contingency planning in the event of the conversion process not
proceeding as planned.

The Minister should investigate the following: Firstly, was any planning
done to ensure that sufficient reserve stocks would be available for this
time of the year, while refineries were being upgraded to meet the 2006
requirements for cleaner fuel?

Secondly, it is reported that the fuel farm at Cape Town International
Airport ran empty at the end of the week and that stocks were ordered to
make up for the shortfall. Who was responsible for monitoring the fuel
level at the fuel farm? Why were no warnings issued to incoming planes
about the pending fuel shortage at the airport?

Thirdly, should the current implementation plan for unleaded fuels lead to
fuel shortages at filling stations and airports, the Minister should
investigate the possibility of phasing in the conversion to unleaded fuel
and low sulphur diesel gradually in order to ensure that the South African
public, airlines and other forms of transport have a continued supply of
fuel, especially during the festive season.

Fuel shortages, whether at filling stations or at the airport, create a
sort of ripple effect that our economy and our tourism industry can hardly
afford. Someone, Minister, messed up and they need to own up before this
happens again. I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

   CONCERN OVER EFFECT OF FUEL SHORTAGE AT CAPE TOWN INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E J LUCAS (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP is concerned about the
effect of fuel shortage at Cape Town International Airport. It is not
acceptable that at this point in time we are made to endure such
inconvenience. Another alarming issue was the inferior mix of aviation
fuel, which was not up to the required standard and the IFP recognises the
extent of danger that could be caused by this.

Motorists in the Western Cape have also suffered from a shortage of
unleaded fuel. This is unacceptable and the petrol companies owe the public
an explanation. We note that it coincided with the decrease in the price of
fuel. We hope that something will be done about this situation as a matter
of urgency. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.


               STEPS TOWARDS PROVISION OF QUALITY HEALTH CARE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M M MALUMISE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a statement on
partnership. The ANC-led government can provide resources and introduce
quality health care as well as a comprehensive plan to fight HIV/Aids. But
for this programme to succeed, it requires public servants who serve people
with respect and efficiency, and it requires active citizenship and a
spirit of responsibility and voluntarism amongst all of us.

In realising this partnership between government and the people, Mrs Mbeki,
with two retired nurses, Olive Mpahlwa and Constance Manzini, as well as a
Ugandan doctor, Josiah Gizito, have, like many in our country, taken it
upon themselves to help people and children who are infected and affected
by HIV/Aids. They have set up a hospice in Butterworth, which caters for
about 150 Aids patients and 100 Aids orphans in the community.

The ANC commends the sterling work done by the four and further calls upon
all our people, including doctors, to emulate this shining example to
ensure the provision of health care services in rural areas. I thank you,
Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]


                            INSTABILITY IN BURMA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Madam Deputy Speaker, in view of the ongoing critical
situation in Burma, the ACDP calls on the President and the Minister of
Foreign Affairs to earnestly attempt to bring the issue of Burma to the
agenda of the UN Security Council.

The ruling military regime in Burma poses a serious and growing threat to
regional security and stability. The regime’s destruction of over 2 500
villages in eastern Burma; the forced displacement of over one million
people; the continuing refugee situation in neighbouring Thailand, India
and Bangladesh; and the regime’s involvement in the drugs trade, its
growing militarisation and the recent bombings in the capital, Rangoon,
make Burma a failed state which is destabilising the rest of South-East
Asia.

Burma spends over 40% of its annual budget on the military and less than 2%
on health and education combined. At least 75% of its population live below
the poverty line and one in three children below the age of five suffers
from malnutrition.

Burma has the highest number of forcibly conscripted child soldiers, that
is over 70 000 children in the Burma army. This army is carrying out
widespread systematic rape, forced labour, forced relocation, destruction
of villages, killings and other crimes against humanity in areas populated
by ethnic nationalities such as the Karen, Chin and Shan.

Whilst the UN Security Council is not authorised to act on country-based
human rights abuses, it is mandated to act in situations where a country
poses a threat to international peace and stability, in terms of Article 7
of the UN Charter. Special appointments by the UN have been unsuccessful as
the regime has been unco-operative and the junta has refused to work with
them.

The ACDP believes that, for South Africa to be silent on the suffering and
abusive circumstances in Burma will be a great shame and tragedy. I thank
you, Madam Deputy Speaker.


                                 FUEL CRISIS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W D SPIES (VF Plus): Agbare Adjunkspeaker, dit is totaal onuithoudbaar
dat by Kaapstad-lughawe en ander lughawens in Suid-Afrika binnelandse en
internasionale vlugte vertraag is omdat brandstoftekorte ondervind word.
Vlugte moes selfs oor Upington gaan ten einde brandstof te kan kry.

Die gevolge hiervan is dat duisende passasiers belangrike
aansluitingsvlugte na die buiteland gemis het of ander afsprake moes
kanselleer. Die skade wat dit Suid-Afrika se beeld by toeriste en
buitelandse sakemanne berokken, is onherstelbaar. Selfs tydens die
hoogtepunt van die energiekrisis van die laat 1970s het daar nooit sulke
vertragings plaasgevind nie.

Die eenvoudige vraag is of niemand betyds kon voorsien dat die
oorskakelings wat by olieraffinaderye gedoen moes word voor 1 Januarie 2006
brandstoftekorte kon veroorsaak nie. Dit moes sekerlik moontlik gewees het
om te kon beplan vir so ‘n situasie deur byvoorbeeld die oorskakeling van
raffinaderye te skeduleer oor ‘n tydperk.

Dit is ook kommerwekkend dat die omskakelingsproses geensins vanjaar in
hierdie Huis of in die tersaaklike komitee bespreek is nie. Hoewel die saak
wel geskeduleer was vir bespreking vroeër vanjaar by die
portefeuljekomitee, is die vergadering gekanselleer as gevolg van die
komitee se oorvol program wat gepaard gegaan het met die oorhaastige
deurvoer van die Diamonds Amendment Bill, die Precious Metals Bill en die
National Energy Regulator Bill.

Dit is baie jammer dat ‘n uiters belangrike saak soos die implementering en
omskakeling na skoner brandsof nooit in die portefeuljekomitee bespreek is
nie. Dit kom voor asof die ANC se transformasiedryf groter was as sy
verantwoordelikheid ten opsigte van die bestuur van ‘n radikale proses soos
die uitfasering van looddraende brandstof.

Hoewel die VF Plus die inwerkingstelling van skoner brandstof ondersteun,
getuig die manier waarop dit ingefaseer is van hopelose wanbestuur. Baie
dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES (FF Plus): Hon Deputy Speaker, it is totally untenable that
at Cape Town International Airport and other airports in South Africa,
domestic and international flights have been delayed because of a shortage
of aviation fuel. Flights even had to be rerouted to Upington in order to
take on fuel.

As a result thousands of passengers missed important international
connections or had to cancel other appointments. The damage done to South
Africa’s image among tourists and foreign businessmen is irreparable. Even
at the height of the oil crisis of the late 1970’s, there were never such
delays.

The simple question is whether no one could have foreseen timeously that
the switchover that had to be done by the oil refineries before 1 January
2006 could lead to fuel shortages. Surely it could have been possible to
plan for such an eventuality by, for instance, scheduling the switchover of
refineries over a period of time.

It is also a cause for concern that the switchover process was not
discussed at all this year in this House or in the relevant committee.
Although the matter was indeed scheduled for discussion by the portfolio
committee earlier this year, that meeting was cancelled due to the
overcrowded programme of the committee that resulted from the fasty
piloting of the Diamonds Amendment Bill, the Precious Metals Bill and the
National Energy Regulator Bill through Parliament.

It is a great pity that an extremely important matter such as the
implementation of and changeover to cleaner fuel, was never discussed in
the portfolio committee. It would appear that the transformation drive by
the ANC exceeded their responsibility with regard to the management of such
a radical process as the phasing out of leaded fuel.

Although the FF Plus supports the introduction of cleaner fuel, the manner
in which this has been phased in attests to hopeless mismanagement. Thank
you.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we proceed, hon members, I just want to point
out that there are just too many meetings taking place in the House. We do
encourage meetings because we want to have people work together even during
recess, but this is the wrong venue. You could have those meetings
comfortably in your offices over a cup of tea, and not here.


                     OPENING OF MAROPENG VISITORS CENTRE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms J L FUBBS(ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, the opening of the
Maropeng Visitors Centre in Gauteng once again recognises South Africa as
the birthplace of humankind. We, the people of South Africa, have been
truly blessed to be the custodians of the cradle of humankind.

The visitors’ centre at the Cradle of Humankind is indeed a fitting tribute
to the world’s biggest archaeological library. The heritage site embraces
Sterkfontein Caves, Coopers B, Swartkrans, Drimolen and Gondolin, where
over 35% of the world’s humanoid fossils were found.

The Gauteng province-based Maropeng Visitors Centre which, among other
unique features, boasts an underground lake and interactive exhibits, was
recently opened by President Thabo Mbeki. As President Mbeki said, Maropeng
Visitors Centre is our own humble contribution to record for posterity the
story of evolutionary human biology.

For years, white supremacist regimes defied the history and the
significance of this site. Now, thanks to an ANC government, South Africans
can proudly claim the custodianship of heritage sites such as this one. I
thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

               NEED TO RECONSIDER PROPORTIONAL REPRESENTATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M T LIKOTSI (PAC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the recent and current
political pitfalls in our country are an acid test for Cabinet to rethink
the issue of proportional representation in all forums of governance,
including local government, mayoral executive committees, the Municipal
Demarcation Board and Salga; and as it is applied in some forums in
Parliament such as the Joint Programme Committee, Rules Committee, Chief
Whips Forum etc.

The daily cries of our communities regarding employment and BEE
opportunities may not be ignored and fall on deaf ears. In a democratic
dispensation, all citizens are expected to be treated equally. And South
Africa is not immune to that. The resources of our country must be
equitably distributed to all its citizens, and not be centred in the hands
of a few individuals who become instant billionaires in a country of
extremely poor people. I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]


           OFFICIAL OPPOSITION NOT IN TOUCH WITH ORDINARY CITIZENS





                            (Member’s Statement)


Mnr S SIMMONS (UPSA): Agb Adjunkspeaker, gebeure die afgelope week het net
bevestig dat Suid-Afrika met 'n amptelike politieke opposisie sit wat
totaal uit voeling is met die gewone burgers van Suid-Afrika. Ek noem dít
na aanleiding van die DA se ondeurdagte en onsensitiewe hantering van die
16 dae van aktivisme teen die mishandeling van vroue en kinders.

Dit is ook opvallend dat die DA bruin areas uitgesonder het vir hul
laakbare en onsensitiewe hantering van hierdie netelige kwessie. Dit spreek
boekdele sover dit die DA se gevestigde rassevooroordeel aangaan.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S SIMMONS (UPSA): Hon Deputy Speaker, events this past  week  have  only
proved that South Africa is saddled with an  official  political  opposition
that is totally out of touch with the ordinary citizens of South  Africa.  I
say this with reference to the DA’s thoughtless and insensitive handling  of
the 16 days of activism against the abuse of women and children.

It is also striking that the DA reserved their despicable and insensitive
handling of this delicate matter for the brown residential areas. That
speaks volumes of the DA’s ingrained racial prejudice.]

The DA has at no point contemplated carrying out its panties exercise in a
predominantly white suburb such as Constantia.











                     [Applause.] Why not? It is because that would have
been upsetting and in bad taste for that community.

The largest opposition party of this country should caution itself against
the obvious prejudice this country is fighting so hard against. I thank
you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

             SALE OF SCHWEIZER–RENEKE TOWN SQUARE TO ANC MEMBERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv P S SWART (DA): Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, die Mamusa-munisipaliteit in
Noordwes se raad is in 2004 ontbind as gevolg van faksiegevegte binne die
ANC, wat dienslewering onmoontlik gemaak het.

Onlangs het die nuwe raad besluit om Schweizer-Reneke se dorpsplein te
verkoop vir die ontwikkeling van 'n winkelsentrum. [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Adv P S SWART (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the council of the Mamusa
Municipality in the North West was dissolved in 2004 owing to faction
fights within the ANC, which made service delivery impossible.

Recently the new council decided to sell the town square of Schweizer-
Reneke for the development of a shopping centre. [Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, please! I’m sure we can do better
than that.

Adv P S SWART (DA): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I would really like the
Minister for Provincial and Local Government to listen. I see he has left
the House again.

Onlangs het die nuwe raad besluit om Schweizer-Reneke se dorpsplein te
verkoop vir die ontwikkeling van 'n winkelsentrum. En die volgende oomblik
het ‘n beslote korporasie bestaande uit die vorige ANC-burgemeester en die
ANC-sweep, die huidige ANC-sweep en twee huidige ANC-raadslede, as lede, 'n
voorlegging gemaak om die betrokke eiendom te bekom. 'n Bedrag van R50 000
is aangebied terwyl die eiendom twee jaar gelede vir R2 miljoen gewaardeer
is.

Sonder inagneming van enige tenderprosedure of advertensies het die raad
die eiendom aan die BK toegeken met 'n argument van swart ekonomiese
bemagtiging. So word eiendom ter waarde van R2 miljoen vir R50 000 aan
vorige en sittende ANC-raadslede vervreem.

Nog erger is dat die beskrywing van hierdie eiendom die huidige raadsgeboue
insluit, terwyl slegs die biblioteek en die brandweerstasie uitgesluit
word.

Dié is geen bemagtiging nie; dit is die skandelike en korrupte verryking
van ANC-kaders ten koste van inwoners van die munisipaliteit en
dienslewering.

Die DA vertrou dat die regering onmiddellik in hierdie situasie sal ingryp
en stappe sal doen teen die raad om die besluit terug te trek. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Recently the new council decided to sell the town square of Schweizer-
Reneke for the development of a shopping centre. And the next moment a
close corporation, consisting of the former ANC mayor and ANC Whip, the
current ANC Whip and two current ANC councillors, had made a submission to
acquire the relevant property. An amount of R50 000 was offered, whereas
the property was valued at R2 million two years ago.

Without following any tender procedures or advertising, the council granted
the property to the CC, arguing that this was black economic empowerment.
In this way property to the value of R2 million was alienated to former and
current ANC councillors for R50 000.

What is worse is that the description of this property includes the current
council buildings with the sole exception of the library and fire station.
This is not empowerment; this is the shameful and corrupt enrichment of ANC
cadres at the expense of the residents of the municipality and service
delivery.

The DA trusts that the government will intervene in this situation
immediately and take action against the council in order to cancel the
decision. [Applause.]]


                    THEFT OF MEDICINES IN STATE HOSPITALS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof S M MAYATULA (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, ndenza umpoposho ngokubiwa
kwamayeza ezibhedlele. Esinye sezibhambathiso esazenzayo singumbutho
wesizwe i-ANC kukunikezela ngeenkonzo zempilo ezisemgangathweni kuye wonke
ummi weli lizwe. Kukho iqaqobana labantu elizimisele ukudodobalisa iinzame
zikarhulumente oxhuzula imikhala ngokuthi bazenzele ngolunya kumayeza amele
ukuya kwizibhedlele zikarhulumente ukuze kuncedakale uluntu ngokubanzi.

Kutsha nje amapolisa eli athe agibisela kwezimnyama izisele isine sabantu
esityholwa ngokubandakanyeka kobu buqhetseba bokubiwa kwamayeza kweliya
laseGcuwa eMpuma Koloni.

Kwesi sine kubandakanyeka nomongikazi osele esidla umhlala-phantsi. Umbutho
wesizwe uyawabulela amapolisa ngemisebenzi yawo emihle, kwaye thina
singamalungu ombutho wesizwe siya kuthi gqolo ukusebenzisana nabantu
bakuthi kunye norhulumente ekulweni intlupheko nentswela-mpilo. Enkosi.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Prof S M MAYATULA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, I refer to the theft of medicine
at state hospitals. The ANC has promised to deliver health services of a
high standard to the people of this country. There are a few individuals
who are letting this government down by stealing medicines. These medicines
are meant for the public.

Recently, four people accused of the theft of medicines in Butterworth,
Eastern Cape, have been arrested. The four people held include a retired
nurse.

The ANC expresses its gratitude to the Police Service for the great effort
they have put into this work. The ANC together with the community is
committed to fighting poverty and ill health. Thank you. [Applause.]]


                   RURAL EDUCATION CONSULTATIVE CONFERENCE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Hon Deputy Speaker, the improvement of conditions
in schools in rural areas has always been a matter of major concern, as
learners in these schools have long been disadvantaged in various ways.

We are therefore pleased that the Minister of Education has indicated that
she is giving serious consideration to convening a rural education
consultative conference to allow affected communities to participate in and
debate relevant strategies.

We, however, would like the Minister to come up with concrete plans that
will indicate specific dates and terms of reference of such a conference,
if it is to move beyond just being a consideration and if we are to make
meaningful inroads into this serious challenge that we are faced with. I
thank you.


                      ROLAND SCHOEMAN’S PATRIOTIC STAND


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A VAN WYK(ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, it takes a South African patriot
of a special kind for an athlete to say no to an offer of R20 million,
because he or she wants to hear ‘Nkosi Sikelel’ i-Afrika played when he or
she wins a gold medal in the next Olympic Games.

The patriot, a South African gold medallist, Roland Schoeman, a young
swimmer from Pretoria, turned down an offer by Qatar to change his
citizenship and swim for them in international competitions. Had he
accepted the offer, he would have been a very rich young man, but he said
no. The reason this young South African said no was that no amount of money
would make him change his nationality.

The ANC calls on other young people to share in Roland’s optimism and pride
for our beloved country, to have faith in this young democracy and to
acknowledge that the dawn of democracy in 1994 has created many
opportunities for young people to excel, especially in the sporting arena.

We call on our sporting bodies, the private sector and communities to form
partnerships to create an environment in which our young people have a
chance to excel and live their dreams. To borrow from a well-known advert:
“Giving up your citizenship; R20 million. The cost of hearing ‘Nkosi
Sikelel’ iAfrika at the Olympics; priceless!” Roland, we salute you.
[Applause.]


                    ALLEGED CORRUPTION IN THE SABC BOARD


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M SMUTS (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, SABC board member, Noluthando Gosa,
has just resigned. She has made accusations of corruption and poor
governance against the board that she leaves behind. She was herself under
investigation at the time of her resignation.

In such circumstances, one is aware of the possibility that a person’s
motives may be less than pure. Nevertheless, such circumstances can reveal
other impurities. A board member’s company was allegedly awarded a large
tender for a computer system. The chairman’s reported assurance that all
conflicts of interests are declared is hardly enough to dispel doubt and
suspicion, and the matter requires investigation.

The DA does not doubt the charge that the board members earn more than
twice the maximum amount set for meetings, which is approximately R70 000
per annum. This is a board that does more than it is supposed to do. It has
constantly intervened in programming and in commissioning guidelines and
events, and so forth, where it does not belong. It is a political board.

It is for that precise reason that Ms Gosa was herself under scrutiny,
after the corporation’s spokesperson Paul Setsetse was instructed to lie
about the presence of a cameraman at the KwaZulu-Natal Women’s Day event.

Does the government not agree that this SABC board should sit as little as
possible and earn no more than the set amount? The less they sit, the more
they will serve the captive viewing public of South Africa. [Applause.]


                   BETTER LIFE FOR ALL IN THE WESTERN CAPE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Agb Adjunkspeaker, terwyl die ANC in die Wes-Kaap
regeer, sal ons doelwit wees om 'n beter lewe vir al ons mense in die Wes-
Kaap te verseker, ongeag velkleur.

Die Wes-Kaapse regering het onlangs aangekondig dat dit beoog om 'n pad te
bou wat Bredasdorp en Gansbaai met mekaar sal verbind. Die geraamde koste
vir die konstruksie van hierdie pad beloop R200 mijoen. Ongeveer 400
werkgeleenthede gaan deur dié projek geskep word. Die regering beplan om
konstruksie oor twee maande te begin. Daar word verwag dat hierdie pad meer
mense na die twee dorpe sal lok en die toeristebedryf in die geheel dáár
sal bevorder.
Die ANC doen `n beroep op mense om in samewerking met die regering
dienslewering te versnel. Dankie, Adjunkspeaker. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, while the ANC is governing the
Western Cape, our aim will be to ensure a better life for all our people in
the Western Cape, irrespective of the colour of their skin.

Recently, the Western Cape government announced that it intends building a
road that will link Bredasdorp and Gansbaai. The estimated cost for the
construction of this road amounts to R200 million. Approximately 400 job
opportunities will be created by this project. The government intends to
start construction within two months. It is expected that this road will
attract more people to these two towns and that it will promote the tourism
industry in general there.

The ANC calls on people to accelerate service delivery in conjunction with
the government. Thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]]


                                 FUEL CRISIS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Deputy Speaker, Chairperson, I would
like to respond to three statements made by three hon members.

To start with, I am disappointed that the hon member from the DA has raised
a question in this Parliament as to who is responsible for this situation,
because I think he, more than anybody else, knows that the industry is to
blame in this case. He has been part of the committee that has been
involved in formulating the policy that is now being blamed for this
crisis.

He knows very well that, from the government’s side, everything has been
done to prepare for the start of cleaner fuels. In fact, even the industry
assured me yesterday that there was nothing wrong with the policy. There
have been no problems in planning. All the investments that we agreed upon
have been made. The lead time they asked for was the correct lead time and
we must therefore not blame this on the government.

What has happened here is that when we came to know of the crisis, we
called an urgent meeting of the captains of industry to find out what the
nature of the problem was. We were assured that the problem had been caused
by bad planning on their part. They underestimated the changeover of their
refineries but everything is under control.

In Gauteng the problem has been caused by panic buying, because when this
hit the public people panicked and filled up their tanks, even those who
did not need to do so. I am happy to tell hon members that as we stand, our
two refineries in Durban are running at 100% capacity; the two inland
refineries are also running at 100% capacity; our pipeline is at 100%
capacity; and the Caltex refinery here in the Western Cape is by now at 80%
capacity and PetroSA is at 70% capacity.

Concerning those areas where there is a shortage of fuel, fuel is being
transported from Durban. Companies have also applied for import permits to
import fuel. That is the status at present. What I do not want is the panic
demonstrated by saying, “We do not have physical stock.” We do have
physical stock, and it is going where it is required.

What I would also like to say is that, obviously, this is an emergency that
we are dealing with and whoever is responsible is going to take the
responsibility. As far as we are concerned, everything has been done to
prepare the industry to be ready for this.

If they had said to me, Adv Schmidt, that there was a problem regarding
implementation of the cleaner fuels policy on 1 January, we would obviously
have reconsidered the issue. They, the people who have dealt with this
issue, say there was no problem. All the oil industries, all their
managers, all their CEOs were there and assured me.

They have not asked for an extension as from June this year. We anticipated
that as they shut down to reconfigure their refineries, they might need to
import petrol. Since June, we have been asking, “Who needs an import
permit? Don’t you want to import fuel to prepare for this?” No one came
forward to apply for import permits.

As far as we are concerned, this is therefore just a contingency issue that
they are dealing with, and which we are also dealing with. We are obviously
dealing with the investigation that you just talked about and we shall be
making announcements soon as to what is going to happen to this commission
which is going to review the petrol situation.

With regard to the hon member who said that the portfolio committee was not
informed about this, I do not know where he was when this issue was
debated, because this issue came before the committee in 2002.
[Interjections.] I think I have dealt with all three of the issues that
were raised. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon members, you have had an
opportunity to make statements. When a member of the executive is
responding, you do not have the courtesy to listen. I think it is uncalled
for. This is a very important issue as far as the nation is concerned. It
is an opportunity for the Minister to address the nation on this issue, and
then you do not afford the Minister the opportunity to be heard. I think it
is very discourteous.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order:
Interjections have always be permitted in the National Assembly.
[Interjections.] Are you ruling that interjections are unparliamentary or
discourteous?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! We will afford one another
the opportunity to be heard. There are interjections, and then there are
interjections. When one is disrupting the member of the executive who is
responding, however, the Chair will not allow it.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, there was no disruption.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! If it happens again, the
Chair will intervene. Clearly we have to allow each other the courtesy to
be heard.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, may I address you on a point
of order? [Interjections.] Hon members need to know what the guidelines are
within the Rules. Interjections have always been permitted. The Chair is
now suggesting that the proceedings were disrupted. I want to suggest to
you that they were not disrupted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Mr Gibson, that is not a
point of order. Please take your seat.


       CONCERNS OVER FUEL SHORTAGE AT CAPE TOWN INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, I would like to respond
to those members who have highlighted the incident at Cape Town
International Airport. Quite clearly, this was a serious problem. It did
inconvenience passengers and airlines and is obviously something we would
not like to repeat. The lesson will be learned, and we shall collaborate
with the private sector, as has been discussed by the Minister of Minerals
and Energy, and with the Airports Company.

As we have indicated to our passengers at SAA, and I am sure other airlines
have done the same, we really regret some severe inconvenience that
occurred. We have to learn our lessons and make certain it does not happen
again. [Applause.]


                    WORLD HERITAGE SITES IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Chairperson, I want to thank the
hon member who raised the issue concerning the opening of Maropeng Visitors
Centre and say that the opening of that centre, at the Cradle of Humankind,
which is one of the seven world heritage sites in South Africa, is yet
another step to advance Africa’s claim in the world community.

Our world heritage sites play a very important developmental as well as
educational role. These world heritage sites are going to have a huge
tourism impact, with our support.

I want to appeal to members of Parliament to make a point, especially
during this period, of visiting all seven heritage sites together with
their families, and actually be ambassadors who are able to tell tourists
from outside our country visiting these sites about them. Yet it happens
that we in South Africa do not visit these heritage sites. I therefore want
to make an appeal that some of the places you visit over the festive season
should actually be these seven heritage sites. Thank you. [Applause.]


    SERVICE DELIVERY AND HOUSING IN DE DOORNS; ALLEGED CORRUPTION OF ANC
                       COUNCILLORS IN SCHWEIZER-RENEKE


(Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson and
hon members, this is a response to the hon Jonathan Arendse’s statement
regarding service delivery and housing in De Doorns. We welcome service
delivery to the community of De Doorns who have been living under terrible
conditions for many years, in a province which was not governed by the ANC
until recently. [Interjections.]

Under the programme of Project Consolidate we have identified the
bottlenecks and begun to address them. One thing I want to remind the House
about is that the ANC government took over in 1994 and we were not the
creators of the bucket system in this country. That is exactly what we are
trying to address. We inherited this mess in 1994 and we are addressing it
now through Project Consolidate. [Interjections.] If only Mr Doman can give
us one good example of success during the DA period in the province, I
would welcome it.

The second statement was about Schweizer-Reneke and ANC councillors in
corrupt practices selling off government property. The hon member has not
given us any help whatsoever by coming to this House and telling us about
corrupt practices of ANC councillors. The hon Minister is sitting here.
Give us the information and proof thereof and we will agree to deal with
the problem of those alleged corrupt ANC councillors. Give us information
and do not just come and make a noise here about some unfounded
information. Thank you. [Applause.]


          SIGNIFICANCE OF ROAD LINK BETWEEN BREDASDORP AND GANSBAAI


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek wil net `n bietjie aandag
skenk aan die aangeleentheid wat deur die agb Dikgacwi geopper is. [Mr
Chairman, I would like to devote some time to the matter raised by the hon
Dikgacwi.]

The road between Bredasdorp and Gansbaai is clearly very important. It is
important to unlock the economic potential of that region. Part of what we
must focus on is how we can create alternatives in the lives of people. The
hon Van Schalkwyk would tell us long stories about just how difficult it is
to create viable alternatives in the lives of people who have made a lot of
money in that particular region from things like perlemoen poaching etc.

This road could clearly make a very significant difference. But, along with
it, I think we must support the province and the Overberg municipality to
ensure that there are viable and sustainable economic alternatives to bring
continued improvement in the lives of the people of the Overberg. I missed
the hon Van Schalkwyk in the House earlier on, but I am sure he would
amplify for a very long time on what I have said.

Ke a leboha, ntate. [Thank you, sir.]
It is a very important issue. Thank you. [Applause.]

  PROPORTIONAL REPRESENTATION SYSTEM; HEALTH CARE SERVICES IN RURAL AREAS;
          THEFT OF MEDICINES; SAFETY AND PROTECTION OF COMMUNITIES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I was a little surprised at the
comment on the proportional model utilised in a range of institutions and
systems in the country, particularly coming from a member of the PAC, a
party that hugely benefits not from electoral votes but from the
proportional representation system. I therefore find this a little
surprising.

However, I would like to agree with the hon members Malumise and Mayatula
who referred to the issue of partnerships in the manner in which we should
address the significant social problems confronting our country. We have
all spoken about the need to act with care and support in response to those
affected by and infected with HIV/Aids and we would certainly join the hon
Malumise in welcoming the work being done by Mrs Mbeki in the
Idutywa/Butterworth area.

Further, the hon Mayatula is absolutely correct. We cannot have a person
stealing medicines in our country, especially in the smaller hospitals and
clinics that serve the poorest of our community. Therefore the police and
the work done in Butterworth are certainly to be commended.

I believe, during this festive season, a season very challenging and
difficult for those working in the areas of safety and security and
protecting our communities, we must have special sympathy and support for
the Police Service, for those working in emergency services, and for those
ensuring that we are protected and cared for – our nurses, doctors etc.

We should extend a hand of support to all those working in these services,
to the volunteers who support children who are orphans, to the nurses who
support those who are sick and to the doctors who are going to have to deal
with very difficult emergency situations regarding car accidents, violence,
the use of guns etc.

We, therefore, certainly, agree with the hon members that we should thank
those who serve to promote safety and security in our country. We urge our
public servants to protect public property and enhance public services in
our country . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge) Order! Hon Minister, your time has
expired.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you. [Applause.]

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE – FACT-FINDING
                           VISIT TO WALLMANNSTAHL

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE – PUBLIC HEARINGS
                       ON THE WALLMANNSTAHL LAND CLAIM

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE – OVERSIGHT VISIT
                              TO THABA TSHWANE

Mr S B NTULI: Hon Chairperson, hon members, Ministers and Deputy Ministers
present, firstly, I wish to dedicate my speech on this report to a gallant
soldier, an ordinary father and family man who resisted forced removals
imposed by the then apartheid government of the National Party, a family
man who was killed on 2 April 1983 by the South African police at a close
range of 100 metres for refusing to be removed from his original land.
Ladies and gentlemen, hon members, I speak here of the late Sol Vusumuzi
Mkhize of Driefontein, Wakkerstroom and Mabola areas in Mpumalanga.

This just shows how far the Land Act has actually dispossessed the South
African people of their original land. The local inspection of
Wallmannstahl as per the claimants’ grievances, that is, on land
restitution, shows that the Land Act itself was a notorious Act. It
resulted in the displacement of the Africans from their original land; land
that was fairly good in providing grazing for their livestock, land with
accessible water, and land where they could practise subsistence pastoral
farming.

Hence, we in the ANC hold the view that land restitution is actually a
human rights matter. It is a human rights matter, because how can any human
being live without water for themselves and their livestock? How can any
human being live after being driven away from their fertile land and
displaced to inarable land?

Therefore the local inspection by the Portfolio Committee on Defence
carried out on Wednesday, 24 August 2005, was to ascertain the size and
scope of the land in the Wallmannstahl community so as to see how it
affects the following areas: Buffelsdrift, Wallmannstahl West,
Wallmannstahl East and Wallmannstahl Central.

These portions have already been returned to the claimants by the ANC
government. The issue at hand is the northern part. This is the area linked
to Wallmannstahl Central, which is used by the current SA National Defence
Force. There is no question about it. However, the issue being argued about
by the land claimants is the area between Wallmannstahl Central and a place
or area further north between Wallmannstahl Central and the area of the
General Piet Joubert Military Training Facility.

There is an area of approximately 400 hectares that we are talking about,
then there is a strip of the road between the General Piet Joubert Military
Training Facility and Wallmannstahl Central which is used by the SANDF. The
claimants don’t have a problem with the road or the strips of land. What
they need is the land which has access to the Pienaars River. The strip of
road does not make up the entire 400 hectares.

By its own admission, the SANDF uses the road sporadically. Besides, there
is an alternative road currently being used to commute between the two
areas mentioned. Thus the Department of Defence really would not collapse
if it were to give the 400 hectares back to the community, that is the
claimants, to further restore the human dignity and human rights of the
Wallmannstahl claimants.

Furthermore, the portfolio committee also looked at the areas such as the
military base’s facilities. Some facilities are in a bad state for human
occupation, which of course poses a threat to human life. The Department of
Defence needs to pay serious attention to those matters as articulated in
the report. We are talking here of Thaba Tshwane, that is One Military
Hospital, the military air force school, the military intelligence
headquarters in Tshwane etc.

Therefore, on behalf of the ANC, I commend to the House the debate and the
adoption of the report on Wallmannstahl, and the entire report on the
Portfolio Committee on Defence’s visit. I thank you. [Applause.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Hon Chairperson, the land claim of the
Wallmannstahl community was registered in 1994 and has yet to be resolved.
The committee decided to investigate this issue after receiving several
requests for interventions from the claimants, and it therefore decided to
undertake a fact-finding mission to Wallmannstahl on 28 August 2005. We
subsequently held public hearings on the land claims on 6 September.

Amongst many, the following are some of the key findings: The land claims
against the Department of Defence amount to approximately 311 270 hectares,
of which 1 628 hectares are under claim by this community. Of these 1 628
hectares, approximately 400 hectares of land were in dispute and were
delaying the entire process and settlement of the claim.

The Department of Defence, DOD, uses this piece of land, which amounts to
approximately 400 hectares, to connect the joint support base, Wonderboom,
with its training area in Piet Joubert Military base. The DOD fenced this
area, forcing the claimants to redirect their cattle approximately 11,5
kilometres in order to reach the Pienaars River for drinking water. The
claimants stated that information relating to this strip of land was
published in the Government Gazette as a land claim, whereas the DOD on the
other hand has not released the land, arguing that it is of strategic
importance.

Finally, the following are some of the recommendations made by the
committee: The Minister of Defence should meet with the Wallmannstahl
community to bring this process to completion. All the final remaining
snags surrounding the issue of the fences etc, should be addressed by the
relevant Ministries, including the Departments of Public Works, Land
Affairs and Defence and, at all costs, we must avoid a court case because
it can prove very costly.

The Portfolio Committee on Defence also received the reports from the
public and members of the SA National Defence Force and DOD that the
defence facilities, including hospitals and buildings used for education
and training, living quarters etc are in a general state of disrepair. In
order to ascertain the situation, we visited several military bases and
units in Thaba Tshwane.

The maintenance challenges of the different units are of a generic nature,
and these challenges include the continuous structural repairs, paintwork
etc. Many of the facilities in the DOD no longer conform to the minimum
requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act. Urgent attention
must be given to co-ordinate efforts between the responsible departments,
including the Departments of Labour, Public Works and Defence to improve
the situation.

The committee has made several key recommendations. One of those is that
One Military Hospital, that provides services beyond the SANDF, should
receive the necessary maintenance and repair budget to maintain its image
and output as an international service provider. The accommodation of the
nurses at the military health training formation should receive priority
attention.

Finally, the defence intelligence headquarters should relocate to Radcliffe
for geographical, technical, financial and, above all, security reasons.
Most importantly, the procurement and tender process of the Department of
Public Works should ensure that contractors are competent to execute the
requested task.

Let me give you a brief case study to illustrate the modus operandi of the
Public Works department to maintain these facilities of the DOD. In 2004,
the Department of Public Works allocated approximately R870 000 for the
construction of a swimming pool for training purposes at the Special Forces
School unit. The funding was forfeited due to poor delivery by the
preferred contractor. This contractor had no construction experience
whatsoever, did not have a mentor and failed to comply with the time
schedules.

Several snags still remain in this project. This procurement process, which
resulted in an incompetent contractor being chosen for the project, leaves
much to be desired. This is yet another example of BEE gone wrong.

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, hon members, on 18 and 19 August 2005 an
oversight visit was undertaken by the Portfolio Committee on Defence,
accompanied by military officers and officials of the Department of Defence
as well as the Department of Public Works to various military units in the
Thaba Tshwane area.

The aim of the visit was to ascertain the state of the facilities and the
maintenance thereof. Included among the main findings by the committee were
the following: the appalling state of accommodation of nurses at the
military health training formation; the gap in communication between the
Department of Public Works and the Department of Defence; and the living
conditions of the learners in some units not fit for human occupation – it
would impede the training of learners. The committee came up with many
recommendations, which we believe would go a long way towards improving the
situation.

In August this year, the Portfolio Committee on Defence also undertook a
fact-finding visit to Wallmannstahl to ascertain the size and scope of the
land claim of the Wallmannstahl community. Among the main findings of this
visit was the communication gap between the Departments of Public Works,
Land Affairs and Defence, which was a major reason for the claim’s process
not being finalised.

In September 2005, the Portfolio Committee on Defence held public hearings
on the Wallmannstahl land claim. It was briefed in April by the Departments
of Defence and Land Affairs on the state of land reform and the land
utilisation of the Department of Defence. The briefing was, however, unco-
ordinated and sometimes contradictory.

At the public hearings, the above two departments, along with the
Department of Public Works, made a joint briefing and reported that the
joint structure had been established. Among the main findings stated in the
report is that there is a general agreement between the community and the
Department of Defence on most of the claims lodged by the community. It is
recommended, as we have heard from the report, that the Minister of Defence
should meet with the Wallmannstahl community to bring the process to
completion by 24 December 2005 so that an official handover to the
community can take place in April 2006.

The IFP supports the approval of these reports. I thank you.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, the first two reports of the
Portfolio Committee on Defence deal with the Wallmannstahl community’s land
claim, which has not been resolved for many years now. We concur with the
recommendations of these reports and we express the hope that the Minister
of Defence’s intervention will lead to a resolution. The handover of the
land by 24 December 2005 would be a wonderful Christmas present to a
community who was forcefully removed from their land decades ago.

The third report deals with the portfolio committee’s oversight visit to
Thaba Tshwane, where various critical military units occupy land and
buildings. The finding that most of the buildings are in a general state of
disrepair is of great concern. The longer the maintenance thereof is
neglected, the higher the costs of eventual repairs or replacements.

We concur with the report’s recommendations and urge both the Department of
Defence and the Department of Public Works to address these critical
infrastructure issues speedily. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr O E MONARENG: Hon Chair, hon members, I want to express my greetings to
all. Let me start off by saying that the committee has undertaken various
visits on various days, and the days are specifically mentioned in the
report. The first visit was to Thaba Tshwane on 18 and 19 August 2005.

The committee wishes to express the view that when it undertakes oversight
visits, it really means business. On the above-mentioned dates we were
able, as a committee, to visit the SA Military Health Service Training
Formation, the One Military Hospital, the Special Forces School, the Joint
Support Base Garrison, the defence intelligence headquarters, the SA
National Defence College, the SA National War College, the SA Air Force
College and the SA Air Force Gymnasium.

So it is clear that the purpose of the visit was to make sure that we deal
with the manner in which the department deals with maintenance of
facilities. That was actually investigated by the committee.

The Portfolio Committee on Defence was, in the same vein, able to visit
Wallmannstahl for an investigation into land. And, in this process,
questions were asked as to what the Department of Defence had to do with
the land claims issues. However, because the portfolio committee is a
parliamentary committee that always follows the position adopted by
Cabinet, the position of the ANC on land restitution is clear.

We were, therefore, able to visit these institutions so as to make sure
that certain things are done by the Department of Defence and the SA
National Defence Force. In so far as buildings and their maintenance, and
land, are concerned, we know that the Department of Public Works is
responsible for these. This department is the custodian of state land and
facilities and therefore is responsible for the maintenance and repair of
these facilities.

The department only dealt with maintenance requests that cost more than
R500 per case. Approval by the Department of Public Works was also
necessary for cases below R5 000, because it has the technical know-how to
advise the user, that is the Department of Defence, on the best course of
action.

Each military unit has a budget for day-to-day maintenance, but it is
insufficient and is only used for emergency cases.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Order! Hon member, please
take your seat. Hon members, the noise level is too high, and there are
very serious meetings taking place in the House. I would like to ask you to
just lower the noise level so that we can hear the speaker at the podium.
Please continue, hon member.

Mr O E MONARENG: Each military unit has a budget for day-to-day
maintenance, but it is insufficient and only used for emergency cases. In
most cases, it is insufficient to deal with emergency cases owing to the
deteriorating state of facilities and maintenance backlogs. Spending is
prioritised on core business of the units, whether it is training or
accommodation, so that the output is not interrupted.

The situation at the defence intelligence headquarters and the SA National
War College was different, because the defence intelligence headquarters
are rented from private institutions. The maintenance and repair routine
have been determined by the owner, who is mindful of overinvestment in old
buildings. The maintenance requirements of these two units have been
addressed by the owner, but very slowly.

The SA National Defence College was the only unit that did not have
critical maintenance problems, apart from the living quarters of the
learners. The Special Forces School used its own capabilities to improve
and maintain facilities. All the different units had maintenance challenges
across the spectrum, which were of a generic nature.

I just want to say that, in terms of our findings as a committee, we have
made sure that we address the following issues. The first issue is the
question of accommodation of nurses at the SA military health services
training formation, which is appalling and not fit for habitation. We have
said that the department should look into this issue. The second issue is
that One Military Hospital shows signs of structural and mechanical
neglect. The military hospital needs an urgent revamp.

Thirdly, the decision on the military intelligence headquarters location
has not been finalised. I heard Mr Shah saying that it has to go somewhere.
The committee agrees that it has to be relocated somewhere, but the
Department of Defence will finalise the relocation process.

Fourthly, Thaba Tshwane was built on dolomitic land and has had virtually
no upgrade or renovation during the past two or three decades. It therefore
poses serious structural and maintenance problems for the Departments of
Defence and Public Works.

Fifthly, the Department of Public Works is responsible for more than 80% of
the total funding for DOD facilities with regard to planned maintenance and
day-to-day maintenance of cases costing more than R500 each, while the DOD
is responsible for the funding of the day-to-day maintenance costing less
than R500 per case.

I am sure that Mr Shah raised an issue that completely distorted the
processes of procurement. The procurement process is not a difficult
process, and neither is it as a result of BEE incompetence. But what we
have recommended as a committee is that that process should be relooked at
and that funding be increased.

The sixth point is that there is a communication gap between the Department
of Public works and the Department of Defence. At one of the units the
Department of Public Works stated that the R5 000 maintenance threshold was
raised to R20 000 per case, but the DOD was not aware of it. So the
recommendation is that this maintenance money should be raised either to
R20 000 or to R30 000.

Regarding the question of the Department of Public Works, this department
does not provide regular feedback to units on the progress on maintenance
requests, tenders and contracts. So the DOD has to look into this process
together with the Department of Public Works.

The department itself has a 10 to 15 year repair and maintenance programme
to address the maintenance and repair needs. The department has to relook
at its maintenance strategy. And, as such, the findings of the committee
have to give us answers because we have tabled this report here.

Coupled with the findings of the committee, we have made the recommendation
that the department should act. With regard to the Wallmannstahl issue, the
speakers who spoke before me did make it clear that the Portfolio Committee
on Defence is very serious about the matter.

The question of the outstanding 400 hectares is delaying the land
restitution process for the people of Wallmannstahl. We have actually sent
a communiqué to the Minister of Defence so that this matter can be resolved
speedily.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

Mr O E MONARENG: Thank you, one and all. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the Wallmannstahl report makes it clear that a lack of
communication between the Departments of Defence, Land Affairs and Public
Works has considerably slowed down the land restitution process. It has
become evident that interdepartmental communication is a critical factor in
the success of land reform initiatives.

In this case, lack of communication meant that claimants were subjected to
a lengthy, drawn-out procedure creating uncertainty and anxiety and wasting
time and money. The ACDP is concerned by the fact that the Department of
Defence was not able to provide the community and other role-players with
clear information on the reasons that made them feel they could not
relinquish the land.

Our democracy is underpinned by transparency and accountability. This means
that the communities whom the government departments serve are entitled to
open and honest communication, particularly when one is dealing with a
major transformation tool such as the land reform process.

The country cannot afford to indulge departments hindering the land reform
process. It is a serious matter that involves the lives and livelihood of
South Africans.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge) Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

Mrs C DUDLEY: I thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, ek dink ons moet ’n stadium bereik waar
ons die ware feite in die oë moet kyk, en feit is dat die SA Nasionale
Weermag besig is om uitmekaar te val. Ons kan hoeveel besoeke aan basisse
bring en ons kan hoeveel beskuldigings teen die Departement van Openbare
Werke bring dat hulle nie hul werk doen nie, maar die werklikheid is dat
die begroting van die Weermag van so ’n aard is dat hulle nie hul taak
behoorlik kan volbring nie.

Dit is skokkend as verslae bekend gemaak moet word dat daar nie eens genoeg
geld is om genoeg ammunisie aan te koop vir die SA Nasionale Weermag nie.
Dit het in hierdie stadium so ’n punt bereik dat ons vir mekaar moet sê dit
help nie net om besoeke te bring en verslae op te stel om hier in die
Parlement ter tafel te kom lê en dit te aanvaar nie. Nee, ons moet ook iets
begin doen. Ons sal moet optree, en een van die heel eerste dinge wat
gedoen sal moet word, is om ernstig te besin oor die begroting van
Verdediging. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairman, I think that we have to reach a stage
where we face up to the real facts, and the fact is that the SA National
Defence Force is falling apart. We can pay as many visits as we like to the
bases and we can lay as many charges as we like against the Department of
Public Works for not doing their work, but the reality is that the budget
of the Defence Force is of such a nature that they cannot  perform their
task properly.

It is shocking when reports have to be released that there is not even
enough money to buy sufficient ammunition for the SA National Defence
Force. At this point it has reached the stage where we have to say to one
another that it does not help merely to pay visits and compile reports to
be tabled and adopted here in Parliament. No, we also have to start doing
something. We will have to act and one of the very first things that will
have to be done is to reflect seriously on the budget for Defence. I thank
you.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon M Diko? Is he not here?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: [Inaudible.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Mr Diko is not here. I won’t
repeat what Mr Gibson has just said.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF, firstly, takes this opportunity to
thank the committee’s task team which paid a visit and compiled this
informative report on the sector. In view of the matter at hand concerning
the land claims issue between the community and, mostly, the Defence Force
facility situated in Wallmannstahl, the MF, noting that the community’s
majority claim is on this area, feels that the recommendation made by the
team on both reports regarding the land claims should be seriously
considered and advocated.

We feel that, if alternative land cannot be made available to the community
to compensate for the land taken up by the Defence Force, monetary
settlement should also be possible if it is not viable that alternative
sites be established for the Defence Force facility in that area.

Now, looking at the third report on the state of the facilities in that
area, the MF finds it necessary, once again, to take in a serious light the
recommendations made. We do see great benefits in communication between the
Department of Defence and the Department of Public Works, considering the
financial decision regarding the maintenance of the facilities.

The maintenance and the management of all facilities need to be instituted
according to their prescribed parameters and authority. Further, adequate
management of such shall ensure the exercise of duties of our Defence Force
in suitable surroundings and a credible environment.

The MF supports the recommendations made in these reports. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Mr M S BOOI: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers that are present here, Deputy
Ministers, the Portfolio Committee on Defence is submitting its report to
Parliament. A number of members have already alluded to the fact that this
is a true report and that we have done quite a lot of work after having
been approached by the public.

When you look at the Wallmannstahl issue concerning land claims, you will
find that we were approached by the public as the Defence committee. We
took it upon ourselves as members of Parliament to visit those particular
communities. Essentially, what is important about that is that it is about
how Parliament continues to explain some of the policies that the Freedom
Charter outlined, that you should always be closer to the people and listen
to what the people are doing. That was what was essential with this type of
initiative.

I’m totally shocked, because even the hon member C Dudley was not in the
committee. She doesn’t even know what we are talking about. She has
received the reports that we have given to them. So it is really shocking
when members don’t really inform themselves and look at the processes of
Parliament and familiarise themselves with those.

Even if you can’t make it, you should come and talk to us. We are quite
available because when you make these general statements regarding
transparency, lack of consultation, lack of communication, we wonder, as
the portfolio committee as to, “Where did you pick up that type of
information?” [Interjections.] I am coming to you. We wonder, “Where did
you pick up that information because ourselves and the community have been
in interaction?”

The fact that we visited the department and the type of analysis that is
even given by the DA concerning that type of visit, our sharing of
information with them and the various departments that we have consulted
with, even regarding the Wallmannstahl issue, show that there has been
transparency. It’s not something that we are hiding. It’s not something
that we have done behind somebody’s back. We have been inviting all
different parties.

For me, it’s very important indeed that members of Parliament should always
give respect to the House itself and familiarise themselves with issues as
they are being explained. The two reports in front of members outline the
issues that have been raised. The ANC is always there for transparency; the
ANC is always honest about what it is doing. These are the lessons that the
ANC has learnt throughout this process.

We continuously say that the people shall govern. So I would hope that the
hon C Dudley would familiarise herself with the report and really reflect
upon it, and not generalise. There has been quite an open way of dealing
with it. That’s why there is a committee formed between ourselves and the
Departments of Land Affairs and Public Works to look at the situation, not
to try and sweep it under the carpet as if we don’t know what is going on.

More than that, what we are saying, hon Groenewald, is that we do care. We
do care about the soldiers. Definitely, the size of the Defence Force that
was there before 1994 and the continuous trimming down of the Defence Force
does call for us to really do a reassessment of their budget. You can’t
just generalise. [Interjections.]

We have made you very aware. We have given you the review of the White
Paper; and we have given you the Defence Review. Those policies are there.
The work and management of the Defence Force, at this particular moment,
has really improved. It is being handled in a manner that is quite
impressive. Regarding the way they are handling the peacekeeping forces
within the different areas of deployment, it has been going very well. You
don’t have problems regarding major issues.

Mr Groenewald, the budget wouldn’t be the same budget that you expected
during the apartheid era because defence was then the priority. Today, the
issues that are going to be handled are issues that are related to local
government. Today, the issues that are related to health and Aids are
issues to us. Today the issues that are related to education are issues to
us. They are priorities. There is no way we would always want to arm the
Defence Force as if it has a threat.

I have always said that there is no threat and there is no way that we are
going to build a huge army. For what purposes would that be? You must
always define the purpose and you must always define the threat. Sometimes
you don’t understand what the purpose of having a defence force is.
Ensuring the readiness of the Defence Force is what we have been doing.

Go about, investigate and see what exactly is happening to your Defence
Force. That’s the type of responsibility we have taken upon ourselves. We
have engaged with different soldiers to inform them that this is what is
happening. We are satisfied about how the integration process has taken
place and this is what we are saying.

Now, we are saying there are equipment shortages. We are not hiding that.
We have spoken about it. Members here have alluded to the fact that this is
something that we need to be able to attend to. But we are saying, don’t
create an expectation in the Defence Force as if the budget is going to
grow because the expectation is there from our people that we must be able
to deal with the issues of Aids, and that we must be able to have the
capacity to deal with the issues of education. Those are the priorities of
this particular government of the ANC.

There is no way, as a Portfolio Committee on Defence, we are going to run
around and say: Have a huge budget for Defence. What would the purpose be?
We say there is no threat, and when there is no threat you are not going to
say this is supposed to be the priority.

So we are really saying that we are working closely with the different
departments with which we interact. We are clearly saying that every time
the public has a concern they must come to Parliament and be able to report
to us. As hon Ntuli has pointed out, we have been able to handle the
Wallmannstahl issue in the proper way.

We have been able to look into the issues of how we make sure that the land
compensation issues are being handled because the Defence Force has vast
tracts of land. We have to start trimming that land down and giving it to
different communities. But we are not going to do that recklessly and in a
manner that is going to disrupt the Defence Force. We are doing it in a
manner that we should be able to continuously say that we are building
their own capacity as a defence force.

But we also make sure that communities that are nearer and communities that
have claims around these issues of land are able to be given this
particular land. These are the issues that we really address within this
particular report. And these are the issues that we say we really need to
improve on.

We are going to be able to negotiate and persuade different members to
understand that it’s important for us to improve the equipment. But there
is no way you are going to say to us that there is no ammunition in the
Defence Force. You are not telling the truth. We have even gone beyond the
borders of South Africa. We have gone into the DRC and we have interacted
with those people there. We have interacted with our own soldiers and we
know that they are combat ready. They are combat ready such that any time
that you attack them they will be able to retaliate.

We are saying that there is no way that you could come here and say to
Parliament, “Regarding your equipment, the Defence Force don’t have
anything with which to defend themselves.” Wherever they are deployed, they
have nice tents. Within Sudan, they have the best tents in which they can
stay. So you can’t be saying that they don’t have equipment.

These people are very ready. They are ready to defend the citizenry of
South Africa. They are prepared to deal with the issue of rejuvenation. The
Defence Force is rejuvenating itself. The SA Air Force is rejuvenating
itself. It has capacity. You can’t say to me that the arms package has not
been able to help keep the Defence Force ready. It is doing that.

Because you want to ignore issues and because you just want to slander, you
then come here and say to Parliament that the Defence Force is not ready.
This Defence Force does have the capacity and it is ready to defend the
citizens of South Africa, whatever you say. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Mr S K LOUW: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move:

      That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Defence on Fact-Finding Visit to
Wallmannstahl accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Defence on Public Hearings on the
Wallmannstahl Land Claim accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Defence on Oversight Visit to Thaba
Tshwane accordingly adopted.


     CROSS-BOUNDARY MUNICIPALITIES LAWS REPEAL AND RELATED MATTERS BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson and hon
members, the House has convened to consider the Cross-boundary
Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Bill. This watershed
development will set the scene for the reconstruction of our developmental
landscape.

As we speak, the NCOP is also getting ready to convene tomorrow, in order
to consider the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill, a Bill that was
referred to it by the National Assembly for concurrence. Today’s event has
the effect, therefore, of bringing us to the penultimate stage in the
finalisation of the legislative programme. It thus confirms the country’s
preparedness to hold local government elections on 1 March 2006.

The need for the geographical reordering of provinces and for the
modification of the local government structure was accentuated by the
realisation that cross-boundary municipalities are among those
municipalities which, in the last five years, registered a relatively weak
performance. Indeed, these particular areas were trapped in a structural
design, which is inappropriate to the task of universalising access to
basic services, as well as cultivating conditions for sustainable local
economic development.

For the government, the task of redressing the problem does not end with
the redrawing of boundaries, for we are talking here of millions of people
who are residents in municipal areas which, by law, suffered statutory
expulsion from the national economy. As hon members are aware, from late
2004, we have been rolling out a programme of intervention, aimed at
bringing about system-wide improvements within the local government sphere.
These include fiscal interventions directed at lifting investment on
infrastructure, and accelerating the pace of redressing service delivery
backlogs.

We will soon be announcing concrete measures, which are intended to enable
erstwhile cross-boundary municipalities to tap into the ever-expanding
veins of municipal fiscal power. This is necessary because a
disproportionately high number of people, who live in the cross-boundary
municipalities, survive on social grants of various kinds.

The only sustainable way in which those areas can be lifted out of
wretchedness and poverty is to ensure that we craft a more even spatial
pattern of socioeconomic development, and that we increase the absorptive
capacity of those municipalities that have hitherto been battling to carry
out their developmental objectives. This Bill promises to make a
substantial contribution in this regard. For that reason, I commend the
Bill to the House. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S L TSENOLI: Chairperson, comrade Ministers, hon members, the Cross-
boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Bill is
consequential to the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill. Together, these
legislative and constitutional amendments give effect to a review that was
undertaken that concluded that we should do away with cross-boundary
municipalities.

The Demarcation Board and provincial governments also took advantage of the
opportunity created by this process to deal with unfinished business
relating to boundaries and section 12 notices by updating them. This is
what is essentially the current idea of municipalities.

This work also gives effect to a broader national agenda to strengthen
institutions of governance, to reorganise them with a broader purpose in
order to improve our ability to satisfy people’s basic needs. This state
that we run, as the ANC, is not a hostile one, imposed on people, but it
comes from them through open democratic means.

It uses its power and influence, its resources, to relentlessly pursue a
people’s agenda to satisfy people’s needs. That, sometimes, in the process
of doing so, we may produce unintended consequences, cannot be interpreted
to mean insensitivity to people’s needs.

Our commitment to carry out this people’s agenda is undoubted. As
articulated in parliamentary and legislature submissions and hearings, we
will be attending to these issues. We have attended to them directly and
indirectly.

It is, however, Parliament and government’s responsibility to negotiate and
always produce the best results from often conflicting positions, as well
as resolve, to the best of our ability, the tension between doing things in
the short term, in the medium term, or in the long term. Advanced work is
already under way – having learnt from the past reduction of municipalities
how to facilitate a smooth transition and handover in the areas affected.

The Portfolio Committees on Provincial and Local Government and on Justice
and Constitutional Development, as well as the Select Committee on Local
Government and Administration, worked together closely on these laws, and
such co-operation was very useful. In addition, we referred these
submissions, which we received, to all the provinces affected, so that
they, working with their affected communities, would incorporate these
views in their decision-making which, as the Minister said, we will hear
through the NCOP when it makes its decisions tomorrow.

Our immediate task - a critical national agenda - is to facilitate the
holding of local government elections throughout our country. These
municipalities enter an important phase in their second term of existence,
the renewal of their mandate. That is a crucial priority. That the people
shall govern must be re-emphasised through these local government
elections.

The people living in these communities, the 16 affected areas, but also
throughout the country, will no doubt recognise the significance of
ensuring that the structures of governance remain in the people’s hands.
The people in these areas will take a longer-term view, will recognise the
necessity of ensuring that the unity of our country is maintained, and that
we are not seduced by fragmentation by default, because of where we are
located geographically. This country is one country, one tax base, and we
think that the work that is under way is intended to prioritise the fight
against poverty and to create employment.

We would like to thank Dr Pat Rabowa, Adv Kholong and the state law
advisers who supported us, Dr Vuyo Mlokoti, the chairperson of the board,
as well as Mr Monare, for their help in processing this legislation.

We support the Bill. Thank you.

Mnr W P DOMAN: Agb Voorsitter, die DA steun die wegdoen met
oorgrensmunisipaliteite. Dié oorgrensmunisipaliteite was gedeeltelik die
gevolg van onopgeloste grensdispute in die verlede, en dié 16
oorgrensmunisipaliteite moes die gevolge hiervan dra. Maar, dit was ook ‘n
doelbewuste besluit van die ANC-regering, destyds, om die lewensvatbaarheid
van dié munisipaliteite te verbeter om ‘n belastingbasis te skep. Dit is ‘n
eksperiment wat verkeerd geloop het, en ek is bly daar is vandag erkenning
dat dit nie kan werk nie.
Die een goeie doel wat dit miskien gedien het, was om ‘n brose vrede te
handhaaf in ‘n sensitiewe tydperk van oorgang. Tóé, soos vandag, met al die
ongelukkigheid en demonstrasies oor grense, is dit ‘n duidelike bewys van
hoe sterk mense oor hul eie en plaaslike belange voel. Al hierdie
gemeenskappe is tog deel van ‘n hele Suid-Afrika, maar hulle is bereid om
in opstand te kom oor watter provinsie of munisipaliteit vir hulle die
beste dienste sal lewer, watter dorp of streek vir hulle die beste
ekonomiese moontlikhede bied, watter gesondheids- of onderwysdepartement
vir hulle die beste sal bedien, en selfs watter taxi- of busroete die
goedkoopste en die doeltreffendste vir hulle sal wees.

As daar dus een belangrike les is wat ons geleer het in hierdie dae dan is
dit hoe belangrik plaaslike belange en omstandighede vir mense is. G’n
wonder nie dat ‘n vorige speaker van Amerika, Tip O’Neill, altyd gesê het:
“All politics is local.” (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN: Hon Chairperson, the DA supports the elimination of cross-
boundary municipalities. These cross-boundary municipalities were partly
the result of unsolved boundary disputes in the past, and these 16 cross-
boundary municipalities had to bear the consequences of this. But it was
also a deliberate decision of the ANC government at the time to improve the
viability of these municipalities in order to create a tax base, and it was
an experiment that went wrong and I am glad that there is recognition today
that it cannot work.

The one good purpose that it possibly served was to maintain a fragile
peace in a sensitive time of transition. Then, as today, with all the
unhappiness and demonstrations about boundaries, it clearly proved how
strongly people feel about their own and local interests. All these
communities are, after all, part of a united South Africa, but they are
prepared to revolt about which province or municipality will provide them
with the best services; which town or region offers them the best economic
opportunities; which health or education department will serve them best;
and even which taxi or bus route will be the cheapest and most efficient
for them.

If there is, therefore, one important lesson that we have learned in these
days, it is how important local interests and circumstances are to people.
It is no wonder that a previous speaker of America, Tip O’Neill, always
said: “All politics is local.”]

We should always remember to allow people local options and bring
government as close as possible to people, and therefore never
underestimate the importance of local government. Even in the municipal
sphere of local government, local municipalities are infinitely more
important to people than the district municipalities.

Wat ook duidelik geword het met die oorgrensveranderinge is dat sekere
provinsies ‘n rekord van swak regering opgebou het, waaraan hulle dringend
aandag sal moet gee. Die mense van Matatiele wil nie na die Oos-Kaap toe
gaan nie, maar wil eerder in KwaZulu-Natal bly omdat hulle dink hulle kan
beter dienste dáár kry.

Die mense van Kgalagadi wil eerder Noord-Kaap toe kom as om in Noord-Wes te
bly; die mense van Merafong wil eerder na Gauteng toe gaan as na Noord-Wes
toe; en die mense van Marble Hall in Groblersdal wil eerder in Mpumalanga
bly as om na Limpopo toe te gaan waar hulle voel dat hulle nóg swakker
behandel sal word. ‘n Groot uitdaging lê dus vir hierdie ontvangende
provinsies voor die deur om goeie dienste te lewer aan hul nuwe
gemeenskappe.

Dít bring ons by die oorgangsmaatreëls wat in hierdie wetsontwerp getref
word. Dit is noodsaaklik, en met die nodige welwillendheid van die
provinsies kan dit goed afgehandel word. Veral die oordrag van personeel
gaan baie sensitief wees, en hier sal die verskillende provinsies wysheid
aan die dag moet lê. Ons is baie dankbaar ook dat die NRVP ‘n rol kry in
dié wetsontwerp wanneer daar nie ooreenkomste getref kan word nie.

Dit sou ‘n heuglike dag wees as ons sou kon sê dat al die
diensleweringsprobleme in dié 16 oorgrensmunisipaliteite nou opgelos sal
word. Ongelukkig was die oorgrensprobleme, naamlik dat munisipaliteite met
twee provinsies se wette moes werk en dat dienste nie bymekaar aangesluit
het nie, en wie watter dienste moes lewer, nie die hoof oorsaak van die
swak bestuur en dienslewering in dié munisipaliteite nie.

Die Minister het daarna verwys, en hy het al die probleme in plaaslike
regering, wat ons maar ook in dié munisipaliteite gesien het, gehanteer.
Hulle is ook aanwesig en hulle sal moet aandag kry.
Daar moet aandag gegee word aan bekwame personeel, aan goeie finansiële
bestuur, sodat daar goeie dienste gelewer kan word. Maar tog, ons maak
vandag ten minste een eksperiment reg wat verkeerd geloop het met hierdie
wetsontwerp.

Nou, in die gees van Kersfees, wil ek nie eintlik onnodig met die Minister
vir Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering baklei nie, maar die waarheid bly dat
hy sedert November 2002 geweet het dat oorgrensmunisipaliteite moet
verdwyn, maar volgens ‘n verslag van die Munisipale Afbakeningsraad self –
hul verslag – eers in Augustus vanjaar die raad versoek het om aandag aan
dié probleem te gee. Gevolglik het die raadpleging met die gemeenskappe wat
geraak word veel te wense oorgelaat. Dis oorhaastig gedoen. In sommige
gevalle is daar onduidelikheid oor wat die gemeenskappe wil hê, in ander
gevalle word daar teen die uitdruklike wil van die mense opgetree.

Nog erger, in Matatiele is die mense eintlik mislei en is hulle aanvanklik
onder die indruk gebring dat hulle by KwaZulu-Natal gaan bly, maar
uiteindelik is hulle by die Oos-Kaap ingedeel. Die Munisipale
Afbakeningsraad was sy hande in onskuld, want daar word gesê hy is nie
verantwoordelik vir provinsiale grense nie, en dit is eintlik reg. Minister
Mufamadi en die ANC-regering dra die verantwoordelikheid vir hierdie
oorhaastige proses wat gemeenskappe in opstand laat kom het, en in sommige
gevalle mense laat met grense waarmee hulle hoegenaamd nie tevrede is nie.

‘n Mens kan nie die indruk ontsnap dat politieke opportunisme en, by name,
stemgetalle, die finale deurslag gegee het in sekere van dié wysigings nie.
En dít terwyl hierdie gemeenskappe maar net smag na beter dienslewering.
Die ANC moenie verbaas wees nie as hy op 1 Maart volgende jaar dalk ‘n laat
Kersgeskenk gaan ontvang van hierdie gemeenskappe wat nie so aangenaam sal
wees nie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[What has also become clear with the cross-boundary changes is that certain
provinces have built up a record of poor governance, to which they will
have to pay urgent attention. The people of Matatiele do not want to go to
the Eastern Cape, but would rather stay in KwaZulu-Natal because they think
that they can get better services there.

The people of Kgalagadi would rather come to the Northern Cape than stay in
the North West; the people of Merafong would rather go to Gauteng than to
the North West; and the people of Marble Hall in Groblersdal would rather
stay in Mpumalanga than go to Limpopo where they feel that they would be
even more badly treated. These provinces that are receiving these
communities will therefore have to meet the great challenge of providing
them with good services.

This brings us to the transitional measures set out in this Bill. They are
imperative, and with the necessary goodwill of the provinces they can be
properly finalised. Especially the transfer of staff is going to be very
sensitive and in this regard the various municipalities will have to act
wisely. We are also very grateful that the NCOP is getting a role in this
Bill when agreement cannot be reached.

It would be a joyful day if we could say that all the service delivery
problems in these 16 cross-boundary municipalities would now be solved.
Unfortunately the cross-boundary problems, namely that municipalities had
to work with two provinces’ Acts and that services did not link up, and who
had to deliver what services, were not the main cause of the poor
management and service delivery in these municipalities.

The Minister has referred to this, and he has dealt with all the problems
in local government, which we have also seen in these municipalities. They
are also present and will have to receive attention. Attention should be
given to competent staff, to sound financial management, so that good
services can be delivered. Even so, with this Bill we are today correcting
at least one experiment that went wrong.

Now, in the spirit of Christmas, I don’t really want to quarrel
unnecessarily with the Minister for Provincial and Local Government, but
the fact remains that he has known since November 2002 that cross-boundary
municipalities have to go, but according to a report of the Municipal
Demarcation Board itself – their report – he only requested the board in
August this year to give attention to this problem. Consequently the
consultation with the affected communities left much to be desired. It was
done overhastily. In some cases there is uncertainty about what the
communities want, in other cases steps are being taken against the express
will of the people.

Even worse, in Matatiele the people were actually misled and they were
initially under the impression that they were going to remain in KwaZulu-
Natal, but eventually they were incorporated into the Eastern Cape. The
Municipal Demarcation Board disclaims any responsibility, because it says
it is not responsible for provincial boundaries, and that is actually
correct. Minister Mufamadi and the ANC government bear the responsibility
for this overhasty process that has caused communities to protest, and in
some cases has left people with boundaries with which they are not at all
satisfied.

One cannot escape the impression that political opportunism and,
specifically, the number of votes finally tipped the balance in some of
these amendments. And this while these communities simply want better
service delivery. The ANC must not be surprised if on 1 March next year it
receives a belated Christmas present from these communities which will not
be very pleasant. [Applause.]]

Mr P F SMITH: Chairperson, Minister, colleagues, as indicated, this Bill is
in fact the flip side of the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill, which we
dealt with in this House a month or so ago. Members will remember that it
is that Bill, not this one, which deals with the determination of
provincial boundaries.

You will also recall that there was much unhappiness expressed by a number
of parties, ourselves included, about that Bill. In fact, we voted against
it. There were disagreements about the process, about the fact that this
Bill should have been introduced a long time ago, and particularly about
the lack of consultation regarding the whole process. Justifiably, we
believe there are a number of affected communities that continue today to
be highly dissatisfied with the outcome of the Constitution Twelfth
Amendment Bill process.

But, we have to live with the reality, of course. That process has left the
National Assembly and it’s now with the NCOP. Depending on what they do
tomorrow, that Bill will become law. This Bill, however, doesn’t deal with
the same thing. It really, in a sense, gives effect to that Constitution
Twelfth Amendment Bill. It doesn’t redetermine provincial boundaries. What
it does is to provide for the redetermination of municipal boundaries
within that framework of new provincial boundaries.

Most importantly, it also provides for a set of transitional measures to
take care of the process between now and the elections, in particular; and
in respect of things like dealing with assets between the provinces,
liabilities, obligations and so forth. And the way this is done is actually
a very positive thing. It provides for interprovincial government
agreements and should there be disagreements between those provinces, an
inability to reach conclusions, then the NCOP is mandated to play a
positive role to facilitate some sort of agreement. And we agree with that;
it’s a very positive approach.

The Bill also makes provision for the re-establishment of some of the
municipalities through section 12 notices to provide for internal
structural changes coming about through the new redeterminations. So, when
one actually looks at the content of the Bill there is nothing contentious
about it and we agree with all of it.

Of course, there is always the temptation to view these two Bills, the one
before the NCOP tomorrow and this one, as a package and to say, well, that
Bill was so flawed that we voted against it; this one is merely giving
effect to that flawed Bill. One could justifiably argue, in fact, that the
whole thing should be thrown out together as a package. There are many
communities out there asking for precisely that. The communities the
previous speaker referred to are justifiably upset with the process. They
believe, even at this stage, that the protests and legal action may have
the effect of suspending the implementation of the Constitution Twelfth
Amendment Bill.

Be that as it may, at the end of the day, although we are sympathetic
towards their concerns and believe that they are right and government is
wrong in not having adequately listened to them, we have to judge this Bill
on its merits. The merits of this Bill are such that we support it. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

Mr J BICI: Chairperson, the Bill before us is as a consequence of the
Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill of 2005, which the UDM opposed. The UDM
can, therefore, based on the same principle, not support this Bill.

It seems to us that there is an unnecessary haste to effect these changes
now. Why was the decision delayed and avoided for years, and now, with very
little time, it is rushed through in this fashion? It is an example of not
only bad governance, but also arrogance on the part of the ruling party.

The insufficient consultation and outright refusal to compromise concerning
the affected communities, especially Merafong and Matatiele, speak of a
government completely out of touch with the people who elected it.
[Interjections.] So stubborn is the ANC in its refusal to compromise and
negotiate with the affected communities that Parliament has been called
back at massive expense for a special sitting in order to bulldoze this
Bill into the Statute Book.

We maintain, yes, that other more elegant and consultative solutions could
have been found. The UDM does not support the Bill. Thank you.
[Interjections.]

Rre I D MOGASE: Ke a leboga Modulasetulo le Tona, ke batla gore rre yo o
neng a bua gona jaanong o kare ga a tshela sebaka se se telele mo Aforika
Borwa. [Setshego.]

Rona ba re tshetseng mo Aforika Borwa, ra sokola, ra bereka, ra lwa gore re
be re thope mmuso go fitlha go tlhaga Molaotlhomo o o jana, o o monate, wa
Cross-Boundary Municipality Laws Repeal and Related Matters Bill.

Re itumetse thata. Re batla gore, ba ba ntsi ba tsamaya ba ntse ba dira
dilo tse dingwe, ba bangwe ba anega diblumase mo di . . . [Setshego.]
(Translation of Tswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mr I D MOGASE: Thank you, Chairperson and Minister, seemingly the previous
speaker did not live for long in South Africa. [Laughter.]

We who lived in South Africa suffered, worked, fought and took over the
government, until the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related
Matters Bill was introduced.

We are happy. Many walk around doing many other things, others hang panties
on the . . .[Laughter.]]

To me, it is an insult.

O kile wa bona moeteledipele wa lekoko a tlhoka se a se dirang? A tsaya
dibluma a di bofelela? A tsamaye a ye go di lata mme ba re ga ba sa di
batla. Ke ne ke le ko teng.

Fela, ke batla gore . . . (Translation of Tswana paragraphs follows.)

[Have you ever seen a leader of a party having nothing to do? Hanging up
panties? He returned them and they refused to take them back. I was there.

But, I want to say . . . ]

. . . when the new Constitution of the Republic of South Africa was adopted
10 years ago, the people of this country declared that South Africa is a
sovereign democratic state founded on values of human dignity, equality and
the advancement of human rights and freedom.

In the past, the demarcation of provincial boundaries was centred around
racial divisions.

O tshwanetse a bo a itse gore o ne a sa boute. [Tsenoganong.] Ga o nkutlwe
wena o didimale. [Setshego.]

O godile. O tshwanetse a bo a tswa kwa re tswang teng a sa itse gore . . .
(Translation of Tswana paragraphs follows.)

[He is aware that he was not voting.[Interjections.]You don’t hear me keep
quiet. [Laughter.]

He is an adult. He is from where we come from without knowing that
. . .]

. . . black people were removed from their ancestral, fertile and arable
land to poor land around the country. Regarding the case of Mma Mathola, as
we remember, the urban areas that black people were removed to were far
away compared to Sophiatown.

Ka ditiro tse re di boneng, ka botlhale jwa ANC, re leboga mmuso, re leboga
Tona gore a tle ka Molaotlhomo o o jana. [There is service delivery due to
the diligence of the ANC. We thank the government and the Minister for the
introduction of this Bill.]

The Demarcation Board determines and redetermines municipal boundaries at
the request of the Minister for Provincial and Local Government, and at the
request of the municipality affected by the proposed determination or
redetermination.

Gongwe ke tshwanetse go le tlhalosetsa go le gonnye. Fa re ne re dira, ga
ke dire makgakga, fela mo ke tsamaileng teng fa re ne re bua le lekgotla la
teropo la Gauteng, Soweto Civic Association e buile ya re, re batla tax
base e le nngwe gonne fa re dira dilaesense tsa dikoloi re ya kwa Gauteng.
Tšhelete e sala kwa teng. Re dira kwa Gauteng, fa kgwedi e fela re tabogela
gape kwa Gauteng re isa tšhelete eo kwa teng.

Re batla gore re tlhaloganye sentle gore Molaotlhomo o ke wa botlhokwa . .
. (Translation of Tswana paragraphs follows.)

[Let me briefly explain that where I visited we had talks with Gauteng’s
municipal councils and the Soweto Civic Association said that they want a
single tax base in Gauteng, because they make vehicle licence applications
in Gauteng. We are employed in Gauteng, every month we take the money back
to Gauteng, therefore Gauteng benefits financially.

Let us understand, this Bill is important . . . ]

 . . . and I would like to report that Parliament has been at the centre
point of all processes around this Bill. We have consistently demonstrated
our commitment on the seriousness of these processes.

O re ke tlhoile batho? Ke wena yo o neng o ntlhoile! Jaanong gompieno o nna
le rona mo. E bile le lesego gonne ANC ke mokgatlho o o siameng o o rileng,
a re bueng! [You said I hate people; you hated me! Here you are today with
us. You are fortunate because the ANC is a good party that is committed to
negotiations!]

Therefore we urge everyone in this House to accept the outcome of this
Bill, as presented to us.

Lastly, Parliament will continue to work diligently with other structures
to see to it that the outcome of this Bill is implemented smoothly and with
the sensitivity it deserves.

Ke leboga ba bangwe ba makoko a ba ba setseng ba buile gore ba tshegetsa
Molaotlhomo o. A re o tshegetseng rotlhe. Yo o reng ga a o eme nokeng, ga
ke itse gore o tswa kae? Ke a leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation of Tswana
paragraph follows.)

[I thank the other parties who have accepted this Bill. Let us all support
it. Whoever does not support it, I don’t know where he comes from. I thank
you. [Applause.]]

Mr V C GORE: Madam Chair, despite the technical nature of this Bill, it
underlies a far more serious problem. The passing of this Bill, together
with the associated Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill of 2005, has
witnessed protests, violence and, to a large extent, opposition by the
people whom this legislation was intended to assist. This legislature has a
proud record of consultation and consensus seeking, and, of course, taking
Parliament to the people.

Unfortunately, we, as legislators, in our haste to meet deadlines and to
rush this Bill through Parliament, have failed to achieve these ideals.
Unfortunately, all that results in a growing divide between this Parliament
and the people of South Africa.

One only has to witness the residents of Khutsong in Gauteng – or will it
be the North West – with a sense of desperation and frustration that is
beginning to brew in this country. The fact remains that name-calling and
dismissing legitimate fears of communities do not address their genuine
concerns.

This change of boundaries interferes with people’s sense of belonging and
recognition within a specific geographical area. This arbitrary change of
boundaries bedevils nation-building because these communities, remember,
will express their dissatisfaction for a long time to come.

In conclusion, much needs to be done if we are to live up to the principles
of participatory democracy, as enshrined in our Constitution, and achieve
the Freedom Charter’s ideal that the people shall govern.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the ACDP appreciates the problems experienced in
administering cross-boundary municipalities and shares the view that such
municipalities have become unworkable. However, we have great concerns as
to the process engaged upon. We believe that there has been undue haste and
very tight timeframes in tabling these amendments, and that insufficient
consultation has taken place concerning the affected communities.

Residents in a number of municipalities have demonstrated against their
removal from one province and their incorporation into another. Whilst the
ACDP does not condone unlawful actions, we can understand their
frustrations. Their main concerns relate to the critical issue of service
delivery to the poor. It is significant, for example, that the Eastern Cape
receives the largest provincial allocation yet service delivery in the
province is appalling.

The Municipal Demarcation Board was accused in the submissions of not
embarking on an extensive, consultative and participatory process in order
to investigate and make recommendations that would strengthen local
government, and ensure affordable and sustainable service delivery.
The ACDP is on record as having opposed the Constitution Twelfth Amendment
Bill; however, we appreciate the problems. We will therefore support this
technical Bill. Thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, as die VF Plus vir die agb Minister vra
om in te meng in die buitensporige hoë salarisse van munisipale amptenare
dan gooi hy sy hande in die lug en sê dat hy nie kan inmeng nie, want die
Grondwet sê dat plaaslike regering ’n derdevlakregering is; ’n regering op
sy eie en hy het nie die bevoegdhede om in te meng nie. Maar wanneer dit
die agb Minister en die ANC pas, om politieke redes, dan is hulle bereid om
die Grondwet te wysig om dan in te meng in oorgrensmunisipaliteite.

Die Minister sê dat die mense sal regeer. Hoekom gaan hy nie na die mense
toe en vra wat hulle voorkeure is nie. Die werklikheid is egter,
Voorsitter, dat indien die Grondwet nie gewysig is nie, ons vandag ’n
tweederdemeerderheid in hierdie Raad sou moes kry om hierdie wet te
aanvaar. Die Grondwet is gewysig met ’n beslissende stem van die Voorsitter
– die eerste keer in die bestaan van hierdie Parlement dat die Voorsitter
’n stem moes uitbring om ’n tweederdemeerderheid te verseker. U sou nie ’n
tweederdemeerderheid gekry het as die Grondwet nie gewysig is nie. Die VF
Plus sal nie hierdie wetgewing steun nie. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, whenever the FF Plus appeals to the
hon Minister to intervene with regard to the exorbitantly high salaries of
municipal officials, he throws his hands into the air and says that he
cannot intervene, because in accordance with the Constitution local
government is a third-tier government; a government on its own and
therefore he does not have the power to intervene. But when the hon
Minister and the ANC find it politically convenient, they are prepared to
amend the Constitution; and then to intervene with regard to cross-boundary
municipalities.

The Minister says that the people shall govern. Why does he not go to the
people and ask what their preferences are? However, Chairperson, the
reality is that if the Constitution had not been amended, then today we
would have had to obtain a two-thirds majority in this House in order to
adopt this Act. The Constitution was amended with a deciding vote by the
Chairperson – the first time in the existence of this Parliament that the
Chairperson had to cast a vote to ensure a two-thirds majority. You would
not have obtained a two-thirds majority if the Constitution had not been
amended. The FF Plus will not support this legislation. [Time expired.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Hon Chairperson and hon members, the repeal of the cross-
boundary municipalities legislation has been inevitable from the outset. It
is just unfortunate that, characteristically the ANC-led government, slow
to deal with issues that affect the wealth of the people, delayed and has
decided to bulldoze the repeal Bill and the amendment to the Constitution
through at the eleventh hour, while it was clear in February 2002 that
these municipalities had proved to be failures.

We sympathise with the plight of the people of Carletonville, but we learnt
the hard way from the ANC in 1994, when they said the date for elections
was sacrosanct. When people in the Kuruman area complained about being
forced into the new South Africa, the late Joe Slovo told them that the ANC
was breaking an egg - that was Bophuthatswana - to make them an omelette.
It looks like the time has come for the people of Merafong to be told that
the egg - that is Gauteng - is being broken to produce an omelette for them
in the North West, “a la ANC”.

We in the UCDP have long made our discontent known regarding the cross-
boundary municipalities, because of their disparity in service delivery. To
us, in the UCDP, it does not matter in which province people find
themselves, all we encourage is service delivery.

Our experience is that people in the far-flung areas understand and
appreciate their circumstances and will be happy if services are extended
to them. We in the UCDP feel that, while it is true that there was
insufficient consultation on the incorporation of some towns into other
provinces, political parties are equally to blame as it has been common
knowledge that these municipalities were going to be disestablished.

The situation brings to mind Shakespeare’s words, through Macbeth, when he
said, and I quote: “So far have I waded in blood that sitting down is as
good as going forward.” Legislation and electoral preparations are too far
advanced for them to be suspended without causing mayhem to the entire
country, for the sake of pleasing some people.

The UCDP is of the opinion that this matter has reached the point of no
return and, accordingly, supports the repeal of the cross-boundary
municipalities legislation. I thank you.

Ms P BHENGU: Chairperson, hon Minister for Provincial and Local Government,
hon members of Parliament, this Bill seeks to repeal all local government
laws that provide for cross-boundary municipalities. As the ANC, we have
characterised the past 10 years as a period of transition in which we have
steadily worked to transform the institutions of our country to serve our
democracy and all its people.

Local government, together with practically every other public institution
in the country, has required a massive overhaul with geographic,
institutional and organisational, social, economic and cultural
implications. Since the democratic government took power in 1994, progress
has been uneven. Great strides have been made in some areas, hence we need
to have periodic checks on service delivery and remove the blockages. We
have the mandate to deliver and the vehicle for realising this mandate is
strong municipalities.

The ultimate goal of this process is to ensure that local government is
indeed democratic, accountable and fulfils its responsibility to drive the
process of service provision, development and poverty alleviation and
eradication.

One of the areas where difficulties have been experienced over the past
five years has been with respect to areas known as cross-boundary
municipalities. Those are areas where a municipality straddles the
boundaries of two provinces. The provinces that came into being on 27 April
1994, while in some sense they were products of the past, in reality were a
major break from that past.

Establishing cross-boundary municipalities in these areas was considered
the most appropriate way to ensure viable, integrated and effective local
government within shifting provincial boundaries. However, experience over
the past five years has shown that cross-boundary municipalities present
administrative challenges that make it impossible to achieve constitutional
obligations, with respect to local government.

We have entered into a contract to make the lives of our people better by
engaging in different programmes. It will therefore be extremely difficult
to deliver on the mandate of building houses, rendering health services,
delivering water and sanitation, to name but a few. The budgetary
implications of a municipality that falls within two provinces result in
citizens not getting the services - as we heard when the stakeholders came
to make representations to the portfolio committee.

Elaborating on some of the challenges posed by the cross-boundary
municipalities, there are the challenges of having two different sets of
legislation and funding from two provinces for health issues. These result
in delays in the implementation of policy, and service delivery is hampered
in the process. The integrated development programmes, IDPs, pose a
challenge in terms of co-ordination and integration of programmes; and,
also, priorities of two provinces are difficult to implement.

As the ANC, we will review all the programmes that are a stumbling block to
service delivery. We have one mission and one mission only: to liberate our
people from the chains of poverty. When the majority of our people stood in
long queues they were saying, “ANC, you are the only liberation movement
which will make our lives better and fast-track delivery so that we can see
changes in our lives,” and that is exactly what we are doing.

The slogan of the Freedom Charter that says the people shall govern is what
drives the programmes of the ANC. And this Bill is strengthening that
notion and making it possible for people to participate in the local
economic development of their areas. Surely, in this process, there are
good lessons to be learned as there are skills and capacities of different
provinces we utilise to strengthen service delivery.

The demarcation of provincial boundaries was therefore not about delimiting
tribal, racial or linguistic areas, as had happened in the Bantustans in
the past, but was about setting up political and administrative units of an
appropriate size and capacity to meet the needs of the people living in
that area.

So the ANC is committed to undo the past imbalances and that is through the
interrogation of the legislation. If there are loopholes in the
legislation, we will not relax and fold our arms. We will act accordingly
to plug all the loopholes. We are carrying the mandate to alleviate poverty
and create employment for our people, hence we are co-ordinating all our
efforts as different committees to realise that goal.

We assure the people of the affected provinces that this Bill strengthens
and improves the delivery of services so that we meet the millennium
targets. Ngiyabonga. [I thank you].

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the PAC believes in the principle of a unitary
state, which we fought for in our years of the liberation struggle. We must
admit that there has been an oversight on our part as a liberation movement
in that we did not educate the masses on the implications of a unitary
state. On the other hand, we wish to state that the matter of cross-
boundary municipalities was, from the onset, not well thought of; it ought
to have been done differently.

We sympathise with the residents affected by this repeal Bill, especially
residents of Khutsong and surrounding townships in the Merafong
municipality and residents of Matatiele, who have strong reservations about
their incorporation into the provinces of the North West and the Eastern
Cape, respectively. We can only hope that there is still some room to
revisit this matter in the near future.

The PAC wishes to advise the residents of Khutsong, Matatiele and the rest
of the country not to be misled by political opportunists who encourage
them not to participate in the forthcoming local government elections due
to several factors, including this cross-boundary Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Your vote is your right. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, the MF acknowledges the sensitivity of the
cross-boundary municipality issue, as far as many people are concerned.
However, having viewed both the arguments for and against cross-boundary
municipalities, we tend to lean closer to the eradication of cross-boundary
municipalities and the endorsement of assigning a singular municipality for
each area.

From many case studies, it is evident that the cross-boundary
municipalities system often held conflicting intentions towards its areas.
Further, the services in these areas were not within the standards or
parameters of serving the communities at the level we would like them to
be.

It is also evident that much dissatisfaction has been expressed by
municipalities concerning the eradication of cross-boundary municipalities
as well as residents affected by the eradication process in municipalities.
The MF feels it is incumbent upon all members of the House to bring
reassurance to our people that their best interests are always of paramount
importance when such decisions are made.

Further, confidence in municipality delivery needs to be boosted. Our
municipalities need to shape up for service delivery. The MF supports the
cross-boundary municipalities Bill. Thank you.

Mr M DIKO: Chairperson, we should take into account that it is the people
who are affected and not just the boundaries. The interests of different
provinces and municipalities are also involved, and therefore we must deal
with this issue in a very sensitive manner. We would do well to admit, at
the onset, that what we are debating here today has caused a lot of
unhappiness to the affected communities and municipalities.

The demonstrations by the community of Khutsong Township in the Merafong
municipality and their contemplated Constitutional Court challenge to this
Bill clearly demonstrate that something is fundamentally wrong. The UIF
believes that the redemarcation process of 1999, before the 2000 local
government elections, is the source of the current problems we are facing
today.

We should also not forget that this demarcation process by the Demarcation
Board, headed by Dr Mike Sutcliffe, was not as inclusive as one would have
envisaged. The UIF will not support the Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Chairperson, once again, the people’s party has changed
like a chameleon that no longer consults its people. Even its tripartite
partners, the SA Communist Party and Cosatu, have initiated a campaign
against the government decision to incorporate the Merafong local
municipality into North West. Its community believes that it will get
better service delivery due to the fact that Gauteng province is much
better equipped to provide a high standard of service delivery.

It must be remembered that Gauteng province was initially opposed to this
move by the national government, but had to eventually give in to political
pressure by the government. The rejection of the proposed incorporation of
Merafong into North West province will threaten to cause a constitutional
crisis.

The same applies to the other 17 municipalities in the provinces, like
Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal and the North West. The people no longer govern.
I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, for any government, the process of ensuring that
the boundary of a municipality does not cross the boundary of another
province is a difficult and sometimes very technical one.

Irrespective of what decision government takes to get rid of cross-boundary
municipalities, the decision will either be welcomed by some or heavily
criticised by others. It is understandable that government would want to
reduce cross-boundary municipalities in order to effect more efficient
service delivery.

However, government must be sensitive to the concerns raised by the
citizens of affected towns. A case in point is Matatiele, where the
citizens of this town took to the streets when they became aware of their
possible transfer from KwaZulu-Natal to the Eastern Cape. The mayor of
Matatiele made the following interesting comments on the issue, and I
quote: “Pietermaritzburg is 700km from us while Bisho is only 200km away,
and everyone knows that the further you are from the seat of government,
the worse the service you get.”

This is exactly the point I wish to raise. On the one hand you have the
sentiments of the community which, of course, for historic reasons wants to
remain part of KwaZulu-Natal. On the other hand you have the mayor arguing
that Matatiele would benefit greatly if it becomes part of the Eastern Cape
because it is much closer to Bisho. This is clearly a case of “you are
damned if you do and you are damned if you don’t”.

The formal proclamation of the local government elections cannot go ahead
unless the final municipal demarcations have been made. The passing of this
Bill is therefore essential to the continued process. The FD wants the
process to be finalised. We, therefore, support this Bill.

Mme L M MASHIANE: Ke a leboga Modulasetulo, ke rata go simolola ka go le
dumedisa lotlhe. A lo a mpona? Go na le selo se se botlhoko mo botshelong
jwa motho. Se bidiwa phetogo. Phetogo e botlhoko ga e monate, mme diphetogo
di tshwanetse go nna teng. Re rata kgotsa re sa rate; di le monate kgotsa
di le botlhoko; di tshwanetse go nna teng. Ke se re mekamekaneng le sona
gompieno. Go tlisa diphetogo.

Jaaka mokgatlho o motona wa ANC, fa re ne re tsena mo tokologong re
simolola go e lwela, re ne re sa lwele Aforika Borwa e e nang le
dikhutlhwanakhutlhwana. Re ne re lwela Aforika Borwa e le nngwe e e tla
buswang ke rona rotlhe, mme ke rata gore . . . (Translation of Tswana
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms L M MASHIANE: Thank you, Chairperson. I will first start by greeting
you all. Can you see me? There is this painful thing in the life of a human
being; it is called transformation. It is bitter, not enjoyable, but
changes have to be made. Whether we like it or not; irrespective of whether
it is bitter or sweet; it has to be done. This is exactly what we are doing
today, effecting changes.

The ANC is a majority party, and during the early stages of democracy, when
we were fighting for this democracy, we were not fighting for a divided
South Africa. We were fighting for a united South Africa, which would be
governed by all of us. I would like to say . . .]

We will continue to say, “The people shall govern.” Hon Chairperson,
Minister for Provincial and Local Government, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, you, Mr Doman, have had your say. You must shut up now; it is my
turn. [Applause.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, may I interrupt you. I
cannot call “shut up” unparliamentary, but I do think we have heard this
term a few times. Perhaps, we should consider using something else that
would be as good and less offensive.

Ms L M MASHIANE: Chairperson, I withdraw, but Mr Doman must give me a
chance to speak because he got his chance to speak. There is deliberate
agitation taking place on the ground – deliberate because we are facing
local government elections. It is deliberate. These so-called problems,
which have been mentioned here by the speakers, are just a mere agitation
so that there is some hype and people will say that they are not going to
vote, but the people will vote.

When the ANC was established it envisaged a united, democratic, nonracial
and nonsexist South Africa; a unitary state where a Bill of Rights
guarantees fundamental rights and freedoms for all on an equal basis; where
our people live in an egalitarian and tolerant society; where the organs of
state are representative, competent and administratively fair in their
functioning; and where opportunities are progressively and rapidly expanded
to ensure that all may live under conditions of dignity and equality.

When we speak of a united South Africa we have in mind, in the first place,
territorial unity, and a single, nonfragmented entity which also includes
our municipalities. We speak different languages but we are all South
Africans. We may have municipalities and provinces but we are South
Africans, united in our diversity.

As the ANC, we have acknowledged that since 2000, local government has
undergone fundamental changes. We are aware that significant challenges
still remain and require a process of review and improvement. We are not
shying away from that, we are saying it must take place.

We want to ensure that local government is indeed democratic and
accountable, and that it fulfils its responsibility to drive the process of
service provision, development and poverty alleviation. We have noticed
that one of the areas that present challenges in the distribution of
services is the area of cross-boundary municipalities. It is within this
context that we have decided to do away with the cross-boundary
municipalities.

We all know that these municipalities present serious administrative
challenges. This process must be seen as an implementation of our
conference resolution that we took in Stellenbosch. We said then that we
need to review the cross-boundary municipalities, with a view to ensuring
that areas demarcated as such remain integrated units but fall within one
province. Central to this review is the key area of delivery and finding
instruments for the realisation of sustainable development.

Through this process, we are not by any means taking away service delivery.
Actually, the affected communities are now at an advantage in that they
will now be serviced by a delivery structure they can recognise and relate
to, with dedicated support.

I am saying this, informed by the press release that was made by Comrade
Joel last week that Merafong will be at an advantage as it will be serviced
and get more funding in order to address the problems. It will be serviced
by both areas. What is the problem?

This Bill cannot be seen in isolation but must be seen within the context
of the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill. We then need the help of the
affected communities in support of these changes.

Re a lekopa lona ba lo leng kwa gae gore le tshegetseng diphetogo tse re di
dirang tse. Le se ke la di lwantsha gonne, kwa bofelong, di ya go le thusa
di le tswela mosola. [Legofi.] (Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[We plead with you, those who are at home, to support the changes we are
making. Don’t fight them, because ultimately it is going to assist you and
be to your advantage. [Applause.]]

Community voices in municipal decisions must be evident in transferring
ownership to the people. We are all aware that, at the time of the
demarcation of the current local government boundaries, cross-boundary
municipalities were set up in some areas to ensure viable, integrated and
effective local government without shifting the existing provincial
boundaries.

Ke itse gore goreng ba gana go fetoga. Ba gana go fetoga gonne ba itiretse
lefatshenyana la bona, ka fa, mo lewatleng. Ke ka moo ba sa batleng
diphetogo. [I know why they are against the changes. They are against them
because they have made a land of their own, this side of the coastal areas.
That is why they are against transformation.]

However, in the past five years, we have witnessed that cross-boundary
municipalities present administrative challenges. They make it difficult
for government to provide services to communities in an equitable and
sustainable manner.

E tla go thusa mme Pandor. [It will assist you, Mrs Pandor.]

Cross-boundary municipalities make it difficult for government to promote
integrated social and economic development, and make it difficult to ensure
effective local government.

Ministers, this thing is going to help you. We are all aware that all these
challenges made it difficult for certain municipalities to discharge their
assigned powers and functions. Now, the advantage of today’s process is
that communities are assured of a single provincial government, which will
have one budget and service delivery programmes. It will be clear from this
process that service delivery will consequently be faster and of a better
quality. We are simply saying that one municipality and one province could
work better.

Since this process has the support of the ANC, it will be important to
guard against those who intentionally want to confuse our people. This is
to ensure an outcome that serves the interests of all the people,
regardless of where they live. Let us avoid mass actions.

Ke lekopa gape lona kwa gae, a re tileng go nna mo megwantong re fiwa madi
ke batho ba ba senang difatlhego. Ba lo romela kwa pele bona ba setse kwa
morago. Ba lo naya tšhelete ba re tsamayang lo dire toyi-toyi, bona ba
setse kwa morago. (Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[I am making this plea again, directed to those who are at home; let’s
avoid taking part in mass actions; getting funds from faceless people,
giving you leadership whilst they are behind the scenes; giving you funds,
saying, “go and toyi-toyi”, whilst they are behind the scenes.]

At the end of the day, they disadvantage you. Mr Doman, you had your
chance. We should all note that provinces, like municipalities, are nothing
more than units for organising government work and holding government
accountable to the masses of our people. [Interjections.] I am right, yes.

The committee dedicated a significant amount of time to this Bill,
including listening to the people. Public participation did take place. The
ANC supports this Bill and we are passing it today. [Applause.]


The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Chairperson, allow
me, firstly, to thank all the hon members who participated in this debate.
I want to extend a special word of thanks to the chairpersons and members
of the Portfolio Committees on Provincial and Local Government, and Justice
and Constitutional Development.

I must also thank all the MECs responsible for local government affairs for
their co-operation throughout the process leading up to this day. Also, I
want to say thank you to the officials from the Departments of Provincial
and Local Government, and Justice and Constitutional Development for giving
so lavishly of their time to make this a reality.

I note for the record the criticisms added by Messrs Doman, Smith, Likotsi
and Simmons. All these hon members clearly lack the equipment for
remembering things past. [Laughter.] The laws, which this Bill seeks to
repeal, are not the sole property of the ANC’s so-called failed ANC
experiments. These laws were enacted by this House at a moment in history
when all of us in the House attached a particular weight to the imperatives
of political inclusivity.

Some have even erroneously referred to this as a technical Bill. This Bill
is very political. If there is one thing to which the ANC must plead
guilty, it is the fact that it is magnanimous. Otherwise, if ANC
preferences were to be the only determinant, there would have been no cross-
boundary municipalities in the first place. [Applause.]

It is convenient, expediently so, for hon members to resort to predictable
pro forma criticism of government. But, what you don’t realise is that this
underscores the fact that, as hon members, supposedly, you are unable to
rise above your parochial self when dealing with matters of national
importance. [Interjections.] You are setting an example that no one out
there in society will be advised to emulate - on the contrary.

I wish, once more, to thank everybody who made a sensible contribution to
this debate. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

                        EDUCATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

     (Consideration of Bill, as amended by NCOP, and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

      That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

                            NATIONAL CREDIT BILL

     (Consideration of Bill, as amended by NCOP, and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Bill, as amended, be passed.


Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

The House adjourned at 12:35.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                         THURSDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    a) Report and Financial Statements of the Government Employees Pension
       Fund (GEPF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
       Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 45-2005].


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on  the  National
    Credit Bill [B18D - 2005] (National Assembly –  Section  76),  dated  16
    November 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry,  having  considered  the
    subject of the National Credit Bill [B 18D - 2005] (National Assembly -
    Section 76), referred  to  it  and  classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging
    Mechanism as a Section 76 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


2.  Report  of  the  Standing  Committee  on  Private  Members`  Legislative
    Proposals and Special Petitions on the proposed Admission  of  Advocates
    Amendment Bill, dated 15 November 2005:

     The Standing Committee on Private Members`  Legislative  Proposals  and
     Special Petition, having considered the proposed Admission of Advocates
     Amendment Bill, submitted  by  Adv  HC  Schmidt  and  referred  to  the
     Committee, having consulted with the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
     Constitutional Development recommends in  terms  of  Rule  235(4)  that
     permission not be given to the member to proceed with the proposal.

   Report to be considered.


3. Report of the Portfolio Committee on  Education  on  the  Education  Laws
    Amendment Bill [B 23D – 2005] (National Assembly – Section 76), dated 16
    November 2005:


     The Portfolio Committee on Education, having considered the subject  of
     the Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 23D – 2005] (National  Assembly  –
     Section 76), referred  to  it  and  classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging
     Mechanism as a Section 76 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


4. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on the
    Parliamentary Network on the World Bank Conference, 21 to 23 October
    2005, Helsinki, dated 16 November 2005:

    The Chairperson of the Public Enterprises Portfolio Committee, Mr Yunus
    Carrim, having attended the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank
    Conference, from 21 to 23 October, in Helsinki, Finland, reports as
    follows:

     A.  “Beyond the Year of Development: What Now?”


     1. The Chairperson of the Public Enterprises Portfolio Committee,
        Yunus Carrim, was invited to attend the Annual Conference of the
        Parliamentary Network on the World Bank (PNoWB), held in Helsinki,
        Finland, from 21 to 23 October.  At a meeting of the Portfolio
        Committee on 7 September 2005 it was decided that the Chairperson
        should attend the conference.

     2. The PNoWB defines itself as ‘an independent association of some 800
        MPs from 110 countries. Established in 2000 and governed by a nine-
        member board of parliamentarians, PNoWB mobilises parliamentarians
        in the fight against global poverty, promotes transparency and
        accountability in international development and offers a platform
        for policy dialogue between the Bank and parliamentarians”. PNoWB
        sees itself as “an action-oriented network of parliamentarians”.
        PNoWB activities are supported by, among others, governments, the
        World Bank, the United Nations (UN) and the International Monetary
        Fund (IMF).

     3. The theme of the conference was “Beyond the Year of Development:
        What Now?”  It came after the July G8 “development summit” in
        Gleneagles and the September United Nations World Summit in New
        York, and before the next round of the World Trade Organisation
        (WTO) Ministerial Meeting in Hong Kong in December.

     4. This “Year of Development” has “presented an unprecedented
        opportunity to mobilise political support behind efforts to reach
        the Millennium Development Goals”, said the organisers of the
        Conference. The objectives of the Conference were to “identify what
        parliamentarians can do to promote action on pressing development
        issues, and to help strengthen the accountability and transparency
        of international financial institutions”.

     5. About 200 MPs from 90 countries attended. Other participants
        included officials from the World Bank and other multilateral
        institutions, technical experts, academics, the private sector,
        civil society representatives and others.

     6. The range and calibre of speakers, some connected with the
        Conference through video link, was very impressive. Among the key
        speakers were Susilo Yudhoyono, President of Indonesia; Paul
        Wolfowitz, President of the World Bank; Pascal Lamy, Director
        General of the World Trade Organisation; Erkki Tuomioja, Minister
        of Foreign Affairs of Finland; and Mary Robinson, former President
        of Ireland and currently the Director of Realising Rights: The
        Ethical Globalisation Initiative.

     7. Among the topics discussed, often in parallel sessions, were:
         • Reducing greenhouse gas emissions and poverty
         • Designing and implementing Poverty Reduction Strategies
         • Beating Back the HIV/Aids pandemic
         • Implementing Debt Relief
         • Strengthening parliaments role on development and global issues
         • Addressing global inequality
         • Realising good intentions in Africa (Implementing NEPAD - New
           Partnership for Africa’s Development - and G8 commitments)
         • Improving governance and fighting corruption
         • The IMF’s Medium-Term Strategy
         • Microfinance: building inclusive financial systems
         • Mobilising science for development
         • Reporting on Pakistan’s devastating earthquake
         • The World Bank and parliamentarians


     8. There were various round table discussions including on making aid
        more effective, promoting a pro-poor outcome of the Doha
        development agenda at the WTO Hong Kong Ministerial Meeting; the
        role of MPs beyond the “Year of Development”; and the role of the
        PNoWB.
     9. There were regional sessions organised as well along the following
        lines:

         • Sub-Saharan Africa
         • Middle East and North Africa
        a. Europe and Central Asia
        b. South Asia
        c. East Asia
        d. Latin America and the Caribbean
        e. Donor countries

10.   The Conference also served as the PNoWB’s general assembly. A
      progress report since the last conference in 2004 was tabled and a new
      Board was elected.


B.    World Bank Relations with MPs


1.    The World Bank is owned and governed by 184 countries.  In 1944 the
      representatives from the Bank’s founding countries decided that the
      organisation would deal with its member states through their finance
      and development ministries only and focus on economic matters only. A
      section of the Articles of Agreement, the international treaty that
      established the World Bank, stated: “The Bank and its officers shall
      not interfere in the political affairs of any member”.

2.    In view of the tremendous changes in the global economy since then,
      and the pressure from parliaments, civil society organisations,
      academics and others for the World Bank to be more open, transparent
      and accountable, the Bank has increasingly begun to accept that its
      interpretation of the above section of the Articles is too narrow.
      The Bank has begun, over the past five years or so, to expand its
      relations with MPs, parliaments, civil society organisations and other
      stakeholders.

3.    The Bank says that its relations with parliamentarians have certainly
      expanded in recent years.  It contextualised this. “First, the world
      has seen an explosion in the number of electoral democracies, from 66
      in 1987 to 121 in 2003.  The growth of civil society is equally
      spectacular; companies, grass-root organisations, campaign groups,
      trade unions, elected officials and academics have joined governments
      on the international stage as agenda setters and decision makers.
      This is the second big transformation.  The third trend relates to how
      development assistance is carried out.  Experience has shown that
      policies and projects to reduce poverty are most effective when
      priorities are set by countries receiving the aid – based on broad
      consultations – rather than by donors.”

4.    The Bank, according to its “Issue Brief” on “The World Bank and
      Parliaments”, believes that “well functioning parliaments promote
      development and the rule of law.  Engaging elected representatives on
      development issues and strengthening the capacity of parliamentary
      institutions are important objectives of the World Bank”.

5.    The “Brief” notes that “in developing countries, parliamentarians can
      be agents of change.  They represent their constituent’s needs and
      views, and can contribute to designing and overseeing implementation
      of World Bank-financed projects.  Legislators can champion social and
      economic reforms, speak out on HIV/AIDS, take on corruption.  In many
      countries, Bank projects are subject to parliamentary approval
      directly, through ratification, or indirectly through budget approval.
       In some cases, parliamentarians create debate and pass new
      legislation linked to World Bank-supported reform programmes.”

6.    The “Brief” notes further that in countries providing development
      assistance, “parliamentarians can be advocates for development.  They
      debate and approve foreign aid budgets, shape and review development
      policies and promote coherence across policy areas. In a progressively
      borderless world, parliamentarians exercising their oversight role are
      paying more attention to matters handled by multilateral
      organisations.  The World Bank is the world’s single largest external
      funder of development programs as well as an important source of
      knowledge and advice on how to tackle global issues such as
      international trade, poverty, HIV/AIDS, corruption, and climate
      changes.”


C.    Some Key Issues Raised at Conference

      1. An aspect of the Conference certainly seemed to be an attempt by
         the World Bank to consolidate and expand its links with MPs. In
         his keynote address to the Conference, World Bank President, Mr
         Wolfowitz, said ‘As World Bank President, I intend to build on the
         partnerships that the Bank has already established with
         parliaments around the world. Their oversight role has an
         important bearing on the mission to fight poverty. Across the
         world, parliamentarians monitor public resources and provide a
         crucial link between the World Bank and the local communities in
         both developing and developed countries.” He said it was vital
         that MPs asked tough questions and ensured that pressing
         development issues are placed on national agendas.


      2. A major theme of the Conference, as explained above, was the role
         MPs could play in ensuring that the Millennium Development Goals
         (MDGs) are achieved. Overall, the concern was how we could use our
         positions and parliament as an institution to fight poverty, and
         how we could mobilize our constituencies to do so too.

      3. Much of the stress of the Conference was on sub-Saharan Africa.
         The World Bank President said too: “I have said often – and I am
         prepared to say it many times – I think the situation of sub-
         Saharan Africa is not acceptable. It has to be the first priority
         of the World Bank; but it’s not something that the World Bank or
         development community can do unless there is leadership in Africa
         ready to take on the challenge of reducing poverty in Africa. And,
         increasingly, I find leaders and governments, including the
         parliaments, stepping up to that challenge, and that makes me
         hopeful about the future of sub-Saharan Africa”.

      4. A parallel session was devoted to “designing and implementing
         Poverty Reduction Strategies.” MPs from sub-Saharan Africa
         complained that they are often excluded from having a say in the
         PRS process (PRSP). All the participants stressed the need for
         parliaments to become more involved in monitoring and implementing
         the PRSP. There was also a focus on how civil society
         organizations might become involved – but this discussion was not
         taken far enough. Among the key suggestions which emerged from the
         discussion were the following:


         • MPs need to be fully conversant with the PRSP of our relevant
           countries.
         • Developing countries rather than the donors should mainly shape
           the PRSP.
         • The relevant parliamentary committees, and parliaments as a
           whole, need to become involved with the PRSP.
         • Those parliaments more actively involved in PRSP should assist
           parliaments in their neighbourhood.
         • The World Bank should approach PRSP in a ways that are conducive
           to the participation of parliaments.
         • MPs need to develop the skills to become effectively involved in
           PRSP.
                     • More field visits should be encouraged.

      5. There was also a specific session on “Ensuring Accountability: How
         to Strengthen the Parliamentary Voice on Development and Global
         Issues”. Most MPs felt that the governments of their countries
         were not keen that their relations with the World Bank and other
         multilateral institutions and the decisions they take through
         these relations be subject to the scrutiny of parliaments.
         Governments do not feel comfortable with parliaments having a
         meaningful say on global and development issues.  A few MPs
         suggested that the World Bank itself must take some responsibility
         for this, because of the way they have related to governments.
         Most MPs felt that it is difficult to engage effectively on global
         and development issues because of their complex and technical
         nature. MPs lacked the skills, and there was inadequate research
         and other support for us to be effective. However, overall, more
         recently, there has been a slight improvement in the levels of
         participation of parliaments in global and development issues.
         There are also the World Bank Institute and other education and
         training programmes designed to assist MPs in this regard.  Among
         issues raised were the following:

         ▪ The effective use of the role of parliaments in approving
           budgets.
      ▪ The key role of Finance committees in parliaments.
         ▪ The need for greater co-operation between parliamentary
           committees.
      ▪ The specific role of women MPs in development issues.
      ▪ More effective oversight of World Bank-funded projects.
         ▪ The mobilization of the public through public hearings,
           constituency meetings and other forms.
         ▪ The need to intensify the current education and training
           programmes for MPs and improve the research and technical
           support given.
         ▪ More effective co-operation of MPs from the donor countries
           with MPs from developing countries.
      ▪ The need to avoid “donors crowding out the policy space”.
      ▪ The more effective tackling of corruption by parliaments.
         ▪ A possible role for parliaments in considering draft lender
           documents.


      6. The importance of developing infrastructure in developing
         countries was stressed in several sessions. 40% of the World
         Bank’s lending is to be for infrastructure. There was a lot of
         interest in the massive infrastructure roll-out planned by Eskom
         and Transnet in this country, especially during informal exchanges
         with participants.

      7.    Among the many other issues dealt with, mainly in sessions
         parallel to those this participant attended, were the following:


         ▪ The extent to which inequalities actually limit the
           possibilities of growth, and the need for this reason too –
           economic sense – to significantly reduce inequalities.
         ▪ The need for strong democratic institutions, including
           parliaments, for economic growth.
         ▪ The crucial need to ensure gender equity and the valuable role
           of women in development issues.
         ▪ The need to ensure that NEPAD is effectively implemented and
           the G8 and other commitments to Africa are fulfilled.
         ▪ The need to understand the impact of HIV/Aids and more
           effectively tackle it to ensure growth and social development.
      ▪ The importance of cross-country regional development.
         ▪ The need to avoid conflicting messages and proposals between
           the World Bank and other multilateral institutions.
         ▪ Issues of “donor fatigue” in developed countries and the
           accountability of MPs in these countries to their electorates
           for support given to developing countries.  The need for MPs
           from different donor countries to co-operate more on donor
           support to developing countries.


      8.    President Yudhoyono of Indonesia offered a very inspiring speech
         on the need for all the countries to work together to tackle
         poverty, and he stressed the importance of achieving the
         Millennium Development Goals.


      9.    Mr Lamy of the WTO dealt with the challenges in getting
         agreement at the WTO Ministerial Meeting in Hong Kong in December.
          “There was mountains of work and very little time to do it”, he
         said. He said that there was “some progress” in agriculture but
         the parties were “too far apart on market access.” “We need to see
         movement on this issue for the rest of the topics to fall into
         shape.” He was very cautious about the prospects of success in
         Hong Kong, and was concerned that if there was not enough progress
         in December, there would be very little chance that the round
         finishing in 2006 will achieve anything at all. “Then, the trade
         agreements of 10 years ago will have to apply”, he said.
D.    Some Overall Observations


     1. The Conference was certainly valuable. There were too many parallel
        sessions, and it was difficult to choose which to attend. There was
        no effective report-back from the separate sessions to the plenary.
        But the Bank is to produce a report on the whole Conference
        shortly, which will give a fuller sense of the Conference as a
        whole.


     2. Perhaps the nature of the PNoWB and the Conference does not easily
        allow for it, but it would have been more useful if a concrete
        programme of action, even if in a limited form, had emerged to
        guide MPs on how to take issues forward. Beyond the general
        proposals, where exactly we go from here and how we monitor
        progress is not clear enough.


     3. While it is clear that MPs from developing countries lack certain
        skills and have very inadequate research and other support, we can,
        certainly, do far more than we are doing in respect of our
        oversight responsibilities on global and development issues. We
        need to display greater political will!


     4. There was not enough focus on mobilising civil society, and the
        relationship of parliaments to this. MPs seemed unduly cautious
        about engaging with civil society. Yet civil society is such a key
        actor!


     5. PNoWB is seeking to become more decentralized. The Africa chapter
        is encouraging the formation of regional structures, including one
        in Southern Africa. This seems an obvious next step.


     6. The World Bank seems very keen to extend its co-operation with MPs
        and parliaments. At some stage our parliament might want to address
        this issue formally and decide what links we think are appropriate?

5. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on the
    “International Legislative Drafting Institute” programme, 11 to 25 June
    2005, New Orleans, United States Of America, dated 16 November 2005:

    Member of the Public Enterprises Portfolio Committee, Mr TJ Louw, having
    attended the “International Legislative Drafting Institute” programme,
    in New Orleans, in the United States of America, reports as follows:

    A. Introduction


        1. The Public Enterprises Portfolio Committee was invited to send a
           representative to take part in the ‘International Legislative
           Drafting Institute” programme ,  organised by the Public Law
           Centre, a joint venture of the Loyola and Tulane Law Schools, in
           New Orleans from 11 to 25 June 2005. The course is directed at
           MPs, legal drafters, government officials, NGOs, academics,
           journalists and others.

        2. The Public Enterprises Portfolio Committee decided that I should
           attend.

3. 36 participants from 13 countries attended.

4. Among the topics we dealt with were the following:

      ▪ Systems of government and legislatures

      ▪ Enhancing public participation

      ▪ Plain language drafting

      ▪ Ethics and Politics of Drafting

      ▪ Technical aspects of drafting

      ▪ Billingual and Multilingual drafting

               ▪ Negotiating skills in the legislative and administrative
                 process

      ▪ International Trade Agreements

      ▪ Technology Marketplace

      ▪ Public finance legislation

    Differences Between Parliamentary and Presidential Systems




        1. Legislative drafting is probably the most difficult form of
           legal drafting. The basic problems are the same as legal
           drafting, but legislative problems are technically more
           complicated and socially more important. The drafter’s job is to
           help the legislator do what is wanted in a way that will work as
           smoothly as possible. The drafter’s effort begins when called
           upon to express in a very specific way substantive ideas which
           are often less than completely formed when the request is made.
           Legislative research, complete familiarity with the subject
           matter, and clear understanding of the situations to be remedied
           and of the purpose to be accomplished will go a long way toward
           the enactment of satisfactory laws.


        2. The first session dealt with the difference between ‘the
           parliamentary system and state federal (bicameral) legislative
           enactment procedures, how they relate to the drafting process,
           and what can be learned by a comparison of the two approaches.


        3. In a parliamentary legislative system, the drafting of laws is
           situated in each ministry. Every ministerial department employs
           its own legislative drafters, what we call state law advisors.
           The Minister will propose a certain law to the cabinet and after
           cabinet’s approval, the Minister will then take or discuss the
           proposed law with the state law adviser who will then start the
           drafting process. Every ministry will have its’ own drafters who
           will only be responsible to draft and interpret laws for that
           individual department or ministry.


        4. The state federal legislative system has drafting offices for
           the state, which are not attached to any specific department or
           ministry. In a federal system, a member of the public proposes
           certain legislation to the legislator, and from there, the
           legislator take the proposed legislation to the drafting office
           for the drafting process to start. One drafter can draft
           legislation for two different legislators at the same time
           without them knowing.  At times one of those legislators is from
           the opposition side. A strict code of confidentiality is always
           adhered to throughout the drafting process. When the drafting is
           completed, and is in a bill form, the legislator who proposed
           the bill to the drafters will then act as a sponsor of the bill
           in the legislature.

    C.      Visit to the Louisiana Legislature


              1. The delegation had the pleasure of paying a visit to the
                 Louisiana legislature. The purpose of the visit was to get
                 first hand experience of the federal legislative system in
                 practice. What I observed in the senate and the state
                 federal, as compared to our parliamentary system, is that
                 their system is more open to the public. The public can
                 talk to their representatives while the session is on.


              2. Another observation is that a senate committee can pass
                 more than ten bills on a particular day. Their public
                 representative’s work only for three months in a year and
                 the legislatures goes into recess and the public
                 representatives go back to their private jobs.


              3. In our parliamentary sessions, were there is sometimes
                 noise and heckling and were the Speaker is forced to call
                 the House to order is nothing compared to the legislature
                 sessions in the state federal system. Their sessions are
                 noisy and chaotic. Members talk loudly on their mobile
                 phones, walk up and down in the house, the Speaker of the
                 legislature holds private discussions, and everything is
                 loud. The only person paying attention to the proceedings
                 is the person who is supposed to ask a question or who is
                 interested in what the speaker on the podium is saying,
                 unlike in our sessions were the decorum of the house is
                 continuously emphasised.


              4. Our visit to the legislature was disappointing and we felt
                 that there was not much to learn.



    D.      Plain Language Drafting



              1. In this session, we were taken through the process of
                 drafting legislation by using plain and unambiguous
                 language. Legislative, unlike legal, drafting which is
                 meant primarily for lawyers and learned people, should be
                 accessible to the ordinary people on the streets. An
                 average person must be able to understand it because it is
                 meant to address problems that are experienced by ordinary
                 people. It will also help to strengthen our democracy
                 because the majority of people will not have to rely on
                 lawyers to help them interpret and apply laws that are
                 meant to help them.


        2. A document is in plain language if users can:


               - Find what they need
               - Understand what they find
               - Use what they find to meet their needs.


           3.    While it is important to draft laws in plain language, it
                 is also equally important that the principle that everyone
                 is charged with knowledge of the law must not be lost sight
                 of, and the least that legislatures can do is to write the
                 statutes in such a manner that everyone of average will
                 understand.


           4.    Other topics covert in this section were: regulatory
                 drafting, which covered topics like the use of tables and
                 graphic presentations, tabulations, provisos and
                 conditions, type-size, boldface and italics and staggered
                 indentation of paragraphs.


    E.      The Ethics and Politics of Legislative Drafting


              1. The evolution of every bill is politically influenced, from
                 the conceptual to adoption and finally the implementation
                 stage. In a parliamentary system of government, the
                 evolution of a law starts from the political party’s
                 campaign promises. At every step in the evolution of a
                 bill, the drafter’s personal and political agendas exert an
                 unavoidable influence on the conceptual aspects. Not only
                 does a drafter’s “political agenda” influence priorities,
                 but personal considerations may also infiltrate the
                 drafting process. Thus, it is very crucial for the drafter
                 to understand the political agenda or campaign promises of
                 the ruling party and the ministry that he or she is working
                 for. Seldom will the proponent for whom the drafter is
                 preparing legislation or a rule have more than a rough idea
                 of what it should include. Even less likely, will the
                 proponent have thought out its details.


              2. It is also important to note that legislative drafters do
                 not operate in a political vacuum. The legislative process
                 and its essential derivative, the drafting process, are
                 inherently political in nature. The choices made within
                 such a context are inescapably political, advocacy choices.
                 Legislative drafters are all ways confronted by the same
                 question and one with obvious ethical and political
                 implications is, “How much is to be left to the drafter’s
                 discretion?” The answer depends to a considerable extent on
                 how aggressively a drafter probes the client for guidance
                 on this question. The drafter who less frequently inquires
                 about the client’s desires will have greater latitude to
                 exercise discretion and accordingly can play more of an
                 advocacy role in shaping legislation. Such a situation has
                 unfortunate ethical implications, tending to undermine two
                 important and related professional responsibilities: the
                 unscrupulous drafter who does not explain matters
                 sufficiently to let the client make informed decisions not
                 only subverts the ethical obligation to consults with
                 clients, but also sidesteps a second duty - to “abide by a
                 clients decisions concerning the objectives of
                 representation”. The drafters should also bear in mind that
                 when they draft laws they should eliminate gender-based
                 biases.



    F.      Accuracy, Clarity and Precision of Legislation



              1. Accuracy is “the degree to which the proposed instrument
                 expresses what the client intends it to express”. A propose
                 ordinance, for instance, is “accurate” when it “moves in
                 the direction intended by the client, and it is no more nor
                 less general, and no more nor less vague, than is required
                 by the considerations of substantive policy. Accuracy (the
                 expression of the client’s will) should always be the
                 objective of the principled legislative drafter”.


              2. Clarity and precision are not “mere ‘technical’ matters to
                 be determined by the drafter alone in accordance with the
                 dictates of good legislative drafting practices”. The
                 degree of clarity or precision in a draft can have
                 substantial political implications.


              3. There are often good reasons, political or tactical,
                 sometimes more easily appreciated by the politician than by
                 the lawyer, but in many cases very sound and cogent,
                 against the adoption of counsels of perfection urged, and
                 properly urged, by the draftsman from the legal point of
                 view. The legislative drafting personnel who are lawyers
                 have a dual ethical obligation - to the representation of a
                 client and to the fair administration of the justice
                 system, and these may sometimes conflict.



   G. Valuable Study Tour



      1. The study tour was an eye-opener for me.  At first, I found the
         course a bit difficult, but I soon adjusted, and began to
         participate more actively. I have learned a lot from this course.
         I now understand much better what is going through the mind of a
         drafter, and, most importantly, how I must relate to and interpret
         laws that come before me. The course is a must - especially for
         members of parliament who are not drafters themselves but who
         always have to rely on the advice of the state law advisors.


      2. If there is any criticism, it is that the course is too American-
         centred. It should reflect greater diversity, especially as many
         of the participants come from developing countries.


      3. It was also a good cultural experience to be exposed to New
         Orleans for two weeks. It was sad to hear about their flood
         disaster.


      4. I would strongly recommend that the Committee arranges for other
         members to also attend the course.


6.    Report of Portfolio Committee on Social Development on Filling of
    Vacancies on the Central Drug Authority, dated 16 November 2005:



Scan and Insert Report – From pages 2958 - 2969




                         WEDNESDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

           1) Road Traffic Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister
              of Transport on 29 October 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Transport and the Select Committee on Public
              Services.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on  Improvement  of  Quality  of
     Life and Status of Women on Office on the Status of Women contained  in
     the Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for 2004-
     2005, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
     Statements of Vote 1 for 2004-2005 [RP  191-2005],  dated  11  November
     2005:

      The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
      Status of Women, having considered Office on the Status of Women
      contained in the Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The
      Presidency for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
      on the Financial Statements of Vote 1 for 2004-2005 [RP 191-2005]:
      referred to it, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
      thereon.

The following points were considered:

The Beijing + 10 Report referred to, was not sent out for discussion to the
relevant stakeholders prior to its presentation to the meeting in New York.
 The Committee was not given the opportunity to discuss, comment on and/or
adopt the Report.  To its knowledge, the Committee is not aware that there
has been a report back by the Office of the Status of Women to
stakeholders.

In the spirit of consultation and participation, that the government is
committed to, the Committee would like to recommend that the 10-year
National Action Plan for Gender Mainstreaming, be opened up for broad
discussion, in all the provinces, before Cabinet/the government adopts it.

The National Policy Framework on Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality,
adopted in 2000, sets out both short-term and long-term indicators for the
achievement of gender equality.  The Committee, as part of its monitoring
role, would like the Office of the Status of Women to undertake research
that responds directly to the indicators, to determine what progress has
been made, five years after the policy has become operational.

The National Gender Machinery, of which the Committee is one of the co-
chairs, holds most of its meetings in Pretoria.  The Committee would like
to recommend the rotational holding of the meetings in different provinces,
as a way of broadening the participation of provincial stakeholders, and
giving a broader base of civil society organisations access to the National
Gender Machinery deliberations.

Report to be considered.

2. Annual Report of Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
 Life and Status of Women, dated 11 November 2005:




         SCAN AND INSERT – PAGE 2972 -2985





National Assembly


1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the Public Hearings  on
    Annual Reports, dated 17 November 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Transport having held public hearings on the
    Annual Report of the Department of Transport on 12 October and 2
    November 2005, reports as follows:

A. Introduction

   The Portfolio Committee on Transport was able to hold three public
   hearings on the Annual Report of the National Department of Transport and
   several entities reporting under the department – the South African
   Maritime Safety Agency (SAMSA), the Air Traffic Navigation Services
   (ATNS), the Railway Safety Regulator (RSR), Airports Company of South
   Africa (ACSA), the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), and South African
   National Roads Agency Limited (SANRAL). Owing to constraints of time the
   Committee was unable to hold hearings on all entities falling under the
   Transport budget. The Committee accordingly made a strategic selection.
   The hearings were held in Parliament between the 12th October and 2nd
   November 2005.


   The Committee notes with concern that the Road Accident Fund, the Cross
   Border Road Traffic Agency and the Road Traffic Management Corporation
   had not submitted their 2005 Annual Reports as of 31 October 2005.

B.    Findings

1. The National Department of Transport


   The 2005 Annual Report of the DoT reflects ongoing progress in the
   restructuring of the department to more effectively respond to its
   diverse responsibilities. The Committee believes that this restructuring
   should enable the department to devote more focused attention to areas
   that had previously been relatively neglected – including maritime and
   aviation policy.


   There are high vacancy levels within the department at senior management
   levels. This is partly related to new posts associated with the
   restructuring noted above. However, the Committee expresses some concern
   at the vacancy levels, and at a relatively high rate of turn-over at the
   senior staff level.


   For the first time in several years the department received a qualified
   audit opinion from the Auditor General. There are several important
   matters that the Auditor General’s report raises, including:
    ▪ ongoing uncertainty regarding the contract for the production of
      the credit card format licences. The Auditor General is awaiting the
      results of an investigation into this matter, and the Committee will
      also be tracking progress in this respect.
    ▪ instances of fruitless and wasteful expenditure, irregular
      expenditure and unauthorized expenditure. Officials from the
      department assured the Committee that each of these specific cases
      had been addressed and remedies applied.

           In the Committee’s view, the most important issue raised by  the
           Auditor General is that memoranda of understanding  between  the
           department and the public entities under  its  control  are  not
           regularly updated and some were last revised in  1994.  In  most
           instances, performance contracts had also  not  been  concluded.
           The  Committee  agrees  with  the  Auditor  General  that  these
           instruments can play an important role in  effective  governance
           and oversight of these entities. The  Committee  is  aware  that
           subsequent to the  time-period  addressed  in  the  2005  Annual
           Report, the department has taken active  steps  to  up-date  and
           enhance memoranda of  understanding  and  performance  contracts
           with all relevant entities. The  Committee  will  be  monitoring
           progress in this regard.


   The Committee raised concerns that there was under-expenditure in certain
   priority areas, including on Arrive Alive, the implementation of the
   National Land Transport Transitional Act, and overloading controls.


2.Air Traffic Navigation Services

   The ATNS has performed consistently well over several years, and the 2005
   Annual Report accurately reflects  continued  achievements.  The  Auditor
   General’s report is qualified, but the Committee is satisfied  that  this
   relates to a relatively minor technicality regarding the  asset  register
   of the ATNS. We are also satisfied that this has now been corrected,  and
   no actual asset losses have been incurred.


3. South African Maritime Safety Authority

   SAMSA has experienced some leadership instability over recent years. The
   committee is concerned that SAMSA seems to lack a clear sense of its
   mandate focus. The Director General of the DoT confirmed this.


   Part of this lack of clear strategic focus is reflected in the fact that
   SAMSA has a large assets to liability ratio. The DoT is insisting that
   SAMSA develops a proper budget to spend its surplus or forfeit it. The
   Committee supports this approach.


   The Committee believes that these issues relate directly to the concern
   raised by the Auditor General regarding the need for the DoT to more
   regularly update its memoranda of understanding and performance contracts
   with entities such as SAMSA.


4. Airports Company of South Africa

   ACSA is another entity that has been performing well over several  years,
   embarking on major infrastructural projects  and  generating  significant
   surpluses out of its airport activities. ACSA plans to embark on  further
   major airport upgrades and renovations with a likely  significant  impact
   on job creation and SMME development, ahead of the  2010  World  Cup.  To
   maximize its work in this area ACSA hopes to  borrow  at  a  30%  gearing
   ratio, instead of at its current 6,7% gearing  which  means  its  capital
   expenditure borrowings  are  more  expensive  than  they  might  be.  The
   Committee agrees that an appropriate regulatory framework in this  regard
   for ACSA should be considered.


   The Committee notes that the company’s dividends have increased by 29% to
   R295-million for the year under consideration. While this is a welcome
   development, given the fact that the government is the majority share-
   holder the Committee is concerned that ACSA’s legal status means that it
   is not subject to the oversight of the Auditor General. The Committee
   suggests that measures be developed to improve public scrutiny of ACSA
   finances.
   The ownership profile of ACSA is another issue that requires further
   attention. The private sector share owned by Aeroporti di Roma has been
   sold back to ACSA and the projected employee share-holding has never been
   implemented. Further discussion and policy-development in this regard
   needs to occur.

5. Railway Safety Regulator

   For the period covered by  the  2005  reporting  year,  the  RSR  was  an
   embryonic entity. In July 2004 there was a CEO  and  only  two  full-time
   staff and three secondments. Given its very  recent  establishment  there
   was not much to report  for  the  year  under  review.  Nevertheless  the
   Committee deliberately invited the RSR senior management  to  the  public
   hearings in order to establish whether there was any real  progress.  The
   Committee was relatively satisfied that indeed  some  progress  is  being
   made. A State of Safety Report is being compiled,  and  the  RSR  is  now
   receiving occurrence reports. 134 Safety Permits have been issued to rail
   operators and a further 50 will be issued in the  near  future.  The  RSR
   concedes that it has very weak enforcement capacity.


   The Committee notes that there are still no organized labour and
   Department of Minerals and Energy representatives on the board of the RSR
   as required by legislation.


   The Auditor General has raised several matters relating to unutilized
   funds, budgeting, the leave system and the non-performance of the RSR’s
   audit committee. The Committee will be monitoring these issues.

6. Civil Aviation Authority

   The CAA continues to provide a high-level of technical capacity in
   aircraft inspection and accident and incident recording and
   investigation.


   The Auditor General has queried a R60million investment with  Old  Mutual
   and Momentum Group Limited, and particularly  commissions  paid  of  R2,5
   million in the absence of a clear investment  policy.  There  is  also  a
   forensic audit under-way in regard to office accommodation. The Committee
   will monitor developments in  this  regard.  Once  again,  the  Committee
   believes that a more effective Memorandum of  Understanding  between  the
   CAA and the DoT could help to improve governance in regard to  issues  of
   this kind.


   The CAA raised with the Committee a concern that the aviation sector in
   South Africa required a champion to broaden participation and awareness
   of the sector amongst a wider section of South Africa’s population, and
   there was no real clarity as to where this championing function should be
   centrally vested. The Committee accepts the point, and will be raising
   the matter with the DoT.


7. South African National Roads Agency Ltd

   In the assessment of the Committee,  SANRAL  has  proved  to  be  a  very
   dynamic promoter of road  construction  and  maintenance.  Largely  as  a
   result of this and of its professional and technical capacities  SANRAL’s
   road coverage has increasingly moved beyond its original national  routes
   mandate. It was reported to the Committee that SANRAL’s road coverage  is
   now set to double from  its  original  mandate,  often  as  a  result  of
   agreements with different provinces. The Committee believes that this  is
   probably a positive development. It  is,  however,  occurring  without  a
   clear agency agreement in place on funding. This latter  now  becomes  an
   important matter for greater clarity and policy  development,  especially
   as many of the roads  now  being  taken  over  by  SANRAL  require  major
   rehabilitation. Ongoing funding of SANRAL’s activities should  also  take
   into account the  significant  escalation  in  the  price  of  bituminous
   products, which are directly related to the international oil price.


   The Auditor General has qualified his report of SANRAL, raising questions
   in regard to the land asset register and the absence of quarterly audits.
   The Committee will monitor these issues.

C. Further recommendations

   Noting improvements in the number of timeous Annual Report submissions of
   the various transport entities, the Committee urges the DoT to ensure a
   hundred percent compliance in future years.


   The Committee had inadequate time to deal with all of the reporting
   entities and we were compelled to make a strategic selection. The
   September 30 deadline for Annual Report submissions also means that the
   Committee’s own oversight and recommendations come too late for a more
   effective contribution to government’s budget development cycle. We
   recommend an earlier deadline for Annual Report submissions, and more
   adequate time in Parliament for public hearings on these reports.

2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the Public Hearings  on
    the Proposed Gautrain Project dated, 16 November 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Transport having held Public Hearings on  the
    proposed Gautrain Project on 18 –19 November 2005, reports as follows:

1. Introduction

   The Gautrain project is intended to provide a rapid rail link between
   Johannesburg and Tshwane, with a branch-line between Johannesburg
   International Airport and Sandton. The project has been developed as a
   Public Private Partnership, involving national government, the Gauteng
   provincial government and a winning private sector consortium, Bombela.
   The prime objective of the project is to contribute to relieving the road
   congestion on the N1 Ben Schoeman freeway. Subject to national cabinet
   approval and the final negotiation of the respective contractual
   obligations of the participating parties, the construction of the project
   is due to begin in January 2006, with a target completion date of March
   2010.


2. The role of the Portfolio Committee

   The Transport Portfolio Committee has followed the development of the
   project over several years, but we have not previously assumed any direct
   oversight responsibility. This has been due to the fact that the project
   has been run by the Gauteng province, as one of several Blue IQ projects.
   However, on the 25th October 2005 the Minister of Finance announced in
   parliament that the Gautrain project had a “national” status. The
   Minister of Finance said that it would be costing government an estimated
   R20-billion. It is in this context that the Transport Portfolio Committee
   held public hearings on the Gautrain on the 8th and 9th November 2005.
   The Committee had very little time to ensure an effective and detailed
   oversight process. This is a matter of considerable concern. In the brief
   time available, the Committee nevertheless believes that its public
   hearings have provided an important opportunity to achieve greater
   clarity and transparency around the project. The hearings have also
   helped to open up a broader national public debate on the merits of the
   Gautrain project.

   3. Policy development and stake-holder participation in the project

   The Committee is concerned that transparency and effective participation
   by key stake-holders in the policy development process around the
   Gautrain project have been inadequate. This is a view that appears to be
   shared by at least two of the three affected Metros, as became apparent
   to the Committee during recent fact-finding trips to the Tshwane and City
   of Johannesburg metros. The City of Tshwane Integrated Transport Plan
   2004-2009, for instance, is explicit about several difficulties that it
   has with the Gautrain proposal. Section 7.6.2 of the ITP notes that the
   City of Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality (CTMM) Economic Development
   Department has committed itself to assisting with a successful
   implementation of the Gautrain project, but then adds: “This undertaking
   was given despite the fact that the Department’s Transport Division was
   not proactively involved, or invited, in the feasibility and planning
   studies undertaken for the project by Gautrans.”

   4. The Gautrain budgetary spend relative to other sectors of public
      transport

   The projected public budgetary cost of some R20-billion makes this the
   most expensive single public transport project ever undertaken in our
   country. According to the project leader, the Gautrain is projected to
   have an initial demand of 134,000 passenger trips per day. Dr Andrew Shaw
   of the Development Bank of Southern Africa provided the Committee with a
   slightly lower initial demand projection of 104,000 passenger trips per
   day. These estimates of passenger trips per day would translate into
   around 60–70,000 individual passengers per day. The projected R20-billion
   to be spent on some 60-70,000 individual passengers (which is itself
   possibly an optimistic estimate) should be compared with what is being
   spent on buses, taxis and the Metrorail system, which together transport
   some 7 million South Africans every single week-day. The 2005 Budget
   allocates R250 million, R315 million, and R320 million for each of the
   next three years for taxi recapitalisation. The same budget makes
   additional allocations for existing and ailing passenger rail
   infrastructure of R100 million for 2006/7 and R250 million for 2007/8.


   The Committee acknowledges that the Gautrain project will be a completely
   new rail system and its construction costs therefore cannot be compared
   in a simplistic way with taxi recapitalisation, for instance, or with
   Metrorail infrastructure upgrading. Nevertheless, the very significant
   size of the estimate cost to the public sector of the Gautrain project
   and the relatively modest number of passengers it will carry do need to
   be weighed seriously against the back-drop of the bulk of our public
   transport systems which are in a dire state, with extremely high levels
   of public dissatisfaction (see, for instance, the National Department of
   Transport’s National Household Travel Survey conducted in 2003 and
   presented to Parliament in 2005). A decision to proceed with the project
   in its existing form constitutes, therefore, a considerable political
   risk for government.

 5. The Gautrain and the 2010 World Cup Soccer Finals
   At the outset of its hearings, the Portfolio Committee expressed concern
   at what was felt to be an attempt to steam-roller its oversight function
   by public statements from the Gautrain project leader that the country
   “had a moral and legal duty” to the 2010 Soccer World Cup Finals to begin
   constructing the Gautrain in January 2006. It was suggested that South
   Africa would lose the right to host the World Cup if the Gautrain was not
   completed on time. In the early stages of our public hearings, the
   Gautrain project leader once more alluded to these claims. However, the
   Committee was able to establish that South Africa’s official Bid Book to
   FIFA contains no reference to the Gautrain project. In the course of
   further interaction, the Gautrain project leader conceded that there were
   no contractual obligations to FIFA in regard to Gautrain. It was also
   agreed that the merits and viability of the project should be de-linked
   from the 2010 World Cup Finals.

6. Are projected construction time-frames realistic?

   The Committee does acknowledge that a completed Gautrain rapid rail
   system could be a positive asset in the context of the 2010 World Cup
   Finals. However, even if construction does start in January 2006, the
   Committee is concerned that a 2010 completion date may well be extremely
   optimistic. The Gautrain project leader repeated to the Committee an
   observation he has made several times in the public media, namely that
   preparation and construction of the project will be far ahead of the
   international norm. (See, for instance: “We have found that a project of
   this nature usually takes 14 years. We will do it in nine years”, The
   Star, 25 June 2004).  The Committee is uncertain of the grounds for this
   optimism. In March and April 2005 the major construction engineering
   groups associated with the two rival bids were reported to have warned
   that meeting the 2010 target would be “very difficult”. “Both
   construction companies have warned that the development of the rail link
   would be extremely challenging, as it would involve tunnelling through
   the hard rock beneath Johannesburg” , “the size and complexity of the
   project…was immense” (Business Day, 1 April, 2005). In assessing the
   feasibility of the current target completion date, the Committee
   recommends that Government factors in the possible impact of skills
   shortages and the availability of key material inputs like cement and
   steel. If construction does start in January 2006, we believe that
   completion by March 2010 is far from assured. If we fail to complete on
   time, the project may present 2010 with a construction site rather than a
   high-speed rail system.


7. Cost escalation

    In its public hearings the Committee devoted some time to establishing
   the reasons for the dramatic escalation in estimated costs to government.
   While the final estimated costs still have to be settled in the
   contractual negotiations, the costs have risen from an estimated R7-
   billion to the R20-billion announced by the Minister of Finance in
   October 2005. The Committee was told by the Gautrain project leader that
   the R7-billion should, in fact, be compared with a new figure of R12-
   billion, because both were calculated as the estimated net present cost
   of the construction phase of the project. The R20-billion figure is the
   estimate of government’s total exposure over the five-year construction
   period, including the cost of paying back on borrowing. As to the
   escalation from R7-billion to R12-billion the Committee was told that
   this was related, amongst other things, to the absence of VAT in the
   earlier calculation, and to the cost of re-alignments. The Committee did
   not find these explanations entirely persuasive. The Committee is
   concerned that as recently as July 2005 Cabinet was still being given an
   estimate of R7-billion, even though the VAT liability had been clarified
   long before this. We are also concerned that costs to government may
   continue to escalate if the project gets under-way.

8. A high risk project

   These concerns were reinforced by the public submission made to the
   Committee by Dr Andrew Shaw of the Development Bank of Southern Africa.
   Significantly the DBSA is one of the major financial backers of the
   Gautrain project, and Dr Shaw expressed support, in principle, for the
   project. However, he characterised the project as “high risk”. He told
   the committee: “I don’t think that the project has done a serious risk
   analysis. I suspect we have been presented a picture in which the risks
   have been substantially underestimated.”  However, the project leader
   assured the Committee that the R20-billion figure was a fixed cost
   contract and there would be no extra cost. The Committee has not seen the
   contract and recommends that Government closely analyses possible risks
   of cost escalations that often occur in projects of this magnitude. The
   Committee also recommends that Government analyses the implications of
   any delayed completion penalties.

9. Construction cost underestimation in similar projects internationally

   In the course of its public hearings, the Committee’s attention was drawn
   to a recent comprehensive international survey of 258 transportation
   infrastructural projects (Flyvbjerg, Holm and Buhl, “Underestimating
   Costs in Public Works Projects”, Journal of American Planning
   Association, Summer 2002). The main findings of this study are that in 80
   percent of transportation infrastructure projects costs are
   underestimated. Rail projects are the worst in this respect, with actual
   costs on average 45 percent higher than estimated costs. The research
   finds that cost underestimation appeared to be a global phenomenon, but
   it was more pronounced in developing countries. In singling out rail
   projects as particularly liable to cost underestimation, the report finds
   that rapid rail and rail projects involving tunnelling were special
   culprits. The Gautrain project is a rapid rail project and some 12
   kilometres of tunnelling are envisaged. The Committee appreciates that a
   statistically established global tendency for serious cost
   underestimation in projects of this kind does not prove that the
   Gautrain’s current R20-billion cost estimation is necessarily flawed.
   However, the survey’s finding that in its 258 world-wide project sample
   “cost underestimation cannot be explained by error and seems to be best
   explained by strategic misrepresentation” should not be lightly dismissed
   in this case.

10. R20-billion a “sunken cost”

   In assessing the likely cost of the project, the Committee also draws
   attention to the fact that the estimated R20-billion cost to government
   for the construction of the Gautrain infrastructure will be a “sunken
   cost”. In other words, unlike many of our current Public Private
   Partnership projects in road construction, there is no plan to recover
   this cost over a defined operating period of the project.

11. Job creation and contribution to general economic growth

   The Committee notes that there is an expectation that the Gautrain will
   create some 93,000 jobs in the construction phase, coming down to 2,700
   direct jobs in operating and maintenance thereafter. An infrastructure
   project costing R20-billion will also certainly have a broader impact on
   job creation and general economic growth. These important positives would
   need to be assessed in terms of the cost and of possible alternatives.
   However, without discounting these positives, the Committee believes that
   the project is not primarily a job-creation project, and it must be
   assessed primarily in terms of its contribution to resolving the
   transport challenges confronting the province.

12. Alleviating road congestion on the N1

The key strategic objective of the Gautrain project is to help alleviate
road traffic congestion on the N1 Ben Schoeman freeway between Johannesburg
and Tshwane. There is relatively serious congestion on this important
arterial route, and the Committee has been told that traffic on the route
is increasing by 7 percent per annum. The Gautrain project hopes to attract
some 20 percent of existing car-users on the Ben Schoeman to use the rapid
rail system instead. It should be noted that, given the 7 percent annual
increase, a (possibly optimistic) 20 percent reduction on the present car
volumes would still leave the Ben Schoeman more congested in 2010 than at
present.

13. Many other congested axes in Gauteng

   It should also be noted that the Ben Schoeman is not the only congested
   road in the Gauteng province. In regard to the Gautrain’s potential
   contribution to congestion relief, the City of Johannesburg’s Integrated
   Transport Plan 2003/2008 (Updated 2004) notes: “Whilst major public
   transport initiatives such as Gautrain can be expected to attract private
   transport users, this attraction will at best only slow down the growth
   in private transport demand (i.e. private transport demand will continue
   to grow albeit at a marginally reduced rate” (Executive Summary, p.42).
   The COJ’s ITP also notes that major congestion challenges are not
   confined to the N1: “The development of East/West linkages are just as
   important to the sustained growth of the City…” (ibid., p.39)


14. Projected ridership figures

   In his public presentation to the Committee, Dr Shaw of the DBSA was
   particularly concerned about what he termed an “optimism bias” in the
   Gautrain’s projected ridership figures. He noted that there was a high
   level of demand risk in the project because it is “extremely difficult to
   project demand for ‘greenfield’ development projects of this kind”, and
   because “private car users are notoriously bad at leaving their vehicles
   at home.”  The authors of the international study on underestimation in
   construction costs referred to in paragraph 9 above, Flyvbjerg, Holm and
   Buhl, have found the opposite tendency when it comes to estimating
   demand. In a sample of 27 rail projects around the world, they found that
   actual ridership figures were more than 40 percent less than estimated in
   more than half the projects (“How accurate are demand forecasts for
   public works projects?”, Journal of American Planning Association, Spring
   2005).

15. The risk of operating subsidies

   Passenger number forecasts for the Gautrain are important not just for
   estimating the relative contribution the project might make to
   alleviating some congestion on one of Gauteng’s key arterial routes.
   Significant ridership levels are also important for the financial
   sustainability of the project during its operational phase. While the
   private sector participants will carry some risk in this respect, their
   patronage guarantee will be set at a level well below the patronage level
   required for the project to cover its operating costs. Beyond this lower
   level, the province and national will have contingent liabilities related
   to higher patronage guarantee levels up to the break-even mark. While all
   of these remain subject to final negotiation, and precise figures could
   not be provided to the Committee, the Committee is concerned that a
   significant part of the Gauteng province’s public transport budget could
   be swallowed up in ongoing subsidies for the Gautrain at the expense of
   other priorities. The Committee is also concerned that the operating
   risks to the private sector would appear to be considerably less than
   those imposed on government.

16. A relatively affluent target market
   The prime objective of the Gautrain is to attract a relatively affluent
   and a relatively modest number of car-users currently using the N1
   between Johannesburg and Tshwane. Projected ticket-prices, the up-market
   location of the majority of stations, the high-speed rail-gauge and
   voltage use which are non-compatible with our current rail-lines, the
   proposed purchase of train-sets manufactured outside of South Africa
   (which places limitations on local job creation) – these and other
   features have all been deliberately chosen to provide an affluent sector
   of the Gauteng community with a first-world public transport mode. The
   project will also be providing 250 new buses to shuttle its target market
   passengers from their places of work and residence within a ten-kilometre
   radius of the Gautrain stations. Park-and-ride facilities will also be
   laid on. However, the location of the rail-line is remote from most of
   the major townships of Gauteng, and there has been very little
   consideration of ensuring connectivity with the major modes of transport
   used by township dwellers in Gauteng. The Committee is also concerned
   that insufficient consideration has been given to the implication of new
   buses operating in areas already serviced by the minibus sector and
   existing bus services. The Committee further believes that insufficient
   attention has been paid to existing metro Integrated Transport Plans and
   related bus and taxi routes and ranks, and the Metrorail system.


17. Fragmented public transport
   In a written submission to the Committee on behalf of the Gauteng
   Provincial Passengers Council, Dr Vaughan Mostert notes that the
   Gautrain’s Feasibility Report published on its website makes many claims
   to being part of a transport system (“It must be seen as part of the
   larger provincial transportation network”; “It is part of a total
   holistic transport system in Gauteng”, etc.). In Dr Mostert’s view:
   “There is no holistic transport system in Gauteng or, for that matter,
   anywhere in South Africa. Formal public transport is fragmented,
   inadequate in terms of both route coverage and frequency, and has failed
   to develop in keeping with urban expansion. There is no integrated
   ticketing, scheduling, marketing or branding. Different operators offer
   different services under different sets of rules.”  Dr Mostert is also
   critical of the Gautrain project’s claim that it is “in line with
   Government policy and legislation.”  Dr Mostert points out that Sections
   4 and 5 of the National Land Transport Transition Act refer 13 times to
   “the need to co-ordinate, integrate and rationalise public transport.”
   Section 4, he notes, “specifically requires public transport subsidies to
   be aimed at currently marginalized users and those who have poor access
   to economic opportunities.” Section 10, he further notes, “requires
   Transport Authorities to be set up. Sections 19 and 28 require these
   Authorities to produce a variety of plans relating to transport in
   general and public transport in particular. These requirements have not
   been met.” Dr Mostert concludes this part of Gauteng Provincial
   Passengers Council submission by asserting that “The Gautrain scheme will
   play no part in meeting the requirements or principles of the NLTTA. It
   is not aimed at currently marginalized users and will not assist those
   who have poor access to social and economic activity.”

  18. The potential for existing bus services to act as feeders for the
      Gautrain

   In another section of the Gauteng Provincial Passengers Council’s written
   submission to the Committee it is noted that the Gautrain project claims
   that “existing scheduled public transport services can act as feeders”.
   The submission, however, notes that in much of the area to be served by
   the Gautrain (Sandton/Midrand/Centurion) “formal public transport is
   almost non-existent. A few peak-only trips are run to and from the
   townships, on routes that lack focus and are known only to the handful of
   passengers using them.” The submission states that, in principle, the
   core bus services of Johannesburg and Tshwane might be expected to play a
   strong role in supporting the Gautrain. However, it notes: “in their
   present form they are in no position to make a contribution to the
   scheme. For many years, bus services in both cities have been crumbling
   steadily…In Johannesburg, heavy passenger losses have taken place, with a
   40 percent cut in bus trips since 1988.”


19. Greater connectivity
     The Committee understands that some of these issues were raised in July
     by Cabinet when it gave an in principle commitment to the project. One
     of the preconditions for a go-ahead from Cabinet was that greater
     connectivity between the Gautrain and other mass public transport
     systems in the province should be built-in and demonstrated. The
     Committee is aware that some feasibility work has been done on this,
     but at the time of our hearings no documentation or briefing was
     available.


20. Assessing connectivity

     It is impossible for the Committee to reach any conclusions about the
     prospects for building-in effective connectivity between the major mass
     modes of public transport in the province and the Gautrain. The
     Committee believes that connectivity needs to be critically associated
     with fare-prices and should not be confined to technical matters or to
     physical proximity of different public transport modes. If real
     connectivity, that begins to overcome the divide between the first and
     second economies, indeed, proves to be possible, then it will certainly
     enhance the social value of the project. We cannot assess the prospects
     of a revised project without much more information being available, but
     we are concerned that hurried attempts in this regard might result
     merely in a retro-fit approach that falls between two stools,
     undermining the objectives of the present first-world project while not
     adding anything serious to existing public transport challenges.

21. Three options

   In the Committee’s view there are three main broad options available to
   Cabinet in seeking to reach a decision on the Gautrain project:

         ▪ The project could be given a go-ahead, essentially in its
           present form. For all of the reasons elaborated above, the
           Committee believes that this would be both financially and
           politically a high-risk option and we would advise against it.


         ▪ The project could be revised to ensure greater connectivity to
           existing mass public transport modes, and to major areas of
           settlement, particularly the larger townships of the province.
           Without a great deal more information, the Committee is unable
           to assess the feasibility of such an approach. If Cabinet
           favours this second option, the Committee would advise adequate
           time be provided for a thorough assessment and for effective
           public participation in the process. This necessarily implies
           delaying any immediate implementation. The Committee recognises
           that delays may have financial implications and may complicate
           negotiations with bidders. We believe that these challenges are
           far outweighed by the dangers of proceeding hastily with a
           project that may prove to be financially unsustainable and may
           further divide rather than connect the first and second
           economies.

         ▪ The challenges of dealing with road-based congestion on many
           of Gauteng’s major arterial routes, including the N1, could be
           dealt with in a more comprehensive, sustainable and integrated
           fashion rather than through a multi-billion rand, stand-alone,
           rapid rail system. This would require moving away from a single,
           flag-ship project approach to a multi-faceted strategy that
           aligns the Integrated Transport Plans of the three major metros,
           and that seeks to drive effective operational integration of all
           of the major existing modes of public transport in the province.

  22. The need for a  comprehensive  approach  to  transport  challenges  in
      Gauteng


   Whatever option is chosen, the Committee  believes  that  the  challenges
   thrown up by the Gautrain proposal underline the imperative of the  rapid
   establishment of a single Gauteng Transport Authority as envisaged in the
   National Land Transport Transition Act (2000). Such a Transport Authority
   should work closely with the Transport Authorities/Transport  Departments
   of the three  affected  metros,  in  order  to  produce  a  comprehensive
   approach to public transport in the  province,  in  which  a  sustainable
   basis is laid for improving existing public  transport,  integrating  all
   public transport modes, addressing land  use  and  spatial  planning  and
   aligning these with public transport plans and regulation. In the view of
   the Committee responses to the congestion challenges of the province  can
   only be addressed in  a  sustainable  manner  in  this  way.  Stand-alone
   projects are unlikely to achieve much. A precondition for the success  of
   an integrated Gauteng approach to public transport is that  the  National
   Department  of  Transport  should  urgently   facilitate   much   greater
   operational and financial devolution of public transport to the  province
   and its three major Metros. This will affect the way in  which  transport
   subsidies are allocated including to current bus operators in  the  area,
   the operational responsibilities currently enjoyed by the  South  African
   Rail Commuter Corporation and Metrorail, and the National  Department  of
   Transport’s approach to taxi recapitalisation.


23. Acknowledgments

   The Committee expresses its appreciation to Jack van der Merwe,  Gautrain
   project leader, Dr Andrew Shaw of the  DBSA,  and  Professor  Romano  del
   Mistro of the University of Cape Town for the presentations they made  to
   the public hearings. The Committee thanks the officials of the Department
   of Transport and the National Treasury who contributed  actively  to  the
   Committee’s  deliberations.   The   Committee   further   expresses   its
   appreciation to the Gauteng MEC for Transport and his  officials  in  the
   Transport Department, and to officials in the City  of  Johannesburg  and
   Tshwane Metros who hosted us during study tours  to  learn  about  public
   transport challenges in the Gauteng province.

3. Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Social  Development  on  Public
    hearings on the Older Persons Bill  [B  68B-2003],  dated  09  September
    2005:


    The Portfolio Committee on Social Development  having  conducted  public
    hearings on the Older Persons Bill [B 68B-2003], reports as follows:

Introduction

The Portfolio Committee on Social Development held public  hearings  on  the
Older Persons Bill [B 68B-2003]  on  30  to  31  August  2005.  This  report
encapsulates those written and oral submissions made on the said Bill.

The following organisations, and individuals, made submission:

Organisations

    ❑ Cape Jewish Seniors Association (CJSA)
    ❑ Ikamva Labantu
    ❑ Highlands House (The Cape Jewish Aged Home)
    ❑ Grandmothers Against Poverty and Aids
    ❑ Kerklike Maatskaplike Dienste Raad (KMDR)
    ❑ Church Council For Social Services
    ❑ Action on Elder Abuse South Africa (AEASA)
    ❑ SA Human Rights Commission
    ❑ NG Ministry of Caring
    ❑ NAWONGO
    ❑ A branch of NG Welfare, North West
    ❑ Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged
    ❑ Alzheimer’s South Africa
    ❑ Women’s Legal Centre
    ❑ Department of Health - CT
    ❑ The Black Sash
    ❑ Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing
    ❑ RAPCAN
    ❑ Southern African Catholic Bishops Conference
    ❑ Alliance for Children’s Entitlement to Social Security
    ❑ Law Society of South Africa
    ❑ South African Council of Churches
    ❑ Media Monitoring Project
    ❑ Commission on Gender Equality
    ❑ Action on Elder Abuse SA
    ❑ South African Association of Homes for the Aged
    ❑ The Body Corporate of La Belle Vie

Individuals

    ❑ Elizabeth M Xaba
    ❑ M.D.S Motshumi
    ❑ Thandiwe Joyce Mbongo
    ❑ Lucas Mangala
    ❑ Raliphi Master Push Xolelizwe
    ❑ HJJ Laubscher
    ❑ Peter Laubscher
    ❑ Mr FE Warner

(A). GENERAL CONCERNS  OR  RECOMMENDATIONS  SUBMITTED  REGARDING  THE  OLDER
PERSONS BILL [B68B-2003]

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse South Africa (AEASA)
    • One of AEASA’s main concerns in regard to the Bill is that,  like  the
      1967 Aged Persons Act that was aimed at protecting white older persons
      in residential care.  It  focuses  on  older  persons  in  residential
      facilities, when the reality. It says, is that the majority  of  South
      African older persons live in  communities,  with  their  families  or
      alone.
    • The Bill does not take cognizance of older  persons  in  rural  areas,
      where the needs are great and services are minimal.
    • While government has  correctly  indicated  that  the  care  of  older
      persons  should  be  the  responsibility   of   their   families   and
      communities, AEASA says, the legislation does not support this.
    • Parts of the current Bill are taken directly from the 1967  Act.   The
      legislation must cover the  rights  of  all  older  persons  in  South
      Africa.

Submitted by Commission on Gender Equality (CGE)

Whilst the Commission lauds the objects of the  Bill  as  far  reaching,  it
however says the actual content of the Bill makes very little  reference  to
many of the aforesaid objects. It dismisses the actual content of  the  Bill
as being disproportionately focused on the  regulation  of  institutions  of
care for older persons as well as mechanisms for dealing with the  abuse  of
older persons.  Whilst the CGE fully supports  the  principle  of  the  Bill
dealing with both these critical issues in respect of the  rights  of  older
persons, it is of the view that in addition, the Bill should  make  adequate
provision for other equally important issues in respect of aged persons.

The CGE  proposes  that  the  Bill  refer  to  the  fact  that  all  of  the
constitutional rights are applicable to all older persons  but  in  view  of
the specific needs of older persons, the application of certain  rights  may
need to be specifically adapted in order to be responsive  to  the  specific
needs of older persons.  It is concerned that this Bill only stipulates  the
rights of older persons in facilities, which ignores the  reality  that  the
majority of older persons live in communities.

It reckons that Bill could benefit from including a specific section at  the
beginning of the Bill that stipulates the rights of all  older  persons.  It
further wants the Bill to  acknowledge  the  critical  importance  of  older
persons gaining access to sufficient information  in  order  to  know  their
rights and be able to exercise them.   It  suggests  that  the  Bill  should
accordingly make specific provision for  empowering  older  persons  through
ensuring them  access  to  information  which  is  both  linguistically  and
culturally appropriate as well as accessible to older persons.

The CGE accepts that certain rights in respect of older persons  are  beyond
the mandate of the Department of Social Development and  it  is  accordingly
not possible to deal with them comprehensively in this Bill. However, it  is
of the view that in order to do justice to the rights of older  persons  and
for the Department of Social Development to fulfil its  objectives  in  this
regard, this Bill should, at a minimum  establish  mechanisms/structures  in
order to facilitate inter-Departmental collaboration  in  respect  of  older
persons.

With the exception of the reference in section 2(1) of the  Bill,  that  the
Minister of Social Development may consult with any other relevant  Minister
to  develop  programmes,  and  support  any  person  who   runs   programmes
contemplated in subsection 2. CGE argues that no further reference  is  made
in terms of securing the  rights  of  older  persons  through  collaborative
inter-departmental initiatives.

CGE therefore recommends the following for section 2(1) “The  Minister  must
in consultation with any other relevant Minister-”, as it expressly  compels
the Minister to consult. By  making  express  reference  to  structures  and
mechanisms  in  order  to  facilitate  inter-Departmental  collaboration  in
respect of older persons, it says, the Bill will ultimately ensure that  the
needs and rights of older persons is  reflected  and  infused  in  the  wide
range of legislative and policy measures of different departments,  such  as
housing, health, education, justice and so forth.

The CGE is concerned that the Bill does not place a duty on the Minister  in
respect of the creation of new facilities and the  maintenance  of  existing
facilities. Section 6(2)  compels  the  registration  of  a  club;  care  or
accommodation, on application can be made to the Minister in  respect  of  a
subsidy thereof. The  constitutional  rights  of  older  persons  impose  an
obligation on the Minister to  create  and  maintain  facilities  for  older
persons. This obligation should be reflected in the Bill.

CGE contends that the Bill, in its current form reflects a  disproportionate
focus on institutional care.  While the CGE is fully supportive of the  need
to regulate institutional care, it  cautions  against  the  assumption  that
institutional care is the primary means of support for  older  persons.  The
reality in South Africa, it says, is that many of the older persons  receive
family and community based care.

It says that the negative impact of the  HIV/AIDS  pandemic  on  the  latter
continues  to  increase  the  responsibilities  of  older   persons.   These
responsibilities,  it   points   out,   include   taking   care   of   their
grandchildren, and extended family members.  Institutional  Care,  says  CGE
does not  accommodate  grandparents  with  young  grandchildren,  and  other
extended family members, and is therefore not an option available  to  these
older persons, even if they wish to reside in institutional  care.  It  only
caters strictly for the single older person, CGE contends.

Submitted by NAWONGO

NAWONGO wants an Older Persons Act to  be  orientated  to  national  policy.
Such policy, it claims, does exist in different draft concepts, but  it  has
not yet been finalized. The absence of such a policy, NAWONGO says,  creates
uncertainty amongst role players in finding a meaningful frame of  reference
and also interpreting some sections of the proposed statute.  This  is  also
expected to be a  problem  later,  when  the  Regulations  to  the  Act  are
published. The issue  is  furthermore  complicated  by  the  fact  that  the
interpretation of policy is left to provincial departments and officials  at
area and local level, it says.
The policy as regards older persons, it suggests, should be orientated to  a
National Welfare Policy and a National Welfare Act. The  finalization  of  a
national policy and a corresponding statute  should  therefore  receive  the
highest priority.

Submitted by Grandmothers Against Poverty and Aids

It requests that more social workers are appointed  and  special  counseling
services for the use of older persons. It also requests that  older  persons
have their special clinics to address their needs and  that  older  persons,
who care for extended families  be  given  priority  in  the  allocation  of
affordable accommodation within the communities where they choose to live.

Submitted by Body Corporate of La Belle Vie
The Body Corporate alleges that the Bill appears to be directed  exclusively
to the requirements of institutions under the control of the  Department  of
Social Development and thus ignores the many establishments in the  country,
which, provide for older and retired persons  outside  the  control  of  the
department. Such are established in terms of the Sectional Titles  Act,  Act
95 of 1986 and the Housing Development Schemes for Retired Persons,  Act  65
of 1988. The latter two are said to be self-sustaining and do  not  call  on
the state for subsidies or special dispensations.  They  reportedly  provide
for their own  autonomous  management  either  out  of  their  own  internal
resources or with  the  help  of  professional  managing  agents.  They  are
directly exposed to financial  pressures  from  outside  and  generally  are
constrained by the limited ability of the  members  and  residents  to  meet
such demands.  While some such establishments may be  fairly  affluent,  the
majority is said to be less well off and are  in  need  of  protection  from
outside influences.

Submitted by South African Council of Churches
The Council sees the Bill as a welcome move away fro  addressing  the  needs
of the older person purely from an institutional point  of  view.  While  it
says, it acknowledges the need to address issues of care and protection,  it
says, it fails to deal with  the  need  for  a  change  of  attitude  toward
ageing.

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa
Alzheimer reasons that while the government’s emphasis  has  been  on  home-
based care this Bill does not focus on  this  at  all  but  concentrates  on
institutional care  which  accommodates  a  very  small  percentage  of  all
elderly people in the country. In addition,  it  says  the  very  frail  who
require the institutional care the most in terms of the care  they  require,
are completely excluded. It asks that this shortcoming in  the  Bill  should
be addressed as a matter of urgency.

(B). SECTION-BY-SECTION COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

1. Explanatory note
Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The Forum and is worried about the impression,  it  says,  this  explanatory
paragraph before the Preamble it gives to the  effect  that  the  Bill  will
establish a “framework”. It says, this seems to imply  that  provinces  will
need to introduce their  own  legislation  for  older  persons  within  this
framework and, presumably, within  their  own  financial  and  institutional
constraints.  It contends that  this  may  conflict  with  the  Parliament’s
responsibility set minimum standards.

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

The Council while it feels that the stated object of the Bill is  sound,  it
however says, this is merely a broad outline of  policy  and  believes  that
the Bill should give direction to the implementation of these objectives  in
practice. Instead of this, the Council argues  that  the  Bill  concentrates
almost entirely on institutionalized care with  only  limited  reference  to
elder abuse. As such, it contends, the Bill fails to  address  the  need  to
create an enabling environment for older persons and  promote  their  status
and well being as envisaged in section 3.

2. Preamble

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing;  and South African Council
For The Aged

Recommendation
Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing and South African Council For The Aged
suggest the replacement of the preamble with the following:
(a)   Recognizing
Past injustices which older persons experienced. The sacrifices which  older
persons made towards the establishment of a  democratic  society.  That  the
majority of older persons live in poverty, especially  in  rural  areas  and
are without access to the essential support and services

(b)   Bearing in mind

The State must,  in  compliance  with  Section  7(2)  of  the  Constitution,
respect, protect, promote and fulfill the rights enshrined in  the  Bill  of
Rights. In terms the Bill of Rights the State may not unfairly  discriminate
against anyone on grounds of  race,  gender,  sex,  age  or  disability  and
everyone has inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity  respected
and protected, the right to be free from  all  forms  of  violence  and  the
right not to be treated in a cruel, inhuman or degrading  manner.  In  terms
of Section 26 and 27 of the Constitution everyone  has  the  right  to  have
access to adequate housing, food and water, health care services and  social
security,

(c)   It is the purpose of this Act

i. To ensure that the rights, dignity and independence of older persons are
upheld;
ii. To provide for the self-fulfillment, participation  and  care  of  older
persons.

3. Definitions

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

Whilst  the  Council  acknowledges  that  an  attempt  has  been   made   to
incorporate all types of services in the scope of the  Bill,  and  therefore
in the definitions section in section 1, it however believes  that  many  of
the definitions overlap to such  an  extent  that  their  interpretation  in
other sections of the Bill becomes problematic

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa
It is felt that not all  the  definitions  in  the  Bill  are  adequate  and
represent the needs of all elderly, especially the frail elderly.

3.1. Defining “Abuse”

Submitted by Southern African Catholic Bishops’ Conference
The Bill defines abuse as follows:
Abuse means a single or repeated act or lack of action that causes  harm  or
distress to an older person, including  physical,  psychological,  financial
or material harm or neglect, or sexual harm and includes  the  violation  of
an older person’s rights enshrined in Chapter 2 of the Constitution.

While covering a wide variety of actions (or inactions), it  is  unclear  as
to what exactly is meant by terms like ‘harm’ and ‘distress’.

Recommendation

In order to assist  in  the  interpretation  and  application  of  the  law,
Southern African Catholic Bishops’ Conference urges the committee to  expand
the definition of abuse.

Submitted by Women’s Legal Centre

The Women’s Legal Centre submits that whilst  the  definition  of  abuse  is
laudable in its aims and objectives it has not fully considered  what  would
constitute abuse in terms of the different types of abuse and  the  type  of
harm suffered by older persons in particular.  It also fails to  distinguish
between different perpetrators of  abuse,  such  as  domestic  elder  abuse,
institutional elder abuse and self-neglect.  Furthermore, it  is  preferable
to define emotional abuse, physical abuse, sexual abuse and  economic  abuse
separately, as has been done in the Domestic Violence Act  (hereinafter  the
“DVA”), as this will also lead to a uniform legal  approach  to  the  issue.
One also needs to distinguish between “harm” and “abuse” as  an  abuse  will
cause or result in harm to the older person.  Neglect also has  a  different
connotation and all these concepts have not been sufficiently separated  and
dealt with in terms of  what  constitutes  abuse  and  what  does  not.   An
extensive definition is set out in the DVA  and  we  suggest  that  this  be
followed and amended in order to take into account the specific  context  of
older persons. Guidance should also be obtained  from  international  trends
in legislative reform.

In the first instance the definition of abuse should be  amended  so  as  to
bring it in line with the approach followed in both South  African  law  and
other jurisdictions, so  as  to  ensure  maximum  protection.   It  is  also
recommended that an expansion  of  the  various  types  of  abuse  would  be
warranted in the South African Bill to as to ensure clarity  and  certainty.
Whilst it may result in  fairly  lengthy  definitions  it  would  ultimately
assist in implementation of the Bill.

Recommendation
The Women’s Legal Centre recommends that a  broad  definition  of  abuse  be
particularized followed by sub-definitions of  the  specifics  as  has  been
done in the Domestic Violence  Act.  The  following  is  suggested  in  this
regard:

“Abuse means any conduct  including  physical,  sexual,  emotional,  verbal,
psychological or economic abuse, neglect or abandonment) which harms or  may
cause imminent harm to  the  safety,  health  or  well-being  of  the  older
person.”

Physical abuse is any act or threatened act of physical violence.   The  use
of physical force may result in  bodily  injury,  physical  pain,  emotional
trauma or impairment of dignity. Physical  abuse  may  include  but  is  not
limited to such acts of violence as striking (with or  without  an  object),
hitting, beating, pushing, shoving, shaking,  slapping,  kicking,  pinching,
and burning. In addition,  the  inappropriate  use  of  drugs  and  physical
restraints, force-feeding, and physical punishment  of  any  kind  also  are
examples of physical abuse.

Sexual abuse  is  any  conduct,  which  humiliates,  degrades  or  otherwise
violates the sexual integrity of the older person.  Sexual contact with  any
person incapable of giving consent  is  also  considered  sexual  abuse.  It
includes but is not limited  to  unwanted  touching,  all  types  of  sexual
assault, such as rape, coerced nudity, and sexually explicit photographing.

Emotional, verbal or psychological  abuse  is  a  pattern  of  degrading  or
humiliating conduct towards an older person. It may include  the  infliction
of  anguish,  pain,  or  distress  through  verbal   or   non-verbal   acts.
Emotional/psychological  abuse  includes  but  is  not  limited  to   verbal
assaults, insults, threats, intimidation, humiliation,  and  harassment.  In
addition, treating an older  person  like  an  infant;  isolating  an  older
person from his/her family, friends,  or  regular  activities  and  enforced
social isolation are examples  of  emotional/psychological  abuse  of  older
persons.

Economic abuse includes the financial or material exploitation of  an  older
person, the unreasonable deprivation of economic or financial  resources  to
which an older person is entitled, or the illegal  or  improper  use  of  an
older person’s funds, property, or assets.  Examples  include  but  are  not
limited    to    cashing    an    elderly    person's    cheques     without
authorization/permission; forging an older person's signature;  misusing  or
stealing an older person's money or possessions; coercing  or  deceiving  an
older person into signing any document (e.g. contracts  or  will);  and  the
improper use of guardianship, or power of attorney.

   It is suggested that a definition of neglect and abandonment be  included
   in the Bill in accordance with and in order  to  take  into  account  the
   specific context within which older persons find themselves. The WLC also
   supports the contentions and submissions by the Human  Rights  Commission
   in relation to incorporating and defining frail older  care  as  distinct
   from older persons.


Neglect means the refusal or failure to provide an older  person  with  such
life necessities  as  food,  water,  clothing,  shelter,  personal  hygiene,
medicine, comfort, personal safety, and  other  essentials  included  in  an
implied or agreed-upon responsibility to the older person.

Abandonment is  defined  as  the  desertion  of  an  elderly  person  by  an
individual who has assumed responsibility for providing care for  an  elder,
or by a person with physical custody of an elder.

Self-neglect is characterized as the  behaviour  of  an  older  person  that
threatens his/her own health or safety. Self-neglect generally manifests  in
an older person as a refusal or  failure  to  provide  himself/herself  with
adequate food, water, clothing, shelter, personal hygiene, medication  (when
indicated) and safety precautions. The definition of  self-neglect  excludes
a situation in which a mentally competent older person, who understands  the
consequences of his/her decisions, makes a conscious and voluntary  decision
to engage in acts that threaten his/her health or  safety  as  a  matter  of
personal choice.

By expanding upon the definition in the aforegoing manner,  one  would  also
be bringing the Act in line with the definition of “care”  as  contained  in
the Bill since this definition clearly envisages a  broader,  more  holistic
approach in that “ care’’  is  defined  to  mean  “physical,  psychological,
social or material assistance to an  older  person,  and  includes  services
aimed at promoting the quality of life and general well-being  of  an  older
person.”  It further brings the Bill in  line  with  the  Domestic  Violence
legislation currently in place  in  the  country  and  the  proposed  Sexual
Offences and Children’s Bill in terms  of  abuse  and  violence  as  against
vulnerable groups.

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse South Africa

The Action on Elder Abuse SA contends  that  although  this  definition  has
been improved on by  the  NCOP,  it  still  needs  further  improvement.  It
therefore suggests the term “elder abuse”  be  defined  as  follows:”  Elder
abuse means a single or repeated act or lack of action that causes  harm  or
distress to an older person occurring within a relationship where  there  is
an expectation of trust, including  physical,  psychological,  financial  or
material harm or neglect, sexual  harm  and  includes  the  violation  of  a
person’s rights as enshrined in Chapter 2 of the Constitution”.

This will distinguish elder abuse from other crimes, AEASA reckons.

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The  Joint  Forum  for  Policy  on  Ageing  notes  the  improvement  in  the
definition of abuse by the NCOP but feels that it is now too wide.

Recommendation

It wants the current  definition  limited  by  adding  the  following  words
between  “person”  and  “including”  on  line  27:  “occurring  within   any
relationship where there is an expectation  of  trust”.  It  considers  this
necessary in order to distinguish abuse from other crimes.

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

The Council thinks the definition of abuse has been  improved  by  the  NCOP
but it is now too wide. To limit it, the Council  proposes  an  addition  of
the following words between “person” and “including” on line 27:  “occurring
within any  relationship  where  there  is  an  expectation  of  trust”.  It
considers this necessary in order to distinguish abuse from other crimes.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

The Commission is of the view that the current definition is too  broad  and
refers to all the rights contained in the Bill of Rights.

Recommendation
The Commission suggests that the words: “. . . and  includes  the  violation
of an older person’s rights enshrined in Chapter 2 of the Constitution  .  .
.” that appear in the current  definition  be  removed.  And  the  following
words “  .  .  .  occurring  within  any  relationship  where  there  is  an
expectation of trust.”

Commission’s proposed amended definition:

“abuse” means a single or repeated act, or lack of action, occurring  within
any relationship where there is an expectation of trust that causes harm  or
distress to an older person, including physical,  psychological,  financial,
material or sexual harm or neglect,.”

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

Alzheimer suggests the following definition of abuse “ a single or  repeated
act or lack of action that causes  harm  or  distress  to  an  older  person
occurring with any relationship where there  is  an  expectation  of  trust,
including physical, psychological, financial or material  harm  or  neglect,
or sexual harm and includes  the  violation  of  an  older  person’s  rights
enshrined in Chapter 2 of the Constitution”.

3.2 Defining “Caregiver”

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission
The Commission raises a concern about the training that  home  based  carers
receive and the standard thereof. It expresses doubt on whether  the  carers
were trained in all he necessary skills.

Recommendation
The Commission suggests an amendment of the definition of  “care  giver”  by
including the word “trained”. It would also like to see the Minister  making
regulations regarding caregivers. It wants caregivers to be registered  with
the Department in order to ensure that there is a minimum level  of  service
and also to check if their names appear on the register.

3.3 Defining “Facility”

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse SA

The Action on Elder Abuse SA holds the view that currently trend  is  moving
towards including services for older persons in multi-purpose facilities  or
centres and the definition therefore needs to include this.

”Within the  Bill  “facility”  refers  mainly  to  old  age  homes;  service
recipients are not necessarily residents of old age homes”.

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

Although it acknowledges the  expansion  of  the  definition  of  “facility”
effected by the NCOP to cover private residential  homes,  the  Forum  still
contends that some  confusion  remains  over  this  definition  and  how  it
relates to that of “community based care and support services.”

Submitted by NAWONGO

Nawongo reasons  that  the  definition  of  “facility”,  read  with  section
5(1)(a), is still confusing and vague.

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

Alzheimer says that “facilities” only includes  residential  facilities  and
residential homes where elderly people pay to stay,  but  does  not  include
residential family  homes,  informal  shelters  or  other  facilities  where
elderly people may reside. It therefore suggests  that  there  should  be  a
separate definition for the primary or family home.

3.4 Defining “Financial Abuse”

Submitted by Eskom Pension Association

Eskom Pension Association feels that this should  be  specifically  defined,
particularly due to fraud,  misrepresentation,  taking  advantage  of  older
persons  living  with  cognitive  and  neurological  disabilities,  unlawful
commission deductions for willingness to convert a pension cheques to  cash,
and misappropriation of pension payments and social grants.

3.5. Defining “Frail Care”

Submitted by NAWONGO

Recommends the re-inclusion of a definition for “frail care”.

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse South Africa

The Action on Elder Abuse South Africa says this definition was  removed  by
the NCOP and wants it reinstated as, it says, frail care is the final  stage
in a continuum of care for older persons.

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged
This definition was deleted by the NCOP, as were all references  to  “frail”
older persons in  the  Bill.  However,  in  line  with  the  community  care
approach, the Council would like to see the  definition  and  references  to
“frail” with respect to residential care restored to the Bill.

3.6. Defining “frail person”

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse South Africa

This is another example of a definition that the Action  on  Elder  SA  says
was removed from the Bill and advances for its reinstatement  on  the  basis
that a frail  older  person,  whether  mentally  or  physically  frail,  has
specific needs, which in turn require special skills and staff ratios.

Recommendation
The Action on Elder Abuse suggests the following definition:
“A frail older person means a person, 60 years and older, whose physical  or
mental condition renders him or her in need of 24 hour continuous care.”

Submitted by Directorate Chronic Care Rehabilitation, Dept of Health: CT

The Directorate contends that although “frail” does not only refer to  older
persons, in this bill, it should however refer to an older person.  It  says
it is  important  to  mention  “frail  person”  specifically  in  the  Older
Person’s Bill as it has implications for the type  of  care,  and  resources
needed e.g.  equipment,  adequately  trained  human  resources,  medication,
rehabilitation etc.

Recommendation
The  Directorate  suggests  that  since  the  object  of  the  Bill  is  the
protection and the promotion of their safety, well-being and  security  etc,
the term “frail person” as vulnerable and in need of care  should  be  added
in the definitions.

If the definition is not replaced, the Directorate threatens that, the  need
for frail persons to receive 24-hour continuous care might not  be  met  and
inadequate support could be supplied.

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

Recommendation

The Forum recommends that in line with the community care approach  and  the
vulnerability of the frail. The reinclusion and restoration in the  Bill  of
the definition and references to “frail” with respect to  residential  care.
It suggests that the definition should read: “frail person  means  an  older
person whose physical or mental condition renders him or her in need of  24-
hour continuous care.”

The Forum urges the Portfolio Committee to  consider  at  the  situation  of
younger frail persons, numbers of whom are  currently  being  cared  for  in
residential homes. What are the implications  for  them  of  excluding  them
from this definition?

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission
The Commission strongly argues  for  the  reinclusion  of  the  word  “frail
person” into the Bill based on the following grounds:

    • Frail persons are  your  most  vulnerable  older  persons.  They  need
      specific recognition.
    • Frail persons have very specific needs, which are different from older
      persons who are not frail.
    • Highly skilled and trained staff are needed for frail care. The  ratio
      of residents to staff is far higher.
    • Frail care represents the end of the  spectrum  of  the  continuum  of
      care, Just as all other forms of care ought to  be  mentioned  in  the
      Bill, so too must frail care.
    • If frail care is  not  mentioned  in  the  Bill  then  what  will  the
      Department connect its Frail Care policy to?
    • Old age homes are increasingly becoming frail care homes

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa
Alzheimer strongly feels that the definition of the frail person, which  was
previously removed by the NCOP, should be reinstated.

It is suggested that the definition of frail person could be defined as:
“is a person over the age of 60  whose  physical  and  or  mental  condition
      renders him or her incapable of caring for themselves and they require
      twenty four hour care.
3.7. Defining “home based care”

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The Forum proposes the following definition replace the  one  in  the  Bill:
“Home based care is the provision  of  health  and  personal  care  services
rendered by formal and  informal  care  givers  in  the  home  in  order  to
promote, restore and maintain a person’s maximum level of comfort,  function
and health including care towards  a  dignified  death”  (Draft  Frail  Care
Policy - World Health Organization).

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

The Commission is concerned that the definition excludes caregivers who  are
the spouse or family member of an older persons.

Recommendation

It suggests that a serious consideration and debate  on  whether  home-based
care should exclude family members. It says it may well be in the  interests
of the state in instances where people are not  economically  advantaged  to
provide some assistance in order that the  older  person  remains  with  the
family. By failing to assist the family, the Commission says the  state  may
well be placed in a situation where older persons are presented for care  at
old age homes
3.8 Defining “luncheon club”

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission


Recommendation


The Commission  would  like  to  see  the  word  “luncheon”  from  the  term
‘luncheon club’ removed and a new definition for  ‘club’  created  with  the
following key elements:
               ❑ It is a service which promotes  the  quality  of  life  and
                 general well being of an older person i.e. it is a form  of
                 care
               ❑ It promotes and maintains the  independent  functioning  of
                 older persons in a community – from definition of community-
                 based care and support services

3.9. Defining “maintenance”

Submitted by Eskom Pension Association
The Association reckons that this should be specifically defined to make a
legislative linkage with the relevant maintenance legislation and to
express the legal obligation of spouses, brothers and sisters, children and
grandchildren of paying maintenance to an older person who legally proves a
need for financial support.

3.10. Defining “older persons”

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse South Africa

The Action on Elder Abuse would like the definition of an  older  person  to
be “any person, male or female, who is sixty years of age or older”.The  age
variation, AEASA claims, is notonly discriminatory but contends  also  would
have a negative impact on accessibility  to  services  for  older  men,  the
mandatory reporting of elder abuse and the admission  to  a  care  facility.
It objects to the notion that this place an extra financial  burden  on  the
Department of Social Development saying that many men in the 60 to  65  year
old age group who are frail, are already in receipt of or would qualify  for
a Disability Grant.

Submitted by Black Sash

The Black Sash is of the opinion that the definition  of  Older  Persons  in
terms of this Bill differentiates between  males  and  females  between  the
ages 60 and 64years.  This,  it  says,  amounts  to  discrimination  as  the
females enjoy legislative protection in terms of access to care  facilities,
protection against abuse and benefits from programmes, which  males  of  the
same age do not enjoy.  This  form  of  discrimination  is  presumed  to  be
unfair in terms of section.9 (3) unless it can be established  to  be  fair,
it reckons.

Furthermore, Black Sash believes because of age differential that this  Bill
will make the Act impractical  to  implement  and  open  the  potential  for
litigation against the Department, the  cost  of  which,  it  says,  can  be
prevented and used to provide social security to older people.

Recommendation

It recommends that an Older Person in the Bill is defined as persons of  the
age 60 years and older.

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The Forum considers that it is not appropriate to apply different  ages  for
men and women with respect to access to facilities and treatment.  The  Aged
Persons Act, which this Bill replaces,  referred  to  “debilitated  persons”
which it defined as any person over the age of 60.  We  seem  to  be  moving
backwards with respect to older men, contends the Forum.


Submitted by Women’s Legal Centre



The Women’s Legal Centre is of the opinion that, whilst  in  some  cases  it
may be justifiable to differentiate between male and females and  not  treat
different sexes the same, in the current context and in view of the  purpose
of  this  Act,  as  a  protective  measure,  there  is  no  reasonable   and
justifiable rationale for the differentiation, which in  effect  amounts  to
discrimination. Accordingly, it submits that an older person should  not  be
defined so as to differentiate between men and women over the age of 60.

The rationale and basis for this Bill, it says, is  one  of  protection  and
accordingly it would not be acceptable to increase the age to  65  for  both
men and women as this will be to the detriment of women  and  men  and  will
not  be  in  line  with  international  trends   and   the   South   African
Constitutional  standard  in  terms  of  allowing  the  maximum   protection
available.



Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

The Council does not consider appropriate to apply different  ages  for  men
and women, particularly with respect to treatment and access to  facilities.
Consideration  needs  also  to  be  given  to  the  effect  of  the  present
definition on facilities and services  that  are  provided  to  a  range  of
people, for example people with disabilities, who  are  frail  but  are  not
old. Many institutions who provide for such people depend on subsidies,  and
the effect of this definition could be prejudicial to them.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission
The Commission holds the strong view that older persons  should  be  defined
as persons older than 60 years and that there should be no age  differential
between women and men. It feels that the present  age  differential  between
men and women is not only discriminatory but will also make  the  Act  quite
impractical  to  implement.   It  also  warns  that  by  keeping   the   age
differential  in  the  Bill,  the  Department  of  Social   Development   is
potentially opening itself up to a plethora  of  litigation  in  that  older
persons across the country could challenge the actions of the Department  in
all its dealings with older  persons  where  the  age  differential  has  an
impact.

Recommendation

The Commission suggests the removal of the age differential from  the  Older
Persons Bill. It supports the notion that an older person is  a  person  who
is over the age of 60 years.

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

Alzheimer feels that it is discriminatory to define  the  ages  of  men  and
women differently and suggests that the Bill define  all  older  persons  as
those over the age of 60. Basic care

3.11. Defining “older persons with disabilities”

Submitted by Eskom Pension Association
The Association feels that this should be specifically defined  to  be  able
to highlight oppression, discrimination and abuse  based  on  cognitive  and
neurological as well as physical disability, since older person living  with
these disabilities are the most vulnerable; that these should be dealt  with
under  the  Criminal  Procedures  Act,  the  Equality  Act  and  to  make  a
legislative linkage with the Mental Health Care Act, No 17 of 2002.

3.12. Defining “Manager” vs. “operator”

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

The Commission thinks the usages  of  these  two  definitions  in  the  Bill
appear confused. Furthermore it does not think  it  is  legally  tenable  to
give these duties to an employee (the manager) of an  owner  of  a  business
(the operator). It argues that the responsibility needs  to  rest  with  the
person who is ultimately in charge of  the  facility.  It  is  open  to  the
possibility that the operator may delegate the responsibilities, however  it
says, it must ultimately  remain  the  responsibility  of  the  operator  to
ensure that the statutory obligations created in the Bill are carried out.

It strongly argues that  the  Bill  is  creating  a  potential  conflict  of
interest for managers. For example, what must the manger do if the  operator
fails to provide the manager with the necessary resources  or  equipment  in
order to carry out the statutory obligations? More concerning is Clause 8  -
how will a resident’s committee ensure that a manager  will  carry  out  the
duties contained therein. Surely, it is  for  the  resident’s  committee  to
consult with the operator on  these  matters.  Finally,  the  operator  must
provide the reasons for a failure to admit an older person  to  a  facility.
If, for example, the reasons amount to a  violation  of  Clause  9(1),  then
this  could  attract  criminal  responsibility,  says  the  Commission.  The
Commission thinks the legal duty to provide  these  reasons  ought  to  rest
with the operator of the facility, as it is the  operator  who  should  take
ultimate responsibility for managers and the decisions that  they  may  take
regarding admissions to the facility.

Recommendation

The Commission suggests that the word “manager” should be removed  from  the
Bill and be replaced with the word “operator”. It wants  all  references  to
manager, except the reference in  clause  22,  be  replaced  with  the  word
operator. It suggests that the definition of manager be removed  and  Clause
22 (4) be reworded by stating that any  manager,  as  defined  in  the  Aged
Persons Act 1967,
Alternatively, it wants the definition of manager  to  be  replaced  with  a
definition that makes reference to the definition of  manager  contained  in
the 1967 Aged Persons Act.

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

The Council thinks the term “operator” is not legally  tenable  as  it  does
not necessarily cover owners.

Submitted by NG Ministry of Caring

The Ministry does not see the difference between  “operator”  and  “manager”
and therefore suggests that the word “operator” be left out.

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

Alzheimer feels that the previous term of “manager” is more acceptable  than
the term “operator”

3.13. Defining “person”

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The Forum reckons that this definition should be more holistic as  it  needs
to cover other parties including Section 21 companies.

Submitted by NAWONGO

The definition of “person” is incomplete and insignificant. The use  of  the
concept “operator” causes more confusion.

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

The Council wants to see this definition more holistic  and  covering  other
parties including Section 21 companies

3.14 Defining “Professional health care provider”

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

It suggests that it should mean a person providing health services in  terms
of any law and who is registered  with  their  professional  association  or
legislative body.

3.15. Defining “shelter”

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse South Africa

The Action on Elder Abuse SA says this definition must include  “safe  beds.
These, AEASA  says,  could  be  in  residential  facilities  or  within  the
community e.g. in rural areas.

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The words “including safe beds” should be inserted between the words
“premises” and “maintained”.

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

The Council suggests that words “including safe  beds”  should  be  inserted
between the words “premises” and “maintained”.

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

Alzheimer says shelters are defined in the Bill but are not included in  the
Bill.

4. Proposed new definitions

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing and South African Council For
The Aged

The Forum and Council propose the insertion of the following definitions  in
the Bill:

“assisted living”

To be defined as ”Assisted living is the provision of affordable,  adaptable
and secure accommodation which provides older persons  with  an  environment
that enables access to  support  services,  food  supplies,  primary  health
care, a pension pay-point or bank, transport, recreational, educational  and
leisure activities”

“basic care” (See Section 12(d)

To be defined as “Basic’’ care covers personal  hygiene,  adequate  clothing
and footwear, nutrition, toilet needs, mobility aids,  rest  and  sleep  and
social and recreational needs.”

“day care”

To be defined as  “Day care for adults is a  service  within  a  residential
home or service centre  which  provides  social,  recreational  and  health-
related activities in a protective setting  to  individuals  who  cannot  be
left alone during the day because of health care or  social  needs”.  (Draft
Frail Care Policy)

Submitted by Action on Elder South Africa

AEASA requests the following definitions to be included in the Bill:

“assisted  living”:  “Assisted  living  is  the  provision  of   affordable,
appropriate and secure accommodation that  would  enable  older  persons  to
remain independent and live in their communities within an environment  that
would provide access to support services”.

“day care”: “Day care for older persons  is  a  service  provided  within  a
residential facility or service center which provides  social,  recreational
and health related activities in  a  protective  setting  to  older  persons
unable to be left alone during  the  day  due  to  their  social  or  health
needs”.

“home based care”: “Home based care is the provision of health and  personal
care services rendered by formal and informal  caregivers  in  the  home  in
order to promote, restore and maintain an older person’s  maximum  level  of
comfort, function and health including care towards a dignified death.

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

Alzheimer suggests the inclusion of the following new definitions:

Basic care

This covers personal hygiene, adequate  clothing  and  footwear,  nutrition,
toilet needs, mobility aids, rest and  sleep  and  social  and  recreational
needs. Access to primary medical and psychiatric care should be included.

Home based care

This is the provision of health  and  personal  care  services  rendered  by
formal and informal caregivers in the home in order to promote, restore  and
maintain a person’s optimum level of comfort, functionality and health,  and
enhance their quality of life and care.

Day-care for adults

Is a service within a residential home or  service  centre,  which  provides
social,  nutritional,  recreational  and  health  related  activities  in  a
protective setting to individuals who cannot be left alone  during  the  day
because of their health care or social needs.

5. Chapter 1 – [Programmes for Development of Older Persons]

5.1 Title of Chapter 1

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing and South African Council  For
The Aged

Recommendation

The Forum and Council would like to see this chapter titled Older Persons
and Development; since it considers the purpose of the Bill as not to
develop older persons as a separate group but to involve and integrate them
in development generally.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

Recommendations

In line with the Madrid Plan, which speaks of Older Persons and  Development
as opposed to the development of  older  persons,  the  Commission  suggests
that the title of the chapter should be  amended  to  Programmes  for  older
persons and development. It  argues  that  the  title  as  currently  worded
implies  that  older  persons  themselves  need  development  and  views  as
paternalistic.

Submitted by South African Council of Churches

The Council, like the SA Catholic Bishops Conference, is of  the  view  that
the heading and contents of Chapter 1  are  vague  in  their  intention  and
arbitrary in their commitment. It further feels that older  persons  be  not
viewed as just subject to programmes and process but that the  older  person
ought to be able to shape these programmes and processes. In order  to  give
substance to the aims and objects of the memorandum,  the  Council  suggests
that the title  be  renamed   “Programmes  for  development  and  the  older
person”.

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

It is strongly suggested that the title of this chapter  should  be  changed
to read: “Programme Development for Older Persons”

5.2. Programmes for development of older persons

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse South Africa

Recommendations

AEASA suggests this chapter should read “Older Persons and Development”  and
should seek to integrate older persons into the  community  and  development
rather than to segregate them from the other age groups.

It further suggests that the word “may” should be  replaced  by  “must”  and
“consultation” by “form partnerships”.  Without  intersectoral  co-operation
this chapter and indeed the entire piece of legislation, will be  impossible
to implement.

In section 2. (b) AEASA suggests that the meaning  of  “support”  should  be
defined – as it stands it is too vague and would have a  direct  bearing  on
implementation.

In section 2. (2) AEASA reckons that the programmes as  they  stand  in  the
Bill are little more than a wish list and merely  pay  lip  service  to  the
implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action.

AEASA suggests that an omission in the list of programmes is one  that  will
address and prevent elder abuse, support  and  encourage  older  persons  to
stand up for their rights. This programme, it says, should target  not  only
older persons but their families and caregivers as well.

The national forum for older persons, which has been initiated by the  Human
Rights Commission and the Department of Social Development,  AEASA  suggests
that it be included in the Bill as  a  programme.   The  inclusion  of  this
forum as a programme, AEASA reasons, would also  insure  that  the  Minister
consults not only  with  stakeholders  but,  most  importantly,  with  older
persons themselves.

AEASA finally proposes that the needs of older persons  in  rural  areas  be
researched and programmes developed accordingly.

Submitted by Black Sash

Recommendation
Black Sash urges the Department to include a programme/s  under  section  .2
related to the impact of HIV/AIDS on Older Persons infected and affected  by
HIV/AIDS.  The focus being the provision of information, social support  and
formal care for Older  Persons  who  are  infected  with  HIV/AIDS  or  care
givers.

Referring to sub-section .2(2)(f)) of the Bill,  Black  Sash  registers  its
strong opposition to deductions of any nature at any point  in  the  payment
of grants by the  State  or  the  intended  South  African  Social  Security
Agency.  In the event of non-consideration of its  objection  to  the  above
position on  deductions  Black  Sash  would  like  to  recommend  that  such
allowable deductions by the Minister should not  exceed  10%  of  the  grant
amount for burial schemes and  this  should  be  stated  in  the  Regulation
concerned.

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

The Council says the list of programmes in section 2 cannot be  regarded  as
sufficient.. As such, it says, the list is not  sufficiently  comprehensive,
nor is it clear as to by  whom  or  how  they  will  be  implemented  and/or
funded. The contents of the Bill, it holds, only address  a  limited  number
of the programmes

Submitted by Cape Jewish Seniors Association

Recommendation

The Association suggests the following additions:
    • “part of UN directive to create a data base” in section 2 (k) .
    • “Seniors should no longer have forced retirement at 60 or 65 years  of
      age” in section 2 (l) and also to include –“ seniors should be allowed
      employment to subsidize their pension without being penalized.”

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing
The Forum proposes   “consultation”  be  replaced  by  joint  mechanisms  or
partnerships, with Social Development as the lead Department. The nature  of
“support” needs to be defined – as it stands it could not  be  costed.  This
will doubtless influence implementation.

The Forum wants the Bill  to  give  more  direction  and  substance  to  the
programmes.  The more precisely a service is described the  more  likely  it
is to be implemented. The Costing Report was unable to comment on legal  and
fiscal implications of the  programmes  because  their  extent  is  unclear.
“Despite the aspirations of a  Developmental  Service  Delivery  Model,  the
absence of norms and standards makes it difficult to cost  the  Bill  within
the developmental paradigm”.

In the event, the costing was  based  on  current  services  and  programmes
rather than costing the specific provisions of the  Bill.  The  outcome  was
four categories of programme:

    ❑ Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Older Persons
    ❑ Integrated Community based and outreach programmes
    ❑ Residential Care
    ❑ Departmental Administration (including research and monitoring)

The shortcoming of the above categories of program, the  Forum  reckons,  is
that they overlook some of the programs listed in the  Bill,  in  particular
some of those which require collaboration with other Departments.
Recommendation

The Forum therefore suggests that the programs in this section be listed  in
order of importance and that priority be given to (a) (e) (h) and (j)

It also suggests the following  proposals  on  programmes  in  this  Chapter
(with amendments underlined):

    ❑ “public education on ageing,  the rights of older  persons  and  their
      social, cultural,  economic  and  political  contribution”  The  Forum
      proposes that this program be combined with (k) and  read  as  follows
      “The formation of an national forum of older  persons  to  advise  the
      Minister, ensure the participation of older persons in decision-making
      and establish a national research plan and a communication network  on
      ageing”
    ❑ “access of older  persons  to  information,  education  and  training,
      especially in rural areas”. This program, the Forum thinks,  needs  to
      be spelt out – as it may be covered by other programs

    ❑ ”The protection of older persons  and  the  education  of  carers  and
      communities on their rights and needs.” The Forum is of the view  that
      the issue of control of companies selling funeral policies  and  loans
      is a burning issue for older persons, hence this programme.
The Forum reckons that, currently the distribution  of  existing  facilities
is very skewed. It feels that transforming them is not enough. It  therefore
suggests that  new  day  care  and  residential  frail  care  facilities  be
provided. The Forum does not consider the multi-purpose centres referred  to
in the Bill as an adequate option.  It  argues  strongly  that  frail  older
persons are vulnerable and therefore need their own space.

The Forum further suggests assisted living housing for older  persons  (some
frail) caring for orphans.

Submitted by South African Council of Churches

The Council says that  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  Department  of
Social Development met with various governmental and  societal  stakeholders
and that such  provided  valuable  information,  the  Bill  still  needs  to
reflect such  participation  further  and  later  down  the  line.  Such  an
approach, it says, would require the Minister to adopt an  intentional  plan
with strategies to be spelt out enhancing the capacity and participation  of
the older person to address the vision of an inclusive society as  envisaged
by our constitution. It says it also suggests that action  on  ageing  needs
to be come mainstreamed into all the work of other Departments so  that  the
process of developing a society that seeks  to  care  for  and  protect  its
citizens is the responsibility of government and every citizen. It  goes  on
to say that such a plan of action would then  of  necessity  be  worked  out
with all stakeholders such as government,  civil  society,  not  for  profit
organizations, faith based organizations and communities  as  well  as  with
traditional leaders.

The Council therefore recommends that section  2  (1)  read:  ‘The  Minister
shall, in consultation with other relevant Ministers and representatives  of
older persons from various sectors of civil  society  establish  a  National
Forum for Older Persons for the implementation of  action  on  ageing”.  The
Council says such a Forum may add to and or  amend  the  fifteen  programmes
identified  under  section  2  (2)  (a-o)  in   the   Bill,   while   giving
consideration to an appropriate inter-sectoral mechanism or National  Policy
Framework

Submitted by Directorate: Chronic Care Rehabilitation, Dept of Health: CT

Recommendation
Referring to section 2 (2) (j),  the  Directorate  suggests  that  the  Bill
should  particularly  address  the   development   of   policies   and   the
implementation of those policies to prevent ill health among older  persons.
In particular, it says, the provision of  infra  structure  to  prevent  the
priority chronic diseases that are costly to manage and lead to increase  in
the burden of disease.

The Directorate further advances for necessary resources in terms  of  human
resources, funding, equipment,  training  as  well  as  the  monitoring  and
evaluation structures.

The Directorate further suggests that programmes should:
    • make provision for the development of self-help support  and  provide
      respite for patients, families and other carers.
    • Promote public information about the symptoms treatment, consequences
      and prognosis of mental conditions.
Provide ongoing training to health care professionals in the  detection  and
assessment of all  mental  disorders  and  of  depression.  The  Directorate
suggests that the provision of assistive devices including spectacles /  and
operations for the removal of cataracts for the prevention of blindness  and
dependency  should  be  addressed  according  to  Prevention  of   Blindness
Strategy of the WHO. It is opposed to any form of  discrimination  practiced
where older persons are concerned.

The  Directorate  suggests  that  the  Bill  should   make   provision   for
occupational health programmes for older persons.

Submitted by Grandmothers Against Poverty and Aids

It requests that programmes  that  promote  intergenerational  understanding
and mutual respect be put in place.

Submitted by Ikamva labantu

It suggests that programmes:
    • must be geared towards the  development  and  enhancement  of  income-
      generating activities.
    • need to include health promotion and prevention programmes, social and
      emotional  support  due  to   the   impact   of   HIV/AIDS,   orphans,
      unemployment,  increased  poverty  and   irresponsible   behavior   of
      individuals within the household.
    • need to focus on the development of  and  sustainability  of  day-care
      centers for seniors.

Submitted by NG Ministry of Caring
In section 2 (b) – The Ministry says the participation of older  persons  in
decision-making process should be at appropriate levels and  taking  account
only people who are corpus mentis.

In section 2 (c) - The Ministry wants the word “training”  to  be  specified
as “health related training”

In section 2 (n) – The Ministry does think the reported exemption cannot  be
done without a means test.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

The Commission is concerned that the Bill does not  provide  for  a  central
coordinating  mechanism  that  would  be  responsible  for  overseeing   and
monitoring the implementation of this chapter. It fears that without such  a
body,  the  matters  listed  in  sub-section  2(2)  would  not  receive  the
necessary and prompt attention.

The fact that, should further programmes be identified  in  years  to  come,
this would require amendments to the Act, also concerns the  Commission.  It
therefore suggests that wording be added to the Bill that  would  allow  the
Minister to identify further programmes  that  may  not  at  this  stage  be
listed in sub-section 2(2).

It suggests that “may” in sub-section 2(1) should read “must”.

Referring to sub-section 2(2)(a) suggests that this  programme  should  also
refer to the religious contribution of older persons.

Referring  to  sub-section  2(2)(c)  on  the  access  of  older  persons  to
information, education and training, the Commission is calling for the  ABET
programmes to reflect the realities of older persons  lives  and  for  these
programmes to be designed in a manner that would equip them  with  practical
knowledge.

It further suggests that  an  intergenerational  aspect  be  added  to  this
programme as it believes  that  It  is  not  only  older  persons  who  need
information. It says their carers and family members also do.
On sub-section 2(2)(d), the Commission thinks that this programme  was  very
broad and is suggesting that it be zoomed  down  to  development  and  Older
persons with a specific reference to the improvement  of  living  conditions
and infrastructure in rural areas; the alleviation  of  the  marginalisation
of older persons in rural areas;  and  the  integration  of  older  migrants
within their new communities.

Regarding sub-section 2(2)(e) the  Commission  claims  that  this  programme
does not specifically reflect any  of  the  Recommendations  of  the  Madrid
Plan. It is however  pleased  with  its  inclusion  of  this  programme  and
regards it as important.

Referring to sub-section 2(2)(f) of the Bill, on the programme  establishing
norms and standards for companies selling  funeral  policies  and  extending
loans to older  persons,  the  Commission  hails  the  specificity  of  this
programme. It says the programme is justified and clearly  needed  in  South
Africa given the widespread reports of older persons being  taken  advantage
of by some people who sell funeral policies and make loans.

Recommendation

The Commission suggests, based on what it terms the enormity of the  problem
and the concern, which people have on funeral policies and loans that  there
should be a programme concerning funeral policies and a  separate  programme
concerning loans. Furthermore, it wants the  programme  to  be  reworded  in
order that the clause does not only refer to companies but to individuals.

In  respect  of  the  programme  mentioned  in  sub-section   2(2)(g),   the
Commission welcomes it as specific and addresses the needs of South Africa.

The Commission argues the  programme  should  not  only  focus  on  existing
facilities but should also include  the  establishment  of  new  facilities.
This argument is based on the fact many  existing  facilities,  particularly
the  ones  that  were  built  during  Apartheid  are  based   within   white
communities and are not located close to black  communities.  And  also  the
fact that there are not many facilities in  the  rural  areas,  particularly
the deep rural areas.

In relation to sub-section 2(2)(h), the commission welcomes  the  programme.
It suggests it be expanded and made to address  homelessness  amongst  older
persons.

In sub-sections 2 (2) (i) and 2 (2)(j), the Commission is  uncertain  as  to
the  potential  scope  of  these  programmes.  Regarding   health   systems,
participants stated that  government  should  continuously  seek  to  expand
health services to the elderly. The Commission  suggests  the  programme  on
health systems should also look  into  the  provision  of  special  discount
health services.
In  sub-section   2(2)(l),   the   Commission   suggests   that   employment
opportunities for older persons must be appropriate  for  the  older  person
needs and abilities, in terms of age.

In sub-section 2(2)(o) the Commission welcomes  the  programme.  It  however
suggests  that  public  transport  for  the  elderly  should  be  free   and
subsidized. The commission further suggests that this programme should  also
look  at  safe  transport.  It  also  wants  accessible  transport   to   be
interpreted broadly to include, among other things  the  inaccessibility  of
some busses and trains due to large steps, gaps and bus drivers pulling  off
before the elderly have sat down.

The Commission also  wants  bus  drivers  who  transport  dementia  patients
sometimes to be made aware and counseled in order that they are  comfortable
with their passengers and understand their behavior.

Recommendations
The commission recommends the following  additional  programmes  to  section
2(2):

    • Older persons forum

    • Programme on HIV/AIDS and its impact on the elderly.

    • Programme on education and awareness on elder abuse
    • Programmes to address homelessness.

    • A programme that includes traditional leaders  in  matters  concerning
      the elderly.

    • Adult Basic Education (ABET) programmes

    • Programmes that address intergenerational solidarity

    • Programmes on eradication of poverty.

    • Programmes that address dementia and Alzheimer’s,  both  in  terms  of
      education and awareness but also in terms of services to sufferers and
      their families and careers.

    • More programmes to ensure an enabling and supportive  environment  for
      older persons.

Submitted by Southern African Catholic Bishops’ Conference

The Conference reasons that in order  for  the  value  and  contribution  of
older people to be fully realised, it is important to  integrate  them  into
the life of the community.  This means, it says, that  it  is  necessary  to
create and maintain a variety of programmes to encourage this integration.
Recommendations

Section 2  (1)  of  the  Bill  states  that  ‘the  Minister  may  …  develop
programmes’  and  deals  with  the  discretion  that  the  Minister  has  in
developing and  supporting  programmes  for  older  people.    As  the  Bill
stands, the  Southern  African  Catholic  Bishops’  Conference  says,  these
programmes are left to the discretion  of  the  Minister,  without  creating
mechanisms to ensure and  assess  compliance.  It  urges  the  Committee  to
consider making the  development  of  such  programmes  mandatory  with  the
necessary mechanisms created to achieve results.

In order to maximise the success of listed programmes in this  section,  the
Southern African Catholic Bishops’ Conference suggests that the Minister  be
mandated to consult not only with other ministers, but with  the  many  NGOs
and CBOs that are active in this field.

Submitted  by  CJ  Janse  van  Vuuren,  Manager,  Luipaardsvlei  Tehuis  vir
Bejaardes, a branch of NG Welfare North West

Commenting on section  2.  (e),  (g)  &  (h)  &  (j),  Mr  van  Vuuren  says
physically disabled adult  persons  (not  necessarily  older  persons)  were
previously  included  in  the   category   older   persons,   in   providing
accommodation, care, and so forth. He asks if they will now be excluded  and
wonders what will happen to the physically disabled adult persons  currently
residing in Care Facilities for older persons?

Recommendation

Mr Van Vuuren proposes that the entire Bill  for  Older  Persons  should  be
revised to state clearly how to deal with adult physically disabled  persons
in facilities for older persons.

Submitted by RAPCAN

Recommendations

RAPCAN would like to  see  government  of  South  Africa  acknowledging  the
tremendous sacrifices that, it says, so many  older  people  are  making  to
keep their families together and to raise this country’s future  generations
in  the  face  of  the  HIV/AIDS  epidemic.   To  ensure  that  these  older
caregivers are successful and that the children in their  care  have  access
to  essential  services  as  well  as  the  opportunity  to  develop  fully,
healthily and happily, RAPCAN says programmes must be implemented with  that
in mind.  As such, it recommends that the following  additions  be  made  to
Clause 2(2):

    ❑ the provision of subsidies and or other financial assistance to  older
      persons caring for orphans; and
    ❑ the development and provision of support  networks  and  opportunities
      to older persons caring for orphans to help them cope with  their  new
      and unique parenting roles.

Additionally, while RAPCAN applauds the inclusion of  Section  2(2)(j)  with
respect to access to health care and support, it feels that it is  necessary
to include  programmes  to  deal  specifically  with  the  HIV/AIDS  crisis.
Therefore, it recommends that  the  following  objectives  outlined  in  the
Madrid  International  Plan  of  Action   on   Ageing[1]   be   taken   into
consideration:

    ❑ improvement in the assessment of the impact of HIV/AIDS on the  health
      of older persons, both for those who are infected and  those  who  are
      caregivers for infected and surviving family members; and


    ❑ enhancement and recognition of the contribution of  older  persons  to
      development in their role as  caregivers  for  children  with  chronic
      diseases, including HIV/AIDS, and as surrogate parents.

It further recommends the establishment of  an  intersectoral  mechanism  to
coordinate and  oversee  the  implementation  of  the  programmes  described
above.  RAPCAN also wants the Minister be  granted  greater  flexibility  in
the identification and development of programmes  currently  not  listed  in
the Bill.  Such coordination and flexibility, it believes, will  enhance  to
the best extent possible the ability of older persons to  care  for  orphans
and, as a result, will give these vulnerable children the  best  opportunity
to grow and develop into happy, healthy adults.

Submitted by Eskom Pension Association

The Association is of the opinion that the retirement funds industry is  set
up inter alia to provide for the payment of pensions to persons who  retired
from retirement funds who had made contributions  to  the  funds  they  were
members of while in employment.

It believes that funds within the retirement funds industry  could  (subject
to the Pension Funds Act  and  the  fiduciary  obligations  of  trustees  in
relation to investment decisions) be a possible source  of  development  and
investment  funds  for  the  types   of   programmes   that   section   2(b)
contemplates.

The stakeholders to this Bill include retirement fund trustees,  since  they
and pensioner associations (such as ours) are  committed  to  promoting  the
interests of pensioners, who are also older persons.

Recommendation

In section 2(b) the Association believes that the programmes referred to
should refer specifically to programmes that can be invested in by the:
    ❑ trustees of retirement funds registered under the Pension Funds Act,
      who by law must promote the interests of pensioners who obviously fall
      under the definition of “older person” in the Bill;
    ❑ employers who are participants in these retirement funds.

The programmes that they could invest in, the Association wants them to be
mentioned in the Act and suggests the following:

    ❑ housing schemes for older persons;
    ❑ skills development and training initiatives for “community-based care
      and support services” and “care” and management and financial
      administration of a “facility”;
    ❑ skills development and training for self-help groups made up of  older
      persons, to develop income-generating initiatives

Submitted by Peter Laubscher, Executive Director, Leprosy  Mission  Southern
Africa

Recommendations

Mr Laubscher says the elderly disabled find it very expensive to travel  and
sometimes the cost of visiting a local health facility  can  be  intolerable
and proposes the following solutions:

    ❑ Reduced fares outside of peak hours on Metrorail and buses
    ❑ Designated compartments  for  the  elderly/  vulnerable  on  Metrorail
      [this is practised in Asia]
    ❑ Taxis be required to offer discounted rates to  the  elderly  disabled
      outside of peak hours

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

Recommendation

In section 2(1)

The Council proposes that “consultation” be replaced by joint mechanisms  or
partnerships, with Social  Development  as  the  lead  Department.  It  also
suggests that the nature of “support” be defined – as  it  stands  it  could
not be costed.

In section 2(2)

The Council wants the Bill to give  more  direction  and  substance  to  the
programmes. The more precisely a service is described the more likely it  is
to be implemented, it says. The Council suggests that the programs  in  this
section be listed in order of importance and that priority be given  to  (a)
(e) (h) and (j).

It also suggests the following  proposals  on  programmes  in  this  Chapter
(with amendments underlined):

    ❑ “public education on ageing,  the rights of older  persons  and  their
      social, cultural,  economic  and  political  contribution”  The  Forum
      proposes that this program be combined with (k) and  read  as  follows
      “The formation of an national forum of older  persons  to  advise  the
      Minister, ensure the participation of older persons in decision-making
      and establish a national research plan and a communication network  on
      ageing”
    ❑ “access of older  persons  to  information,  education  and  training,
      especially in rural areas”. This program, the Forum thinks,  needs  to
      be spelt out – as it may be covered by other programs

    ❑ ”The protection of older persons  and  the  education  of  carers  and
      communities on their rights and needs.” The Forum is of the view  that
      the issue of control of companies selling funeral policies  and  loans
      is a burning issue for older persons, hence this programme.

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa
Alzheimer suggests that the following programmes should be included in  this
section:

(p) The training of health care professionals  to  deal  with  the  specific
problems or complexities associated with dealing with the elderly.
(q) The establishment of a National Forum on Older People
® The needs of carers need to be addressed to support them in their work.

6. Chapter 2 – [Ensuring an Enabling and Supportive  Environment  for  Older
    Persons]

Submitted by South African Council of Churches
The Council believes that one way in which the Bill may be  strengthened  in
order to  promote  an  enabling  and  supportive  environment  might  be  to
recognise the need for a continuum of care services  for  the  older  person
including primary care, family and community based  care,  professional  and
rehabilitation,  long  term  and  palliative  care.  The  Council  therefore
reckons that the Bill could be considerably strengthened if it included  the
following:
    • A community plan to conduct a needs assessment  for  planning  locally
      based care and health services that involves the participation of  the
      older person; and
    • Regulatory mechanisms for such community and family based services  as
      a continuum of care. Consultation with the  Department  of  Health  on
      this plan is essential, as with other programmes, that  care  for  the
      older person needs to be mainstreamed into  every  relevant  facet  of
      government.

6.1. Facilities and services to comply with national norms and standards

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse South Africa
In this chapter, AEASA reckons that the Bill needs  to  focus  primarily  on
community living where the majority  of  older  persons  live,  rather  than
solely on residential facilities. Older persons, it says, need  a  continuum
of  care  that  can  be  outlined  in  three  stages:  independent   living,
assistance with daily living and finally  frail  care.   This  continuum  of
care  can  be  provided  in  the  community,  including  frail  care,  where
possible.

Recommendation

AEASA suggests that the Bill focus  on  community  based  care  as  well  as
residential care.  Many older persons, it  says,  are  exploited  due  to  a
shortage of appropriate, affordable accommodation.  It  wants  accommodation
options explored where older persons can  be  accommodated  in  safety  with
their grandchildren where applicable.

National norms and standards for all residential facilities  are  imperative
and all facilities should be subsidized  on  the  cost  of  providing  basic
care. The registration and regular monitoring and evaluation of  residential
facilities by the Department of Social Development in conjunction  with  the
Department of Health is vital to prevent and address elder abuse. It  is  of
the utmost importance that this be included in the  legislation.  Facilities
run by the State should  be  compliant  with  all  legislation  and  not  be
exempted.

Service level agreements should be between the older  persons  as  consumers
of a service and the service providers, not between the  consumers  and  the
residents’ committees in facilities.

Submitted  by  CJ  Janse  van  Vuuren,  Manager,  Luipaardsvlei  Tehuis  vir
Bejaardes, a branch of NG Welfare North West

Referring to Section 3. (1) - (2), Mr Van Vuuren explains that according  to
the Older  Persons  Bill  under  discussion,  facilities  and  services  are
subsidised by a provincial legislature for the benefit and caring  of  older
persons. He then raises his institution’s concern in relation to  the  adult
physically  disabled  persons  already  in  residence  in  subsidized   care
facilities for older persons and wants to know whether this will  constitute
a contravention of the Bill?

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The Forum urges  the  Portfolio  Committee  to  give  consideration  to  the
challenge of applying national norms and  standards  where  there  are  wide
disparities in resources and provision  between  and  within  provinces.  It
wants the level of subsidy to be based on the cost  of  basic  care,  taking
account of various cost drivers.

Submitted by NAWONGO

In this  section  of  the  Bill  norms  and  standards  (Section  3(2))  are
mentioned.  Problems that are currently being experienced are:

    ❑ Conflicting standards set by the Department of Social Development  and
      Department of Health.
    ❑ Medico-legal risks
    ❑  Astute  standards  and  maintenance  thereof  in  facilities,   while
      private home care does not have meet the same standard.

NAWONGO wants to highlight the  following  as  problems  that  it  says  are
currently being experienced:
         • In the Bill the capacity of older persons to act  (or  the  loss
           thereof) is not dealt with.
         •  Also  lacking  are  more  comprehensive  guidelines   for   the
           management of facilities.

The protection of the interests of both  older  persons  and  management  in
facilities, it argues, will be promoted by the  availability  of  Codes  and
Procedures.

Recommendation

As in the case of the Labour Relations Act, NAWONGO suggests that  perceived
gaps in the Bill be filled with codes of good practice (as  addenda  to  the
Act). The codes could possibly deal with the following areas:


    ❑ Grievances and discipline in facilities
    ❑ Admissions and contracts with residents
    ❑ Management of facilities
    ❑ Transformation

As  a  way  of  alternative,  NAWONGO  says,  the  above  could  be  set  as
prerequisites for registration.

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

The Council says that one of the main concerns in  welfare  is  the  current
narrow and restrictive funding criteria, which are  appropriated  to  fields
of service. The modern approach, it goes on to say, is to encourage  service
providers to follow a multi-purpose  approach  and  example,  provide  frail
care to older persons, children with terminal diseases or every  conceivable
person in a terminal state of sickness or requiring frail care. Contrary  to
the modern approach, the  Council  then  contends  that  the  proposed  bill
entrenches the narrow view of  compartmentalizing  the  funding  of  service
provisions.

It urges that the, Bill should not perpetuate the narrow formulation of  the
provision of social services for the  older  persons  only.  The  Bill,  the
Council reasons, should prescribe the principles for the protection  of  the
older person including criteria such a good governance,  standards  of  care
and generally  the  protection  of  older  persons  as  underscored  by  the
constitution, whether  such  services  are  funded  by  government  or  not,
incorporating the principles  annunciated  in  papers  such  as  the  Madrid
Declaration,  which  was  adopted  by  the  Minister  at  the  International
Conference on Ageing in 2002.

The Council therefore, suggests  that  the  reference  to  funding  and  the
intended controls stipulated in the  bill  and  reference  to  same  in  the
proposed regulations should  be  omitted  and  instead,  incorporated  in  a
separate legislation dealing with the entire spectrum of funding for  social
services across the board. One  alternative,  it  says,  is  to  expand  the
current Social Assistance Act to incorporate funding for  services  for  the
full spectrum of social services.

If all issues regarding funding are  removed  from  the  Bill,  the  Council
contends that the intended benefits articulated for the  protection  of  the
older persons will become more apparent.

The Council is of the view that services to older persons are also  governed
by other legislations. It maintains that this  Bill,  in  its  current  form
does not acknowledge these links and in many instances is in  conflict  with
other such legislations. For  example,  it  says,  the  Housing  Development
Schemes  for  Retired  Persons  Act  65  of  1988  regulates  and   controls
retirement housing for persons over 55 years of age and as  such  prescribes
requirements in this regard which are different to those contained  in  this
Bill

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission
The Commission welcomes this section. It  is  however  uncertain  about  the
content of the norms  and  standards,  which,  it  says,  are  relegated  to
Regulations (Clause 21), which the Minister will draft after the passing  of
the Bill.

It also registers a concern that the Bill does not provide  any  time  lines
for the drafting of these norms and  standards.  It  proposes  that  such  a
timeline should  be  included  in  the  Bill.  he  clause  demonstrates  the
drafters, possibly unintentional,

It says the title of this  section  and  its  wording  refer  throughout  to
‘facilities and services’ and suggests that a  more  developmental  approach
would refer first to services and then to facilities. This, it  says,  would
reflect the continuum of care, which older  persons  should  have  at  their
disposal.

It asks for norms and standards to be developed for  home-based  carers.  It
also wants home based care to be more formalized and  home-based  carers  be
paid some form of stipend by the State and that it should  not  be  expected
that these services be delivered for free.

Recommendation

The Commission suggests that a further section must  be  inserted  providing
that the Regulations for Norms and Standards  must  be  drafted  within  one
year of the coming into operation of the  Act.  It  also  wants  the  phrase
‘facilities  and  services’  be  changed  to   ‘services   and   facilities’
throughout the Bill.

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

The Council urges the Portfolio  Committee  to  give  consideration  to  the
following:
    • How can national norms and standards be applied  over  all  provinces,
      given the disparities in resources? This was a major  concern  in  the
      NCOP.
    •  Will  norms  and  standards  be  established  in  consultation   with
      stakeholders?
    • Can facilities be compelled to meet national norms and standards where
      the State subsidies only cover a part of their costs?

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

Alzheimer recommends that the norms and standards should also be made  after
consultation with other stakeholders, especially including  those  of  older
people.   It  wonders  how  prescriptive  the  Minister  can  be  with   the
decreasing subsidies paid to homes that only cover  a  small  percentage  of
the facilities costs.

6.2. Conditions of use, withdrawal and refunding of subsidies

Submitted by Cape Jewish Seniors Association

Recommendation

The Association suggests the following addition:
    • “thorough investigation first, only then followed by withdrawal of the
      subsidy in question after one month’s notice of intention to do so” in
      section 4 (3)

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

This Section, the Forum says, is almost the same as  Section  2A(1)  of  the
Aged Persons Amendment Act. Under the Regulations of  that  Act,  the  Forum
explains, subsidies were restricted to “residents who met  the  requirements
determined by the Minister” and managers in  receipt  of  subsidies  had  to
allow inspections, report abuse and  follow  agreed  accounting  procedures.
The last condition of the present Bill has now been amended by the  NCOP  by
adding the requirement of a  “register  of  assets  bought  with  government
funds”. It is doubtful if this is realistic. Substantial government  capital
funding of residential homes occurred under the previous  regime  when  such
registers were not required. Earlier attempts  to  uncover  the  whereabouts
and extent of such “loans” have been unsuccessful.

Recommendation

The Forum would therefore like to recommend that “conditions for the use  of
a subsidy” be made part of a funding agreement between  the  state  and  the
service provider.

The Forum considers the provision for the withdrawal of a subsidy after  one
months notice  if  any  condition  is  not  complied  with  too  punitive  a
response. It argues that this sub-section must be made consistent  with  the
Promotion of Administrative Justice Act with respect to time frames  allowed
for various steps taken in response to  administrative  actions.  The  Forum
recommends that more graduated sanctions be provided for in the Bill.
The Forum would like to see this Section addressing the issue  of  “duty  to
support” by the children of persons in receipt  of  subsidies  in  order  to
reduce the burden of residential care on the budget.

Submitted by NG Ministry of Caring

In section 4 (3) – The Ministry thinks that “one month’s notice”  is  not  a
reasonable practice

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

It is the submission of the Council that where the  state  provides  funding
or a subsidy, the terms of the funding or subsidy should be formulated in  a
funding agreement, consistent with the principles espoused in the  bill,  as
and when the funding is offered.

The Bill proposes that when a subsidy is paid, the Minister  must  prescribe
the conditions of use of that subsidy, including  conditions  regarding  the
accounting for the subsidy so paid. A more flexible approach,  depending  on
the organization, its circumstances, the  level  of  funding,  the  services
offered and the ability of management, the Council says, should  be  adopted
and reflected in a funding agreement between the state and the  facility  or
organization.

The Council recommends that private organizations without any state  subsidy
or state involvement should be  excluded  from  certain  of  the  provisions
contained in the proposed Bill. For example, it says, it  is  unconscionable
that the Bill prescribes for the establishment of  resident  committees  for
facilities if more than ten older persons reside in a facility  irrespective
of whether the organization is for profit or not subsidized  by  the  state.
It therefore wants private organizations without any state subsidy or  state
involvement to be excluded from such prescriptive  provisions  contained  in
the Bill.

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

The Council would like to recommend  that  “conditions  for  the  use  of  a
subsidy” be made part of a funding  agreement  between  the  state  and  the
service provider.

It considers the provision for the withdrawal of a subsidy after one  months
notice if any condition is not complied with as appears in sub-section 4  (3
too punitive a  response.  It  would  like  to  see  this  sub-section  made
consistent with the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act with respect  to
time frames allowed for various steps taken in  response  to  administrative
actions. If a subsidy is withdrawn so that the  service  can  no  longer  be
provided, it suggests that an alternative provision be made  for  the  older
persons receiving such a service. And recommends  more  graduated  sanctions
be provided for in the Bill.

6.3 Prohibition on operation of unregistered facilities

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The Forum reckons that this Section is taken virtually  unchanged  from  the
1967 Aged Persons Act.

Recommendation

On Section 5 (7) the Forum is the opinion  that,  while  it  is  appropriate
that the owner of a facility facing closure should have to  take  reasonable
measures to ensure older persons  are  accommodated  in  another  registered
facility, the Bill should expressly recognize that the State has  the  final
responsibility to ensure these older persons are taken care of.

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

Section 7 (8) of the Bill requires the manager  of  the  which  immediately,
prior to the date of the commencement of the section is being subsidized  by
the state, must register such facility within 12 months of the  commencement
of the section. By implication, the Council contends that a  facility  which
immediately prior to the date of commencement of the section, which  is  not
being subsidized by the state, is not obliged to register.  This  anormally,
it reasons, defeats the objects of  the  bill  and  it  submits,  no  reason
exists for the distinction between  facilities,  which  are  subsidized,  or
not. It is its contention that all currently  registered  facilities  should
be regarded as registered in terms of this bill.

The Council further says that the Bill is unclear as to  whether  all  types
of facilities as defined in section 1 (10) should formally  register.  There
is a contradiction between section 7 (1)  and  section  8  (1),  as  in  the
former section, all facilities  should  register  whereas  the  latter  only
requires  notification,  not  registration  in   respect   of   unsubsidized
services.

The Council further contends that The forfeiture of all assets  bought  with
government funds or donated with the  specific  intention  to  assist  older
persons to the state if the registration of the facility has been  cancelled
or the owner  of  the  facility  wishes  to  close  down  or  transfer  that
facility, is  unconstitutional.  It  says  the  Bill  does  not  distinguish
between  assets,  which  may  have  been   acquired   partially   by   state
subsidization and by the facility itself. On account of  the  potential  for
dispute, which may arise pursuant to the provisions of paragraph  9  of  the
Bill, the Council submits that a dispute resolution  process  or  an  appeal
process to any decision made by the Minister should be provided for  in  the
Bill. It wants it noted that in terms of the NPO Act, all NPOs are  required
to include a specific dissolution clause, which states that the assets  must
be transferred to another similar organization.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

The Commission raises concern about  the  practical  implementation  of  the
section and how facilities that are based in poor communities  would  access
the process and communicate with the department.

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

Referring to sub-section 5(7), the Council argues that  while  it  considers
appropriate that the owner of a facility facing closure should have to  take
reasonable measures to ensure older  persons  are  accommodated  in  another
registered facility, it suggests that the Bill  should  expressly  recognize
that the State has the final responsibility to ensure  these  older  persons
are taken care of.

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

Alzheimer asks about the criterion that is going  to  be  used  to  register
facilities under this section, and whether norms and standards will  be  the
same as under section 3(2). It further asks if this is  fair  when  they  do
not receive a subsidy from the state.

6.4 Minister to be notified of provision of certain services

Submitted by Cape Jewish Seniors Association

Recommendation

The Association suggests the following addition:
    • “ Community based service center” in section 6 (1)

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The Forum welcomes the  removal  of  private  residential  homes  from  this
Section so that they will now be obliged to register under  Section  5  like
other facilities, regardless of the number of older persons accommodated.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

The Commission says this section is too narrow.  Whilst  the  title  of  the
section refers to services, it says that services are then narrowed down  to
in the content of the clause to luncheon clubs and home based care.

Recommendations

The Commission proposes the following changes:
    • Section 6 (1) should refer to  the  revised  definition,  as  proposed
      earlier in the submission, and refer to clubs.
    • Section 6(1) should refer to services and  community  based  care  and
      support services.
    • Section 6(1) should state that a persons must notify, the Minister  in
      the prescribed manner . . .”
    • Additional sub-sections, similar  to  the  sub-sections  contained  in
      clause 5 and 7 should be inserted with deal with the registration  and
      granting of subsidies to services.
    • The reference to accommodation in clause 6(2) is illogical  as  clause
      6(1) only refers to luncheon  clubs  and  home-based  care.  The  word
      accommodation should be removed.

6.5 Compliance with conditions for registration of facilities

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The Forum argues that the addition of the requirement  to  hand  over  funds
will conflict with the constitution of many institutions, which comply  with
the Non-Profit Organisations Act. This Act, the Forum  says,  requires  that
provision be made for assets  of  an  institution  closing  down  to  go  to
another institution with similar aims.

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

Commenting on sub-section 4 (1) the Council believes  that  the  requirement
to  hand  over  funds  will  conflict  with   the   constitution   of   many
institutions,  which  comply  with  the  Non-Profit  Organizations  Act.  It
therefore suggests that the Bill  provides  for  assets  of  an  institution
closing down to go to another institution with similar aims.

6.6 Establishment of residents’ committees for facilities

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The Forum says many services to older persons  need  to  comply  with  other
legislation, where requirements for corporate governance  are  specific  and
mandatory (for example Section 21 companies must comply with  the  Companies
Act). These, the Forum contends,  conflict  with  the  powers  of  residents
committees provided for in this section;

The Forum wants a  distinction  to  be  made  between  the  obligations  and
liabilities of owners, management committees and  residents  committees.  It
is problematic for government to legislate on how  management  or  residents
committees are constituted.  Nor is it desirable for  the  Bill  to  contain
prescriptive measures regarding the composition of  governing  bodies.   The
Forum argues that  this  is  the  responsibility  of  the  relevant  service
provider.

Differing financial and other resources of  institutions  affect  what  they
can reasonably do.  The interests of  the  State  in  ensuring  that  unfair
discrimination is prohibited would  be  adequately  protected  by  requiring
that governing bodies be representative of the relevant community as far  as
is reasonable and feasible.  We understand that  such  provisions  contained
in funding agreements of the Gauteng Department.

The Forum wants consumers of  any  service  to  have  some  input  into  the
conditions of provision of that  service,  and  should  have  the  right  to
obtain information regarding the service concerned.  It  says  there  should
be a mechanism to enable older persons to obtain  information,  reasons  for
actions taken or not taken, and obtain recourse when  they  feel  aggrieved.
Again, a special protector or ombuds system would be appropriate  here,  the
Forum reckons.

Submitted by NG Ministry of Caring
The Ministry is of the opinion  that  the  screening  procedures  listed  in
section 8 (2) (a-c) are unrealistic and will make  it  impossible  to  admit
older persons who are  still  physically  and  mentally  able  to  serve  on
committees and make well-considered and meaningful resolutions.

Submitted by CJ Janse van Vuuren, Manager, Luipaardsvlei Tehuis vir
Bejaardes, a branch of NG Welfare North West

Recommendation

Mr Van  Vuuren  is  the  opinion  that  when  the  Minister  prescribes  the
composition of a “residents’  committee”  for  a  Care  Facility  for  Older
Persons, it  must  be  taken  into  account  that,  due  to  their  physical
condition, most of the residents will not be able to serve on  a  residents’
committee, and that their family members should represent them.

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

The Council reckons that the establishment of  a  resident’s  committee  for
facilities in the Bill does not prescribe the role that  such  a  resident’s
committee should play and what powers it will  have  in  the  management  or
administration  of  a  facility  or  organization.  Without  this  essential
information, It contends, it is not possible to consider the impact of  such
a clause on organizations.

It further reasons that the imposition  of  a  resident’s  committee  for  a
facility or organization,  which  is  established  for  profit  or  receives
little or no state subsidy, is unwarranted.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

The Commission submits it will be extremely  problematic  and  difficult  to
comply with this section. It criticizes  this  section  for  what  it  calls
subtle preoccupation with old age homes. Whilst the definition  of  facility
refers to community based care and support services, it  maintains  that  it
is clear that the use of the word resident in this  clause  refers  only  to
old age homes or residential care.

It sees it as impossible and illogical task for a community-based  care  and
support service to establish a residents committee. These services may  well
have a transitory group of recipients.

Recommendation

The  Commission  proposes  a  revision  of  this  section.  It  suggests   a
determination whether the clause is intended to apply  to  residential  care
facilities only. If so, it wants this to  be  stated.  It  also  suggests  a
legal determination of whether the residents  can  in  fact  ensure  that  a
manager carries out the functions set out in clause 8(3). It  also  suggests
that an obligation to be created that  older  persons  are  entitled  to  be
consulted on and participate in  the  decision-making  processes  concerning
the matters contained in sub-section 8(3). Furthermore it  proposes  that  a
separate section should be inserted that refers to how  older  persons  will
be consulted and included in  the  decision-making  processes  in  community
based care and support services.

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

The Council says that many services to older persons  need  to  comply  with
other legislation, where requirements for corporate governance are  specific
and mandatory (for  example  Section  21  companies  must  comply  with  the
Companies  Act).  It  contends  that  these  conflict  with  the  powers  of
residents committees provided for in this section.

It  suggests  that  a  distinction  be  made  between  the  obligations  and
liabilities of owners, management committees and  residents  committees.  It
considers it problematic for government to legislate on  how  management  or
residents committees  are  constituted  and  undesirable  for  the  Bill  to
contain  prescriptive  measures  regarding  the  composition  of   governing
bodies.  It sees this is as  the  responsibility  of  the  relevant  service
provider.

It also says that the  interests  of  the  State  in  ensuring  that  unfair
discrimination is prohibited would  be  adequately  protected  by  requiring
that governing bodies be representative of the relevant community as far  as
is reasonable and feasible

6.7 Admission to facilities

Submitted by Highlands House

Referring to section 9 (1), the  Highlands  House,  whose  admission  policy
discriminates against all applicants who are not Jewish, is  concerned  that
the specific punitive measures in the Bill will have other  unintended,  and
unconstitutional consequences for facilities which,  it  says,  legitimately
operate for the benefit of members of a particular religion.
As an example, the only requirement that Highlands House says it takes  into
account in its admission policy is that the applicant for residence must  be
Jewish.  It denies that a person’s race does enter into  the  consideration.
Forcing Highlands  House  to  replace  this  primary  consideration  with  a
requirement to consider demographic  representivity  [in  terms  of  section
9(2) of the Bill], Highlands House says, will violate the rights of  it  and
its residents to religious freedom [in section 15(1) of  the  Constitution];
freedom of association [section  18  of  the  Constitution];  cultural  life
[section 30 of the Constitution]; religious practice  [section  31(1)(a)  of
the Constitution]; and to form, join and maintain  a  religious  association
[section 31(1)(b) of the Constitution]. It further claims that section  9(2)
of the Bill will also  violate  the  rights  of  the  current  residents  to
dignity [section 10 of  the  Constitution];  property  [section  25  of  the
Constitution]; access to existing housing [section 26 of the  Constitution];
and access to existing health care services,  food  and  water,  and  social
security [section 27(1) of the Constitution].

Highlands House contends quite strongly that the Bill in  its  current  form
is unconstitutional on the basis that it constitutes a violation  of  rights
contained in the Bill of Rights and  such  a  violation,  it  says,  is  not
“saved” by the limitations clause in section 36 of the Constitution.
Recommendation

The  House  suggests  the  following  as  ways  in  which,  it  says,   such
unconstitutionality can be cured whilst the purpose of  the  legislation  is
maintained.

    • The concept of “unfair discrimination” in section 9(1)  of  the  Bill
      should be defined to mean the same as its meaning in Pepuda;
    • The requirement set out  in  section  9(2)  of  the  Bill  should  be
      qualified.  The  requirement   concerning   the   consideration   for
      determining eligibility for  admission  to  facilities  contained  in
      section 9(2) of  the  Bill  should  only  be  operative  when  unfair
      discrimination based on race is involved; and
    • In the alternative, the Minister should be granted  the  power  under
      section 5 of the Bill to exempt any facility from the  obligation  to
      satisfy the requirements of section 9(1), read with sections 9(2) and
      9(5) of the Bill.

Commenting on section 9 (4) the Highlands House says the Bill does not  make
it clear whether  the  punishment  for  contravention  of  this  section  in
respect to a facility will be levied against the facility or  the  admitting
officer.

The Highlands House also argues that there are a great many cases in  which,
it says, consent to their admission to a facility due to medical  conditions
such as Alzheimer’s disease or senile  dementia.   It  says  it  is  neither
practicable nor desirable that these individuals remain in their own  homes.
 It says they require medical treatment and if left to  their  own  devices,
pose a significant danger to themselves and  others  due  to  the  increased
risk of (otherwise avoidable) accidents.

In these circumstances, Highlands  House  submits  that  legislation  should
facilitate, rather than  hamper,  the  admission  of  these  individuals  to
registered facilities.

The requirement for a Court order as  a  pre-requisite  for  admission,  the
Highlands House contends will strike a disproportionately heavy blow to  the
most vulnerable members of any community. The House says the  difficulty  in
finding a facility which is prepared to  admit  a  poor,  senile  individual
will be compounded if that facility must first go  through  the  potentially
expensive process of attaining a court order.

Highlands House submits that the financial realities  faced  by  facilities,
whether private or public, will  by  themselves  militate  against  ‘forced’
admissions. The House suggests that  a  distinction  must  be  made  between
those older persons who are capable, and  who  are  not  capable  of  giving
their consent to admission.  The determination whether a person  is  capable
of giving consent, it argues, can be made by a medical professional.

Recommendation

In this regard Highlands House suggests that section 9(4) could  be  amended
to read as follows:  “No older person capable of consenting to  his  or  her
admission to a facility may be  so  admitted  without  his  or  her  consent
excepting in terms of an order  of  a  court”;  or  section  5(5)  could  be
amended to include a  provision  that  a  facility’s  registration  will  be
withdrawn by the Minister  if  that  facility  is  found  to  have  admitted
persons capable of giving their consent against their will.

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The Forum welcomes the changes made by the  NCOP  to  this  Section,  namely
that written reasons be provided for refusal of admission  and  9(4),  which
is new. It however contends that  the  obligation  to  give  reasons  should
extend to all actions taken  by  providers  of  services,  and  the  section
should make it clear that the reasons must be substantive.  Furthermore,  it
wants some avenue of  recourse  following  the  receipt  of  reasons  to  be
provided for.

Submitted by CJ Janse van Vuuren, Manager, Luipaardsvlei Tehuis vir
Bejaardes, a branch of NG Welfare North West

Mr Van Vuuren says that a facility that provides for the care and  needs  of
older persons must have admission  rules  by  which  they  can  exclude  the
admission of mentally/psychologically disabled  older  persons.  He  further
states that older persons suffering from dementia are not  included  in  the
aforementioned category. He also maintains that most of the facilities  that
provide  in  the  care  of  older  persons  do  not  have   the   facilities
(accommodation) and  trained  staff  to  care  for  mentally/psychologically
disabled older persons.

He asks if it is the appropriate Provincial Legislature  that  is  going  to
pay the full required fee should an older person be ordered by court  to  be
admitted to a facility

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

The Council submits that section 11 (3) and (4) are too widely stated.  Many
facilities as defined exists where the  state  makes  no  or  only  a  small
subsidy or contribution to the well-being of such facility and,  under  such
circumstances, it argues that the state should  not  be  able  to  prescribe
criteria for admissions and tools to determine  admission  criteria.  It  is
opposed to any situation where a state enjoys influence in facilities  where
it makes no contribution in order to promote private  initiatives,  provided
that the facility complies with the requirements of the Bill.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission
Recommendation

The Commission proposes that  this  section  should  refer  specifically  to
residential care facilities. It says that is  justifiable,  in  light  of  a
particular  history  concerning  old  age  homes,  that  affirmative  action
measures are created in legislation to address the imbalances of  the  past.
It further suggests if the  intention  for  this  section  is  to  refer  to
community based care  and  support  services  then  this  should  be  stated
clearly. It proposes that a separate section could  be  created  to  address
discrimination in this context.

It suggests that a further section  referring  to  recipients  of  community
based care and support services should be added to the Bill.

The reference to manager in section 9(3),  it  says  should  be  changed  to
operator.

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

Referring to sub-section 9(3) welcome the changes made by the NCOP  to  this
section, namely that written reasons be provided for  refusal  of  admission
and 9(4), which is new. The obligation to give reasons should extend to  all
actions taken by providers of services,  and  the  section  should  make  it
clear that the reasons must be substantive.   Furthermore,  some  avenue  of
recourse following the receipt of reasons  should  be  provided  for,  which
again highlights the importance of having  a  special  protector  or  ombuds
system (See motivation at the end of Chapter 3.)

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

Referring to section 9 (4), Alzheimer thinks this  has  direct  implications
for  elderly  people  suffering  from  dementia  that  have  no  contractual
capacity and argues that due to their cognitive decline and  the  fact  that
their insight and judgment is impaired, they are not able  to  complete  and
or sign the application forms giving their consent. It says that those  that
are still able to communicate may express that there is nothing  wrong  with
them and that they are capable of caring for themselves,  when  the  reality
is very different. It  goes  to  say  that  getting  a  court  order  is  an
expensive and time consuming event that  is  not  practical  or  financially
possible in most situations. Often, Alzheimer says,  it  is  in  their  best
interests to be admitted to a facility as they are in need of  nursing  care
and could be posing a danger to themselves or to other people.  Under  these
circumstances, Alzheimer feels  that  the  fact  they  cannot  give  consent
should not mean that the person signing on their  behalf  is  guilty  of  an
offence as stated in section 5. Alzheimer reasons that if  the  person  does
not admit them to a facility when they are needing care, they are likely  to
be guilty of a crime under section 13 – as they will be guilty of the  abuse
or neglect of an older person.

Alzheimer therefore recommends that this section read as follows:
9(4) “No older person may be admitted to  a  facility  without  his  or  her
consent, a court order or where they would at risk if not admitted”.

6.8 Monitoring of registered facilities or places

Submitted by Directorate: Chronic Care Rehabilitation

Recommendation

The Directorate suggests that  the  Bill  must  include  the  Department  of
Health  in  monitoring  or  registration  of  homes  for  older  persons  as
mandatory.  It considers this essential. The  Directorate  claims  that  the
Health act legislates that the  department  of  health  is  responsible  for
health care. It therefore suggests that the Bill must  make  provision  that
the Department of Health ensures it has the capacity to monitor the care  of
Older persons in the various settings as well as Old Age Homes.

Submitted by Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing

The Forum wants monitoring provisions to apply to services provided  in  all
facilities, whether registered or not, as well as services provided  outside
facilities.

For example, Section 43(1) of National Health Act requires the  Minister  to
prescribe  minimum  standards  for  the  provision  of  health  services  in
locations other than health  establishments,  including  schools  and  other
public places. This must cover residential homes for  frail  older  persons.
However, the Health Department does  not  yet  fulfil  this  oversight  role
here. The Forum wants the Bill to provide a mechanism, which  is  linked  to
the monitoring requirements in order to overcome this gap.

It would be helpful if the Bill specified  the  purpose  of  the  monitoring
system, linked monitoring to the quality of care provided to other  persons,
and provided for remedies where the results of the monitoring  process  show
that norms and standards are not being complied with. There should  also  be
an obligation on the monitoring body to inform affected institutions of  the
results  and  findings  of  any  monitoring   or   investigation,   with   a
corresponding right for any institution to respond or  take  remedial  steps
before other actions are taken as a result of the monitoring findings.

The Forum would also  like  this  Section  to  give  more  emphasis  to  the
monitoring role of  “persons designated by the Director General” as it  says
many older persons’ perception of  social  workers  is  extremely  negative,
especially in disadvantaged communities

Submitted by NG Ministry of Caring
Referring to specifically to section 10 (c), the Ministry is of the  opinion
that social workers have limited knowledge of health care and might  not  be
the appropriate discipline for this function.

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

The Council submits that the majority of abuse of older  persons  exists  in
the communities and  not  in  facilities  or  organizations  and  a  glaring
omission from the provisions of the Bill is the ability  of  social  workers
to monitor older persons housed in private homes.

The Council  contends  that  the  Bill  does  not  make  provision  for  the
inspector or social worker to make a report available  to  the  facility  or
organization, which has been visited by  the  inspector,  or  social  worker
pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph. It  further  argues  that  the
relevance  of  a  social  worker  visiting  or  monitoring  a  facility   or
organization, interviewing any  older  or  frail  person  or  directing  the
person  to  submit  documentation  in  the  context  of  the  Bill  is   not
understood. It adds that the Bill  does  not  prescribe  what  the  director
general should do with such reports or what the relevance  of  such  reports
would be to the director-general.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

The Commission raises a concern that there are not enough social workers  to
carry out the duties that are created in this section.

Recommendation

The Commission proposes that term “places”  in  the  title  should  also  be
reconsidered. It wants it be changed registered  community  based  care  and
support services.

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

The Council suggests that monitoring provisions  should  apply  to  services
provided in all facilities, whether registered or not, as well  as  services
provided outside facilities. It thinks it  would  be  helpful  if  the  Bill
specified the purpose of the monitoring system,  linked  monitoring  to  the
quality of care provided to other persons, and provided for  remedies  where
the results of the monitoring process show that norms and standards are  not
being complied with. It  also  recommends  that  there  should  also  be  an
obligation on the monitoring body to inform  affected  institutions  of  the
results  and  findings  of  any  monitoring   or   investigation,   with   a
corresponding right for any institution to respond or  take  remedial  steps
before other actions are taken as a result of the monitoring findings.

6.9 Report to Minister by managers of facilities

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

The Council reckons that the  Bill  assumes  that  all  services  for  older
persons are subsidized and Bill envisages using the subsidy  for  the  basis
to control institutions and enforce the government’s policy and directives.

It argues that the requirement for the manager of a facility  to  furnish  a
report within 60 days after the end of  the  financial  year  on  compliance
with the prescribed service standards and the prescribed measures  with  the
prescribed service-standards and the  prescribed  measures  to  prevent  and
combat abuse of older person during the financial  year  is  debatable.  The
inappropriateness of such a requirement, it says,  is  demonstrated  by  the
proposed penalty contained in the  bill,  which  prescribes  that  when  the
manager of a facility fails to submit a report, the  Minister  may  withdraw
any subsidy paid in respect of that facility.

It says that it should be noted that reports are already required  in  terms
of the NPO Act and also by provincial departments in  respect  of  financial
service plans. In its opinon, should  a  further  report  be  deemed  to  be
essential, It says,  it  should  contain  meaningful  information,  and  not
merely be a repetition of information already supplied.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

The Commission is concerned that  the  reporting  requirements  may  overlap
with the provisions contained in the Non-Profit Organizations Act, 1998.

Recommendation

The Commission proposes that section 11 should be placed  immediately  after
section 4. It suggests that all reporting requirements should  be  contained
in one section believing that the failure to do this may  create  confusion.
It wants to see a determination  of  different  reporting  requirements  for
residential facilities versus community-based  care  and  support  services.
This, it says, should be reflected in two different clauses.

7. Chapter 3 – [Protection for Older Persons]

7.1 General overview of the chapter

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

The Commission registers what it says is a general concern that the  chapter
makes little provision for abuse that occurs in private  homes  and  in  the
community. It says the chapter deals predominantly with  abuse  that  occurs
in institutions and provides mechanisms  to  address  instances  where  such
care is injurious to the older person or where the  older  person  is  taken
advantage of (section 14 and 15).

It wants the Bill to reflect a community orientated approach to the care  of
the elderly and de-emphasize a facility-based approach.

The ordering of the clauses  in  the  Bill,  it  says,  should  reflect  the
progressive developmental  approach  of  protecting  older  persons  in  the
community and provide protection mechanisms in the different forms  of  care
which they may encounter during their ageing process.  In  other  words  the
Bill should provide protection for persons in the community, thereafter  for
persons living in private residences and participating  in  community  based
care programs and finally, protections should be provided for older  persons
who live in institutions

Recommendation

The Commission suggests that this could be achieved  if  the  sections  were
placed in the following chronological order:

Section 16 - Notification of abuse of older person
Section 18 - Older Persons in need of care and protection
Section 14 - Procedure for bringing person who accommodates or cares
              for older of frail person before magistrate
Section 15 - Enquiry into accommodation or care of older or frail
              person
Section 13 - Prohibition of abuse of older persons.
Section 17 - Keeping of register of abuse of older persons
Section 12 - Rights of older persons in facilities

7.2 Rights of older persons in facilities

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse South Africa

AEASA is of the  opinion  that  Section  12  (Rights  of  older  persons  in
facilities) should appear at the beginning of Chapter 2 and that Section  18
(Older person in need of care and protection) should be brought  forward  to
the beginning of Chapter 3.

Submitted by NAWONGO

Recommendation

Although  section  12  does  refer  to  the  rights  of  older  persons   in
facilities, NAWONG believes that an exposition of all the  rights  of  older
persons elsewhere would be of great value.  This can be added, if deemed  to
be more practical, as a schedule to the Act.

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

Council contends that rights should apply to all  older  persons,  not  only
those in facilities.

Council reckons that the right of older persons to  be  informed  about  the
financial status of the facility and changes  to  management  is  vague  and
embarrassing. It wants to see provision made for residents of facilities  or
organizations to receive annual financial statements of such  facilities  or
organizations and a notification of any change to management.

It further says that chapter 3 also introduces the rights of  older  persons
in facilities to have access to basic care but argues  that  basic  care  is
not defined in the  Bill.  It  wants  the  reference  to  the  word  “basic”
omitted.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

The Commission remarks that it  is  clear  that  the  rights  identified  in
clause 12 refer to older persons who live  in  residential  facilities.  The
section  refers  to  transfer,  discharge,  keeping   and   suing   personal
possessions, reasonable access to visitation, etc.    .  .  .  Clearly,  the
Commission considers it illogical that these rights  could  refer  to  older
persons who are recipients of community-based services as  are  included  in
the definition of facility.

Recommendation

The Commission suggests that the section  needs  to  state  clearly  in  its
heading  that  these  rights  are  conferred  upon   persons   residing   in
facilities.
    • The right to dignity should be included.
    • The right to privacy should be expanded.
    • Clause 12(b) is worded  clumsily.  The  word  visitation  is  not  the
      correct word to be used in this context. The clause should read: “ . .
      . the right to receive visitors
    • The have reasonable access to assistance should be a  separate  right.
      right to . . .

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

The Council proposes that this section be moved to the beginning of  Chapter
2

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

Alzheimer feels that this section in its entirety should  be  moved  to  the
start of Chapter 2. In addition, it feels that  section  18(5)(a)(i)  should
be moved to the beginning of Chapter 3 as it thinks  this  would  provide  a
definition of an older person in need of  care  and  protection  and  should
introduce the chapter.

7.3 Prohibition of abuse of older persons

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

Recommendation

The Commission suggests a revision of definition of abuse order that  it  is
clear what forms of conduct amount to abuse in terms of this clause.

Submitted by South African Council of Churches

The Council applauds the steps that recognize the criminalisation  of  older
person abuse but questions whether the “naming and shaming” of abusers  will
produce significant prevention and or awareness of older  person  abuse.  It
says other practical problems that arise are  whether  the  removal  of  the
victim from the place where he or she  is  abused  will  bring  satisfactory
justice for the victim or whether trauma may  not  be  further  exacerbated.
Frequently, it reckons that the  older  person  as  victim  may  be  further
traumatized if she or he becomes the centre of attention within that  family
or community from whom she or he is removed. The  Council  enquires  whether
in such an instance of older person abuse, it may not  be  more  appropriate
for the alleged abuser or offender to be removed from the place of care  and
dealt with in terms of criminal law. A  further  point  of  concern  is  the
message sent out  by  trying  to  deal  with  abuse  primarily  through  the
criminal justice system.

7.4 Procedure for bringing  person  who  accommodates  or  cares  for  older
       person before magistrate

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse South Africa

AEASA claims that this procedure has largely been taken  verbatim  from  the
1967 Act and considers it impractical.

Recommendation

AEASA suggests that the procedure needs to  be  made  as  user  friendly  as
possible, yet at the same time ensure protection of the  older  person  from
even further exploitation.  The training and sensitizing  of  staff  in  the
Justice Department would be a key element in making this legislation  easier
to implement as well as provision being  made  for  older  persons  to  give
evidence in camera, as this would reduce the fear  factor  that  many  older
persons experience when being asked to testify in court, AEASA reckons.   It
also wants the Department of Justice to be sensitive  too,  to  the  reasons
making older persons to frequently withdraw charges that they have laid  due
to dependency on or pressure from family members etc. and ensure that  cases
are  not  dropped  before  they  have  been  fully  investigated.   In  most
situations older persons are  dependent  on  their  abusers  whether  it  be
financially or from a care aspect.  Perpetrators who  have  become  addicted
to substances such as drugs and alcohol frequently abuse  older  persons  to
obtain money to fund their habits  or  become  physically  aggressive  as  a
result  of  their  addiction.   Another  problem  area  are  adult  children
suffering from mental disability such  as  Schizophrenia  refusing  to  take
their medication and subsequently displaying aggressive and  sometimes  life
threatening behaviour towards their older  parents.   Presently  the  Mental
Health Act allows for the removal  of  these  persons  to  a  mental  health
facility for a few days, but they return home and the cycle of abuse  begins
again.  AEASA suggests therefore that the legislation allow for the  removal
and rehabilitation of the abuser where necessary rather  than  removing  the
victim who is the innocent party.

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

The Council charges that the provision of  section  14of  the  Bill  focuses
only on the perpetrator and does not address  the  resultant  needs  of  the
victim. It is our contention that a direct reference to  section  20  should
be incorporated to ensure that the older person receives the required care.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

Recommendation

Whilst the Commission agrees that these provisions remain in  the  Bill,  it
urges the Committee to  make  serious  inquiries  with  the  Departments  of
Social Development and Justice on  the  current  use  of  these  provisions,
determine why they are not being  used  and  thereby  ascertain  if  further
clauses are necessary to address these deficiencies.

It also proposes that:
    • The Bill should provide for alternatives to such a formal procedure.
    • The Bill should provide for education  and  awareness  raising  about
      abuse.
    • The Bill should include provisions that provide  for  mediation  with
      offenders, particularly family offenders where the abuse is not of  a
      severe nature.
    • Preventive measures against abuse need to  be  provided  for  in  the
      Bill.

7.5 Enquiry into accommodation or care of older person

Submitted by Cape Jewish Seniors Association

Recommendation

Referring to section 15(5), the Association suggests  that  the  enquiry  is
always held behind closed doors as it reportedly  feels  that  this  lessens
the feeling of intimidation for the older person. In  section  15  (8),  the
Association suggests the addition of  “social worker can also  be  asked  to
furnish a report ”.

7.6 Notification of abuse of older persons

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse South Africa

AEASA says there are no timeframes given, for example, it is  not  specified
that when the Director-General receives notification  of  the  abuse  of  an
older person, action must be taken within a certain period of  time.   AEASA
fears  that  if  timeframes  are   not   specified,   secondary   abuse   or
traumatization can occur.

Recommendation

AEASA suggests that mandatory reporting should be confined to categories  of
abuse. While, it believes that older persons of sound mind  are  adults  and
as such their decision as to whether to report the abuse or  not  should  be
respected,  it  also  argues   that   older   persons   who   are   mentally
incapacitated, for example, those suffering from dementia,  need  the  extra
protection that mandatory reporting would provide.

AEASA also feels that mandatory reporting would, to a certain extent,  be  a
deterrent, and could curb the amount of harm done to an older person.

AEASA strongly advocates for consideration of older people living  in  rural
areas. It cites what the Act stipulates in Section  16  that  the  Director-
General must be notified –and asks - who represents the Director-General  in
the rural areas? It suggests that the role of the Traditional  Leaders  must
be recognized in  the  legislation  and  protocols  observed,  for  example,
before an older person in an abusive situation is  removed  to  a  place  of
safety. In such situations, AEASA wants the Chief’s permission be sought.

 AEASA suggests that the term “place of safety” in place  of  “hospital”  in
Section 16 (2) (a).  The reason for this, it says, being that not all  abuse
is of a physical nature, and this would  be  broad  enough  to  cover  rural
areas where there are no hospitals. If there  were  physical  injury  to  an
older person, it says, a hospital  would  also  be  considered  a  place  of
safety.

AEASA is in complete agreement with the change made by  the  NCOP  that  the
procedure should include any person who abuses an  older  person,  not  just
those who care or accommodate them.

While, it acknowledges, it is common law that  children  have  a  legal  and
moral responsibility to provide for their parents if  they  are  financially
able to do so, AEASA suggests that this be included in the Bill  as  failure
to do so is tantamount to elder abuse.

Submitted by Southern African Catholic Bishops’ Conference
The Bill proposes mandatory reporting of abuse by ‘any person who  suspects’
that an older person is the victim  of  abuse.  The  Conference  wants  this
proposal carefully considered before it is implemented.  Unlike children  in
abusive situations, the Conference holds  strongly  that  older  people  are
adults who are competent.  By introducing  mandatory  reporting,  it  feels,
this is being undermined and their right to autonomy may be violated.

Section 16 (2) (a) proposes that the Director-General must arrange ‘for  the
removal of the older person concerned to a hospital in case of injury or  to
such other place as the  Director-General  may  determine  If  enacted,  the
Conference thinks,  this  clause  would  have  a  number  of  ramifications.
Firstly, it says there would have to be  enough  facilities  to  accommodate
the elderly abused who are being relocated from their homes.

Secondly, it says that the removal of the  older  person  is  likely  to  be
traumatic and, in a sense, is punitive.  While the alleged abuser  stays  in
the residence, the abused  is  removed  from  the  situation.   Taking  into
account the possible psychological trauma that may result, as  well  as  the
practicalities in relocating the older person, the Conference suggests  that
it is the alleged abuser that may need to be removed from the residence.

It further says that it is also necessary to look  at  the  desirability  of
mandatory reporting on all people. While it is  undeniable  that  there  are
certain categories of people who should  have  a  legal  duty  to  note  and
report  suspected  abuse  (such   as   social   workers   or   health   care
professionals), it feels that it is contentious to suggest that  all  people
have this  legal  responsibility.  It  therefore  asks  that  the  Committee
carefully consider this while deliberating on the Bill.

Submitted by Peter Laubscher, Executive Director, Leprosy  Mission  Southern
Africa

Mr Laubscher says elderly people, especially  those  drawing  pensions,  are
subject to high levels of crime and their safety is  often  in  jeopardy.  A
related problem, he says, is that many of these patients are unable to  sign
for the pension payments as they do not  have  fingers  and  are  unable  to
write or to give a thumbprint. They are dependent  on  ‘procurators’  to  go
with them to receive the payments and these assistants often steal  some  of
the money.

Although she gives money  to  her  family  to  buy  groceries  for  her,  Mr
Laubscher says, she seldom has any supplies in  the  house,  as  the  family
steals the money.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

Recommendations

In  section  16(2),  the  Commission  proposes   that   the   words   “where
appropriate” should be added. It argues that not all cases of abuse  warrant
the removal of the older person to a hospital. It considers expensive,  very
onerous on the State and highly disruptive and further  upsetting  to  older
persons in some cases. Referring section 16(2),  it  says  hospitals  should
not be the only permissible destination for older persons  who  are  removed
from the abusive situation.  It  wants  the  Bill  should  state  the  other
options such as the following:
    • Safe houses,
    • Shelters,
    • Old age homes,
    • Step down facilities etc. …

The Commission suggests that section 16 should compel  the  Director-General
to initiate criminal avenues of redress when reports of abuse are received.

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

Alzheimer is concerned about this section as  it  says  it  places  as  much
responsibility on the public as it does on  Health  Care  Practitioners.  It
feels that the latter should be mentioned as in the Aged  Persons  Amendment
Act No  100  of  1998  in  order  for  them  not  to  be  an  abdication  of
responsibility to the family and to secure that notification does  not  take
place. Furthermore, it feels that the Director-General is  inaccessible  and
not  always  a  practical  channel  for   reporting   abuse   and   awaiting
instruction.

Recommendation

It recommends that section 16(1) should rather read as follows:

“Every  registered  health   care   practitioner   (medical   practitioners,
psychologists,   dentists,   social   workers,   occupational    therapists,
physiotherapists) or any other person who examines, attends to or who  comes
into contact with an aged person and suspects that an aged  person  has  (a)
been abused; or (b) suffers from any injury related to the  abuse  shall  to
immediately notify the Director-General or  an  organization  designated  by
the Director-General for reporting abuse”.

It further suggests, in respect to section 16(2)  that  there  should  be  a
time frame for the arrangement of necessary treatment and  a  response  from
the Director-General as we are dealing  with  vulnerable  older  people  who
have been abused, and  that  the  notification  needs  to  be  responded  to
urgently and not have to go through bureaucratic channels  in  order  to  be
able to assist the elderly person.

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

The provisions of section 16 (2) (b) of the Bill provide that  the  director
general  must  arrange  that  the  older  person  receives   the   necessary
treatment. The Council charges that the Bill  does  not  prescribe  who  the
director-general may order to pay for such treatment or determine under  any
circumstances who is liable for  the  costs  of  such  treatment  the  older
person is obliged to receive.

The Council says it is often difficult  for  older  persons  suffering  such
abuse to  escape  an  abusive  situation  because  of  financial  and  other
dependence and suggests that practical alternatives such as the  removal  of
the abuser, rather than the older person,  should  be  provided.  Whilst  it
welcomes the extension of the obligation to notify abuse to all persons  who
witness abuse of older persons the Council thinks this section of  the  Bill
should  include  an  obligation  on  the  Director  General  to  investigate
allegations of abuse. It suggests that the section should also  provide  for
the identification and use of safe beds, to which  older  persons  could  be
removed.

7.7 Keeping of register of abuse of older persons

Submitted by Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged

The Council reckons that the Minister  should  not  be  obliged  to  keep  a
register of all notifications in terms of  section  17(1)  in  circumstances
where no finding of guilt was made pursuant to a  notification  referred  to
in Section 17(1) of the Bill. In other words, the Minister must  distinguish
between notifications where a finding  of  guilt  is  made,  as  opposed  to
notifications where no finding of guilt is made.

Submitted by Southern African Catholic Bishops’ Conference

Section 17 proposes that  the  Minister  must  keep  a  register  of  people
convicted of abusing an older person and that this  must  be  accessible  to
the public.

When looking at the question of registers,  the  Conference  thinks,  it  is
necessary to have clarity on what the purpose of the  register  is  and  how
the information contained therein will be used.  It further says that it  is
also important to know what information will be  in  the  register  and  who
will compile and maintain it.  Establishing a register, it says, also  poses
the question of how long an offenders’ name will be  on  the  register.   In
addition to this a register is not always easily accessible  to  the  public
and those who need to have access to it.

The Conference holds a view that a register, as conceived in  this  section,
may be limited in effectiveness and may create a false  sense  of  security.
It contends that only a small number  of  people  are  convicted  of  abuse,
which means that  the  information  contained  in  the  register  will  only
represent a very small number of those guilty of abuse and is  by  no  means
an extensive list.  It also wonders whether this section will also apply  to
people who are convicted of abuse under other pieces  of  legislation,  such
as the Domestic Violence Act.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

Recommendations

The Commission thinks section 17(2) is too  narrow,  and  suggest  that  the
word facility  should  be  replaced  with  residential  facilities  and  any
community based care and  support  service.  Furthermore  it  suggests  that
persons convicted of abuse should not be allowed to work in community  based
and especially home-based care services.

It further proposes that the register must include the  names  of  offenders
who are convicted of offences in which the victim is  an  older  person.  In
this manner, it says, it will ensure that  more  offenders’  names  will  be
placed  on  the  register.  It  is  possible  that  offenders  will  not  be
prosecuted in terms of the Older Persons Bill but rather in terms  of  other
common law or statutory criminal offences. It says more  clarity  is  needed
in the Bill on the Register. It wants this to be spelt out more  clearly  in
the Bill. Some of these issues include:

    • We need to consider what is the purpose of the Register?
    • How will it be used?
    • What information should be recorded on it?
    • Who will compile it?
    • Who will have access to it?
    • How long will a perpetrators name be on the register, it cannot be  on
      forever surely?
    • How will perpetrators be rehabilitated?
    • What about persons who abuse the elderly and  are  convicted  of  more
      serious crimes (e.g. rape), in terms of the present legislation  their
      names would not appear on the register as  the  charge  would  not  be
      abuse in terms of the Bill but rather common law rape.

Submitted by Alzheimer’s South Africa

While in principle, Alzheimer feels that this is important and needs  to  be
implemented; it argues that  the  practicalities  are  not  that  clear.  It
suggests that the record of notification, which was  previously  removed  by
the NCOP, should be reinstated into the Bill.

In respect of section 17(2), Alzheimer says that while  there  is  agreement
that peoples whose name appear in the register  should  not  work  with  the
elderly, it  is  concerned  that  this  only  applies  to  them  working  in
facilities, which means that they could still be employed to work  with  the
elderly in the community (e.g. providing home-care services).

7.8 Older person in need of care and protection

Submitted by Action on Elder Abuse South Africa

AEASA is not happy with the fact that the time  frames  are  not  specified,
and once the report has been made to a social worker,  there  is  no  “spur”
for action to be taken.  It alleges that the fact that there is  a  reported
shortage of social workers in the Department of Social  Development  and  in
many other organizations, this will place a significant  pressure  on  these
staff members to attend to cases  involving  children  first  and  foremost,
which means that the abused older person might not be assisted.

In section 18 (5) (d), AEASA is also  greatly  concerned  over  homelessness
amongst older persons.  It does not understand why  a  shelter”  is  defined
but not utilized in the Bill.

Submitted by South African Human Rights Commission

The Commission says the section places too  much  responsibility  on  social
workers that, it says, are currently stretched in terms  of  the  amount  of
work that it is expected of them. The ability  of  social  workers  to  cope
with this additional workload, the Commission, will  determine  whether  the
section will be used and adequately implemented  in  order  to  achieve  its
objectives. The Commission alleges that this section  fails  to  give  older
persons a voice as it does not provide for  them  to  report  incidences  of
abuse of which they are the victims. The Commission stresses the  importance
of recognizing, encouraging and empowering older persons to have  their  own
voice and where possible to report abuse that  they  suffer  themselves.  It
also claims that the section fails to provide  for  an  intersectoral  inter
departmental and  inter  organizational  coordinating  structure  that  will
ensure the holistic and  adequate  implementation  and  realization  of  the
Bills stated objectives and duties that it is imposes.

Recommendations

The Commission proposes that section 18(3) should  be  amended  as  follows:
“The Director-General, social workers, or  investigator  recognized  by  the
Department and working under the supervision of a social worker, to  whom  a
report has been made must investigate the matter.”

It further proposes that section 18(2) could  be  amended  as  follows:  Any
person, including an older person, other than a  person  in  subsection  (1)
who is of the opinion that an older person, or himself  or  herself,  is  in
need of care and protection may report such opinion to a social worker.

8. Chapter 4 [General and Supplementary Provisions]

8.1 Delegation

Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

The Council thinks it is important  that  norms  and  standards  established
under the Bill are national. It therefore wants  the  delegation  provisions
to recognize this.  It is opposed to idea of the establishment of norms  and
standards being delegated to provinces.  Furthermore  the  Council  suggests
that  the  delegation  provisions  should  also  be  compatible   with   the
constitutional powers of  and  relations  between  national  and  provincial
spheres


Regulations


Submitted by South African Council For The Aged

The Council suggests that some provision should be made for the  funding  of
compliance with regulations, especially under minimum  norms  and  standards
for admission to facilities, the use of subsidies and service standards.  It
also wants to see broad consultation  with  stakeholders  where  regulations
are made.

4. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the Annual Report  of  the
    National Department of  Health  2004/2005  and  for  it’s  entities  the
    Council for Medical Schemes and the Medical Research Council,  dated  15
    November 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the Annual Report
      of the National Department of Health 2004/2005 and for it’s entities
      the Council for Medical Schemes and the Medical Research Council,
      referred to it, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
      thereon.


      The Committee further reports as follows:

     1.  Background  information  on  submitting  annual  reports  of   the
        Departments and entities reporting thereto to Parliament

        On the 30th of September 2005 the National  Assembly  referred  the
        Annual Report of the National Department of  Health  2004/2005  and
        it’s entities the Council  for  Medical  Schemes  and  the  Medical
        Research Council, Department to the Portfolio Committee on  Health.
        The Committee decided to call upon  these  entities  for  extensive
        hearings on their Annual Reports,  Financial  Statements,  and  the
        report of the Auditor General.

        In terms of current National Assembly processes, all Parliamentary
        Portfolio Committees are required to consider and report on the
        annual reports of Departments and public entities after they are
        tabled in Parliament. The objective for consideration of the annual
        reports is to assess the performance of the department and public
        entities that report to the Department against the targets set in
        the previous financial year.


        Furthermore, the purpose of processing the annual reports from both
        the National Department and entities reporting thereto, is to
        ascertain whether the strategic plan, budget and business plan are
        in line with the requirements of section 654 (1) of the Public
        Finance Management Act (PFMA).

        The Committee, having  oversight  over  the  Department  of  Health
        together with entities that report to the Department, in  terms  of
        fulfilling its functions, has to report to Parliament on the Annual
        Reports, which cover all activities that the  Department  has  done
        during the year ending on 31 March 2005. This also applies  to  the
        financial statements that that Department must submit.


        The Committee having heard and considered evidence  on  the  Annual
        Report of the National Department  of  Health  2004/2005  and  it’s
        entities the Council for Medical Schemes and the  Medical  Research
        Council presents its report thereon.

        2. Overview of presentations on the Department of  Health  and  its
           entities

        2.1 Department of Health
        The Director General for the National Department of  Health,  Mr  T
        Mseleku  together  with  the  Chief  Financial   Officer   of   the
        Department, Mr G Muller presented the  2004/05  Annual  Report  and
        financial statement for the National Department of Health. The main
        focus  of   the   presentation   was   on   legislative   mandates,
        administration,  strategic   health,   health   services   delivery
        programmes and challenges

           1. Legislative mandates

        The legislative mandates for the departments are the Constitution
        of the Republic of South Africa, National Health and Care Acts,
        Public Finance Management Act and Medicines and Related Substances
        Act as well as the Medical Schemes Act.


        Mr Mseleku briefly gave  an  overview  of  the  priorities  of  the
        Department from  2004  to  2009.  Amongst  the  priorities  of  the
        Department the following were identified:-


            • Improving governance and management of  the  National  Health
              Services;
            • Improving of management of communicable and  non-communicable
              disease  through  strengthening  of  primary   health   care,
              emergency services and hospital delivery system; and
            • Contribute towards human dignity by improving quality of care
              and promotion of healthy lifestyle

        2.1.2 Programme Administration

        The programme presented by the Director General, provides improved
        integrated planning with provinces and districts as well as
        packages of care for primary health care, district hospitals and
        tertiary care. The administrative side of the Department also
        focussed on the review of annual reports of the provinces.

        2.1.3 Programme 2: Strategic Health Programmes

      This programme focussed on how provinces should work with the National
      Department in terms of integrating all activities within health care
      like telemedicine facilities, offering of VCT and PMTCT to patients.
      In their strategic programme the Department has managed to monitor 74
      NGO’s, that have been funded, issuing of licences to pharmacist, TB
      related issues have also been intensified.

      2.1.4 Programme 3: Health Service Delivery

      This programme covers guidelines to improve management for hospitals,
      which has been improved by 60%. Through its service delivery processes
      the Department had managed to improve employer relations with the
      National Department of Health and 55% of grievances have been solved
      internally.

      The Department also touched on improving hospital revitalisation
      programmes

        2.1.5 Challenges

      The challenges faced by the Department were:


            • TB control and campaign intensifications;
            • improvement of services in public hospitals;
            • retaining of and recruitment of health professionals; and
            • improvement of emergency medical services.

        The Committee deliberated on the Report and  raised  the  following
        concerns:


            • limited operations for 2004/05 in  regard  to  South  African
              Aids Trust;
            • concern about appointment of 5 trustees instead of 7 on South
              African Aids Trust;
            • failure by the Department to take  the  resolution  taken  by
              SCOPAs report on management;
            • issue of the slow pace of hospital revitalisation  especially
              in KwaZulu-Natal;
            • non-availability of business plans from 2 provinces  for  HIV
              and AIDS;
            • late submission of  reports  and  incomplete  information  on
              reports; and
            • lack of reconciliation and monitoring between the National


           Department and KwaZulu-Natal on expenditure.

        The Committee then RESOLVED to ACCEPT the Report by the national
        Department of Health

        2.2 Report by Council for Medical Schemes

        2.2.1 Background Information on Council for Medical Schemes


        The Council for Medical Schemes is a statutory body established by
        the Medical schemes Act to provide regulatory supervision of
        private health financing through medical schemes.  The governance
        of the Council is vested in a board appointed by the Minister of
        Health, consisting of a Non-executive Chairman, Deputy Chairman and
        13 members.


        The Executive Head of the Council is the Registrar, also appointed
        by the Minister in terms of the Medical Schemes Act. The Council
        determines overall policy, but day-to-day decisions and management
        of staff are the responsibility of the Registrar and the Executive
        Managers.

        2.2.2 Overview of presentation on Council for medical Schemes

        The main focus of the  presentation  by  the  Council  for  Medical
        Schemes was

         • Functional activities of the Council
         • Annual Financial Statements
         • Challenges

        2.2.3 Functional activities of the Council

        Activities that were indicated in  a  report  by  the  Council  for
        Medical Schemes were  the  monitoring  of  solvency  and  financial
        soundness  of  medical  schemes,  control  and  co-ordinating   the
        functioning of medical schemes in a manner  that  is  complementary
        with the  national  health  policy,  investigating  complaints  and
        settling disputes in relation to the affairs of medical schemes.

        The  Council  also  collects  and  disseminates  information  about
        private health care in South Africa, make rules (that are  in  line
        with the Medical Schemes Act) with regard to its own functions  and
        powers, and makes recommendations to  the  Minister  of  Health  on
        criteria for  the  measurement  of  quality  and  outcomes  of  the
        relevant health services provided for by medical schemes.

        The Council was  also  involved  in  a  project  that  focussed  on
        investigating causes of governance failure and  possible  solutions
        in a number of schemes that included Prosano, Protector Health  and
        Commed.

        In regard to valid complaints against medical schemes  the  Council
        had received 1848 complaints and was able to  solve  91%  of  these
        complaints as well as 20 appeals against decisions of disputes.


        2.2.4 Annual Financial Statements

        The Council indicated that the operating budget expenditure for the
        Council for 2004/05 was R34, 889.976 billion from a budget of R35,
        751 848 billion and this was covered by an income of R29 644,910
        plus a surplus of R6 million. In terms of audit reporting the
        Auditor General stated that the Council’s financial statements
        comply with requirements of Generally Accepted Accounting Practice
        (GAAP) and other applicable laws.

        2.2.5 Challenges

        Apart  from  the  work  that  the  Council  was  doing  there  were
        challenges that the Council was faced with:

         a) to ensure  that  more  people  could  afford  to  join  medical
            schemes;
         b) the issue concerning the high cost of private hospital services
            remains a challenge to the Council; and
         c) the continuance of pursuing fair treatment of  members  by  the
            medical schemes

        The Committee deliberated on the Report and raised the following
        concerns:


            • the decline  of  General  Practitioners  in  terms  of  total
              benefits paid;
            • the issue of broker fees which seemed to  have  increased  by
              206,4% was raised by the members;
            • 600 unpaid accounts which rose by 35,71%;
            • the increase of months for claims from 4.2 to 5.7 months; and
            • complaints from the clients that have not been resolved.

        The Committee then RESOLVED to ACCEPT the Report by the Council for
        Medical Schemes

        2.3 Medical Research Council

        2.3.1 Overview of presentation on Medical Research Council

        The Medical Research Council is  a  statutory  Council  established
        under Act 589 of 1991.  The  objectives  of  the  Medical  Research
        Council are to promote the improvement of the health and quality of
        life  of  the  population  of  South   Africa   through   research,
        development and technology. The Medical Research  Council  performs
        its functions as may be assigned to by and under the Act.

        The Council interacts  with  the  National  Department  of  Health,
        Department of Science and Technology together with 9 Health Science
        Councils and Non-Governmental Organisation as well as the Portfolio
        Committee on Health




        2.3.2 Functional activities of the Council


        The Medical Research Council is  engaged  in  research  translation
        through policy,  practice,  promotion  and  product.  The  National
        Department of Health is the principal channel,  through  which  the
        MRC research can improve the health of the nation as  the  National
        Department of Health develops national health policies to be tabled
        in Parliament, in conjunction with the 9 provinces.

       The Medical Research Council is also involved in research through
       practice by interacting with other stakeholders such as health care
       professionals, social workers and other professionals.


       The research that is done by the Medical Research Council through
       health promotion creates a healthy environment for South Africans
       because health choices that people can make protect their health and
       well being.  The Medical Research Council is involved in identifying
       the determinants underlying the behaviours that lead to disease
       determinants such as poverty, lack of education or gender power
       imbalances.


       The Medical Research Council was also involved, through its
       functional activities in developing products such as patents for new
       drugs and vaccines, medical devices and disclosure of new biomedical
       or public health processes such as training programmes for lay
       health workers.

      Other functional activities that the Medical research Council embarked
      on are:

         • Research strategy and business plan
         • New opportunities for research
         • Capacity building  (training  off  scientists  particular  black
           scientists)
         • Developing of new drugs within 3 years

      2.3.3 Annual Financial Statements

      The Council indicated that the operating budget expenditure for the
      Council for 2004/05 was R350 million. R180 million was a budget from
      Medical Research Council and R170 million was an amount from external
      income. The amount is reliably sustainable year after year.

      2.3.4 Challenges

      Challenges that are faced by the Council are:

         • R403 million which would be needed for  the  next  three  years.
           This amount would  be  needed  in  terms  of  facilitating  more
           research projects for the Council; and
         • Telemedicine  facilities  –That  the  Council  was  experiencing
           challenge  in  terms  of   not   having   a   policy   governing
           telemedicine.


      The Committee deliberated on the Report and raised the following
      concerns:

         • the budget of R180 million was not enough  taking  into  account
           the amount of work that was being done by the Council;
         • lack of skills in operational research capacity  both  in  South
           Africa and the South African Development Countries;
         • preparedness of Council in terms of dealing with the avian  flu;
           and
         • non-compliance with laws, rules  and  regulations  in  that  the
           Council has failed to  institute  a  fraud  prevention  plan  as
           required by Treasury Regulation 27.2.1.

        The Committee then RESOLVED to ACCEPT the  Report  by  the  Medical
        Research Council.


5. The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration
    Provincial Oversight Visit Report to: KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Eastern
    Cape and North West, 31 July to 12 August 2005, dated 16 November 2005:

   The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration undertook a
   provincial oversight to KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Eastern Cape and North
   West. The visit emanated from the Special Report No. 19 of the Public
   Protector 2002 to establish facts as to the validity of the claims that
   delays in communication, lack of co-ordination or the breakdown thereof,
   impacts negatively on service delivery.


Group A

1- 12 August 2005


KZN - Eastern Cape

PJ Gomomo - Delegation Leader - Chairperson
Mr. NE Gcwabaza(ANC)
Ms. HC Mgabadeli(ANC)
Mr. RS Ntuli(DA)
Dr. U Roopnarian(IFP)
Mr. R Sikakane(ANC)
Ms. Sheilla N. Mninzi(Stand-In Committee Secretary)
Mr. Victor Ngaleka(Parliamentary Reseracher)
Commissioners from the Public Service Commission:
Commissioner Mxakato-Diseko(PSC)
Commissioner M Msoki(PSC)
Commissioner PM Tengeni(PSC)
Ms. Shamiela Abrahams(Ministry DPSA)

Group B

1-12 August 2005
North West – Limpopo

R Baloyi – Delegation Leader
Mr. B Mthembu (ANC)
Mrs. L Maloney (ANC)
Mr. WW Skhosana (ANC)
Mrs. Mashangoane (ANC)

Commissioner K Mokgalong (PSC)
Commissioner RR Mgijima (PSC)
Commissioner JDS Mahlangu (PSC)
Commissioner KE Mahoai (PSC)
Mr. Lewis Rabkin – Ministry DPSA

CONTENTS

Chairperson’s Remarks                                    2

1. Introduction                                           3

2. Purpose/Significance of the Oversight Visit            3

3. The Construction of Classrooms/Schools                 5

4. Unannounced School Visits                             8

5. Water Service Provision                               10

6. Housing Delivery Services                              13

7. Social Security Provision                              15

8. Unannounced Hospital Visits                             16

9. The Way Forward                                              17

10. Recommendations                                             17

10.1. The building of schools, classrooms and clinics      17
10.2. Delivery of Water Services                           18
10.3. Delivery of social security services                 19
10.4. Housing Services                                    20
10.5. Compliance with Batho Pele and Managing Discipline 20

11. Conclusion: Towards Effective Oversight                21

12. Action Plan                                            22

13. Note of Appreciation                                        22

1. CHAIRPERSON’S REMARKS

The Portfolio Committee on Public Service  and  Administration  embarked  on
Provincial visits to the Eastern Cape,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo  and  North-
West, from 31 July to 12 August 2005. Upon this undertaking,  the  Committee
managed  their  programme   in   terms   of   detailed   communication   and
organisation.

2. SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY OF THE OVERSIGHT VISITS

This fact-finding mission of the Portfolio Committee on Public  Service  and
Administration was influenced and guided by  the  Public  Protector  Special
Report number 19 of 2002 which revealed that  delays  in  communications  in
the  Public  Service  have  a  negative  impact  in  service  delivery.  The
directives of other reports were also considered as  guiding  the  scope  of
the oversight visits, such as the following reports of  the  Public  Service
Commission. These are the:

(     Report on Remunerative work outside the Public Service,
(     The State of the Public Service Reports of 2003 and 2004.

The Committee decided to get more information  on  the  mission  by  way  of
interaction and interviewing officials and the Executive authorities of  the
National, Provincial  and  Local  Government  Departments  or  institutions,
parastatals, other service delivery agencies and  individuals,  particularly
those that are linked to one or another in the delivery of services  in  the
following areas:

   (  The construction of classrooms/schools
   (  The supply of water
   (  The delivery of houses
   (  The delivery of social security services; and
    □ The Management of discipline and compliance with Batho Pele
      standards.


3. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The Portfolio Committee appreciates the special support function rendered
by the various Departments, the Public Service Commission and the
Minister’s Office of the Department of Public Service and Administration,
for the role they played in the planning of and during the oversight
visits.


Chairperson: -------------------------------------------------------
                  P J Gomomo
Date: --------------------------------------------------------------

          PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION


                    REPORT ON PROVINCIAL OVERSIGHT VISITS


   The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration, having
   undertaken fact-finding visits to provinces, reports as follows:


   1. INTRODUCTION


1.1   The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration embarked
       on provincial oversight visits to the provinces of the Eastern Cape,
       KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo and North-West, from the 31 July to 12 August
       2005.


1.2   The decision on which the Portfolio  Committee  initiated  this  fact-
       finding mission was guided by the  Public  Protector  Special  Report
       number 19 of 2002, which revealed that delays in communication in the
       Public Service impacted negatively on service delivery.


1.3   In finding practical ways of pursuing and responding to the
      recommendations made in the Public Protector’s Special Report, the
      Portfolio Committee interacted with national, provincial and local
      government departments and institutions, parastatals and other
      agencies in the delivery of services. The oversight visits of the
      Portfolio Committee was concerned with and focused on five service
      delivery areas namely:


      The construction of classrooms/schools
      The supply of water
      The delivery of houses
      The delivery of social security service, and
      The  management  of  discipline  and  compliance   with   Batho   Pele
      principles.


   2. PURPOSE/SIGNIFICANCE OF THE OVERSIGHT VISIT


2.1   The purpose of the study was to investigate and gain an  understanding
      of progress that was being made to improve  service  delivery  by  the
      public service. In particular, the  Committee  wanted  to  assess  the
      impact of communication in service delivery and establish facts as  to
      the validity of the claim that delays in communication,  lack  of  co-
      ordination or the breakdown thereof,  impacts  negatively  on  service
      delivery.


2.2   The Committee was divided into two multi-party  groups,  Group  A  and
      Group B, with each group covering two  provinces  simultaneously  over
      the period of two weeks.  Group A concentrated  on  KwaZulu-Natal  and
      Eastern Cape  while  Group  B  focussed  on  Limpopo  and  North-West.
      However, the Committee emphasised that the visits were a  fact-finding
      and not a fault-finding mission.

2.3   Having considered the Public Protector Special Report No. 19 of  2002,
      the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and  Administration  decided
      to embark on oversight visits to selected Provinces  with  a  view  to
      establish facts about a finding that delays  in  Communication,  or  a
      breakdown  thereof,  impact  negatively  on  service   delivery.   The
      Committee thus voted that it would be necessary  to  select  areas  of
      focus where it could be established that there is a Communication link
      either internally in a  particular  Department,  between  Departments,
      between the Public and Government Departments.


2.4   In the delivery of housing, for  example,  the  Department,  does  not
      necessarily rely on the activities of other Departments, but there has
      to be very active Communication between  the  Department  and  various
      Developers, Contractors and suppliers of materials.   In  cases  where
      there is no such communication, the  housing  projects  are  often  at
      serious risk of not being completed, and when that happens, it is  the
      governments’ targets that get compromised.


2.5   It is a known fact that there is an  inter-sphere  communication  link
      in the delivery of water  services  between  the  Local  (Category  B)
      Municipalities, the District  (Category  C)  Municipalities,  and  the
      Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, such that where a gap exist,
      the delivery of the services may be further compromised.


2.6   For the effective  roll-out  of  the  Social  Security  Services,  the
      Department of Home Affairs plays  a  complimentary  role  to  that  of
      Social Development, and so is the Department of Health in dealing with
      the processing of applications for disability grants.

2.7   Whereas  the  Government  has  predetermined  a  time-period  for  the
      acquisitioning of documents as identity documents and the waiting time
      between applications for  registration  as  beneficiaries  of  various
      categories of Social Grants, we may not say for certain  that  all  is
      well. Where such anomalies occur, the impact is that the rendering  of
      such  services  are  affected  negatively.   The  prevalence  of  this
      tendency may be due to a Communication gap between the applicants  and
      the Departments concerned.


2.8   In the construction of classrooms, we see a  communication  link  betw
      een the  Department  of  Education  and  that  of  Public  Works.  The
      Committee’s decision to focus on these issues is due to the fact  that
      anyone of the two Departments, may fail to reach their target,  simply
      because the other one of them is not exerting  enough  effort  to  get
      things done according to the laid down communication.


   9. The Public Protector’s report also  made  a  finding  that  there  are
      problems related to the general compliance with Batho  Pele  and  that
      the Management of discipline in the Public Service  is  a  point  that
      needs attention. Accordingly, the Portfolio Committee will visit  some
      hospitals and schools.

   3. THE CONSTRUCTION OF CLASSROOMS/SCHOOLS


3.1   The Department of Education in the Eastern Cape is servicing  about  6
      642 schools, with 2,1 million learners. It has a backlog of  about  21
      248 classrooms; a significant number is in the Transkei region.  About
      1 487 schools have no toilets, 1 972 schools have no water  supply,  4
      333 schools have electricity and  90%  of  the  schools  do  not  have
      laboratories or libraries.


3.2   The Department has incurred  a  deficit  of  R600  million.  The  huge
      deficit impacts  negatively  on  the  functionality  of  schools.  The
      Department does not have funds to employ the necessary  administrative
      workforce as backup support to schools and as a result a  60%  vacancy
      gap exists within the department.


3.3   The Department was resistant to the Interim Management  Team  IMT  due
      to undue influence  and  strained  labour  relations  with  the  South
      African Democratic Teachers Union (SADTU) and the  National  Education
      and  Health  Workers  Union  (NEHAWU).  It  saw   the   influence   as
      interference in the  work  of  the  Department.  The  issue  of  undue
      influence by trade unions in the administration of the  Department  is
      an issue that needs urgent resolution at a political level.


3.4   The performance of the Department of Education  in  KwaZulu-Natal  has
      significantly improved over the last five years as demonstrated by the
      results of senior certificate candidates,  which  increased  from  49%
      since 1999 to 73% pass rate in last year’ s results.


3.5   While the Department of Education in the Eastern Cape  is  faced  with
      strained relations with labour, the Department in KZN enjoys good  and
      normalised relations with organised labour to the extent that there is
      greater willingness on the part of the both parties  to  cooperate  in
      resolving differences and in the provision of services.


3.6   The  Departments  of  Public  Works  in  Limpopo  indicated  that  the
      function of construction of classrooms is carried out  on  request  by
      the Department of Education. In  other  words  the  Department  should
      indicate to Public Works where schools should be built  and  how  many
      classrooms should be built. In spite of such problems, the  Department
      of Education in Limpopo managed  to  reduce  the  backlog  to  11  000
      classrooms.


3.7   In some cases in the province  of  Limpopo,  it  was  found  that  the
      learner-ratio was reasonable enough for a particular school but due to
      failures in  the  school  management  plans,  timetables  and  others,
      learners where then found studying under trees.


3.8   The Limpopo and  North-West  departments  of  Education  were  worried
      about over-crowding in schools.

      They reported that this is mainly due to the mobility  of  communities
      from rural areas to migrate to and settle in urban areas.  Related  to
      this, was the case of farmers turning their  farms  into  game  farms.
      Affected farm workers consequently move to urban areas and settle into
      Reconstruction and Development (RDP)  houses.  In  itself  this  is  a
      problem as it indicates cases where these RDP houses  are  being  sold
      for profit. The mobility of people to urban areas leaves farm  schools
      standing empty while in the urbanised areas this inevitably  leads  to
      over-crowding  of  classrooms  in  schools.  In  the  North-West,  for
      instance, farm owners refuse  to  sign  contracts  because  they  want
      exorbitant rental from the departments. The other problem is  that  of
      ablution facilities  at  schools  with  toilets  often  collapsing  or
      getting filled too quickly.


3.9   The North-West Education department explained  that,  amongst  others,
      there is no redress for infrastructure i.e. there is not enough  money
      available (e.g. backlogs of about R6.8 billion). The province  intends
      to build more schools, one per region; however, mobile classrooms with
      toilets are currently being used to ease the problem  of  overcrowding
      at some schools. These mobile classrooms will be moved to other  needy
      areas as soon as classrooms have been built.


3.10  All  the  departments  of  Public  Works  in  the  provinces   visited
      complained of shortages of appropriate skills in many  areas  such  as
      land and quantity surveying, engineers, etc. Another area  of  concern
      was on lack of clarity on who is having the  legal  responsibility  to
      maintain schools. In  this  regard,  it  surfaced  that  lack  of  co-
      ordination between the  Department  of  Public  Works,  Department  of
      Education and Municipalities was emerging with regards to the erecting
      of schools and servicing of water and electricity.


3.11  The other general challenge facing the visited provinces  was  in  the
      area of libraries, laboratories and ways of addressing the shortage in
      furniture.


3.12  While the depth and intricacy of challenges differ by province,  major
      challenges are in the areas of:


(     Temporary Teachers - The  question  of  temporary  teachers  keeps  on
   haunting the Departments.  The question is whether there is a possibility
   to overcome this problem at some stage.  Of course, it is just normal  to
   expect that whenever vacancies occur, such should be used to  accommodate
   the temporary teachers, but the departments argue that this is not always
   the case, because the School Governing Bodies may  prefer  to  appoint  a
   totally new applicant than absorb a temporary teacher and others like the
   Eastern Cape reached agreements with organised labour in  that  educators
   in excess must first  be  absorbed  before  the  temporary  ones  can  be
   absorbed.


3.13  The utilisation of inherited ”school inspectors”.   This  category  of
      employees are posing a serious threat to performance,  either  due  to
      allegiance to the old order and resistance to  change,  or  they  have
      just reached a  stage  where  they  cannot  learn  or  adjust  to  new
      strategies. The departments  called  on  the  Portfolio  Committee  to
      assist in the development of an audit plan.
3.14  While both the Departments of Public Works and Education in  the  four
      provinces visited are signatories to a service delivery  agreement  in
      the area of classroom construction, there are nonetheless  reports  of
      strained relations with each other and relations vary from fairly good
      to very bad. On the one hand the Department of  Education  blames  the
      Public Works department for taking too long to put  up  infrastructure
      and for allowing already existing infrastructure to degenerate,  while
      on the other hand the Department of Public  Works  complains  that  it
      experiences problems with Education with late  submission  of  request
      and lists of school requirements, thus not allowing it enough time  to
      adhere to its forward planning approach.

      It surfaced that the Departments of Public Works and Education have  a
      generally  volatile  relationship  that  regrettably  often  leads  to
      adverse points  of  contention  in  the  critical  area  of  classroom
      construction.


3.15   However,  the  overwhelming  majority   of   provincial   departments
      concerned are currently putting up interventionist measures to resolve
      the disagreements.  The  Committee  views  this  common  issue  as  an
      indication  of  the  wider  challenges  that  exist  between  the  two
      provincial departments and that corrective  measures  need  to  be  in
      place to find practical ways of dealing with these disputes  in  order
      to minimise and  eradicate  factors  that  act  as  obstacles  in  the
      delivery of service and particularly in the construction  of  schools.
      This  situation  is  coupled  by  poor  integrated  planning   between
      departments, parastatals and the private sectors.


3.16  In  relation  to  Black  Economic  Empowerment  (BEE),  all  the  four
      provincial departments of Public Works visited complained that the BEE
      imperatives have to be consulted when  awarding  tenders  and  warrant
      them  to  support  emerging  contractors.  They  indicated   that   in
      considering BEE the departments have  experienced  problems  with  BEE
      contractors being slow to deliver as a result of various factors  such
      as finances. Some BEE  contractors  often  leave  projects  incomplete
      because of lack of financial management skills.


3.17  When the Department of Public  Works  in  North-West  was  asked  what
      plans they have to attract experienced and renowned  contractors.  The
      department responded that if a contractor  shortens  the  construction
      period but still produces quality buildings, this will be added into a
      database for profiling and such contractors would stand a good  chance
      in future tendering.


3.18  Concerning learners who travel long distances on foot to  school,  the
      MEC  in  North-West  indicated  that  the  provincial  department   of
      Transport and Roads has requested Education to indicate the number  of
      learners involved in this category  and  what  mode  of  transport  it
      required but it took senior management +- 18 months to  provide  this.
      The matter is, nonetheless being pursued further.


      The  Committee  wishes  to  note  the  positive  reception  from   the
      department of education in KZN. The Committee was further  overwhelmed
      by progress  in  the  province  regarding  compliance  with  laws  and
      policies  like  poverty  alleviation,  strategic  plans,   performance
      management and others. What  emerged,  was  a  sense  of  urgency  and
      commitment. However, skills issues need to be improved  and  the  need
      for appropriate learners support material is an issue for concern.


   4. UNANNOUNCED SCHOOL VISITS


4.1   The purpose of the visits was to  look  at  issues  of  management  of
      discipline and support services to the schools,  which  emanates  from
      the report of the Public Protector. The Committee  visited  Wongalethu
      High in Mdantsane, in the Eastern Cape, Sejankabo High  in  North-West
      and Gija-Ngove High School in Limpopo.

4.2   The Committee discovered that Wongalethu High School in Mdantsane  has
      been consistently under-performing with a 13% senior certificate  pass
      rate last year. Moreover, in the past two years, the  school  operated
      without a  school  Principal  and  a  new  Principal  started  at  the
      beginning of this year replacing the caretaker acting Principal.

4.3   Lack of discipline was a prominent feature in the schools visited  and
      this was demonstrated by late coming from both learners and educators.
      At no time for instance has Sejankabo High in North-West enjoyed  100%
      attendance or presence of educators and learners in the year.

4.4   While Gija-Ngove High  school  in  Limpopo  has  been  obtaining  100%
      senior certificate passing rate  for  the  past  few  years,  lack  of
      parental guidance or involvement was seen as  the  major  contributing
      factor to problems  of  discipline,  as  parents  are  mainly  migrant
      labourers. This led to schoolgirls falling pregnant and increasing the
      volume and degree of teenage pregnancy and child  support  grants  for
      the province. This is further coupled  by  learners  using  drugs  and
      drinking alcohol even during school hours.


   5. Gija-Ngove High in Limpopo has 1094 enrolment with 40% of learners not
      paying schools fees resulting the school being turned into  and  given
      section 20 status and has about 25% late coming rate.  The  school  is
      currently sitting with a debt of about R11 000  for  installation  and
      servicing for machines. The school has a fairly good relationship with
      the SGB and communication with circuit is  very  good  and  effective.
      However, all parents want to  be  exempted  from  paying  school  fees
      whether  they  qualify  to  be  indigent  or  not.   The   school   is
      coincidentally located near shebeens and drug-infested area.

      The school is also faced with problems of facilities, where a class of
      60 learners is equipped with only 20 chairs.


4.6   Wongalethu High in the Eastern Cape was also characterised by  a  lack
      of co-operation between the Principal  and  the  rest  of  the  school
      management team. This was clearly demonstrated by the failure  of  the
      deputy Principal as one of the managers in the school management  team
      to submit quality test assurance or assessments of the pupils  on  the
      last quarter, resulting in prejudice to the learners final year marks.


4.7   The Committee was further alarmed  by  information  that  the  schools
      visited are not the only ones encountering such problems as  mentioned
      above in 4.6 and in fact about 18 of other schools might  possibly  be
      experiencing  such  problems.  The  Committee  feels  strongly   about
      pursuing this issue.


4.8   The Committee was surprised to learn of  section  21  schools  as  the
      establishment of such provisions  where  never  explained  to  it  and
      forwarded to its attention  by  relevant  departments.  The  Committee
      wants to determine whether the issue of section 21 schools  points  to
      gaps in legislation.
4.9.  The other problem  that  troubled  a  significant  number  of  schools
      visited relates to the agreement with the  teachers  union  where  the
      educators in excess must first be absorbed before the  temporary  ones
      can be absorbed.  Hence in Limpopo some of the best  teachers  at  the
      schools are temporary teachers and the affected schools may lose  them
      at the end of the year.

4.10  Sejankabo High School is faced with a  decline  in  the  enrolment  of
      learners. There is also a high rate of vandalism of  the  school.  The
      passing rate  has  declined  from  85%  in  1996  to  29.8%  in  2003;
      absenteeism remains a problem and proper school uniforms are not being
      worn by learners.

4.11  When asked about the school success rate despite the  challenges,  the
      Gija-Ngove teachers explained  that  good  relationships  between  the
      staff and he School governing body (SGB), a  no-nonsense  approach  by
      the school management team, no tolerance to absconding from study  and
      attendance have been the key  factors  behind  the  school’s  success.
      Educators are made to feel ownership of the school by allowing them to
      make suggestions on the running of the school.

4.12  When asked about learners who perform below expectations,  the  school
      responded that parental consultations take place regularly in order to
      deal with learners who are under-performing.  Learners are urged to be
      at school even during examination times while not  writing  any  paper
      and that peers and prefects monitor other learners.


4.13  When asked whether Learner Support Materials (LSMs)  are  received  on
      time, the school explained that the problem with LSMs is that they are
      not allocated  to  specific  learners.   Therefore,  LSMs  are  always
      insufficient when compared with the demand. In  most  cases  there  is
      either under-supply or over supply of books.

4.14  The  Portfolio  Committee  feels  that  the  failure  of  the  Deputy-
      Principal to submit the quality test assurance needs to  be  taken  up
      with the Department of Education. It views this as an example of gross
      misconduct on the part of the educator.

4.15  The Committee appreciates  the  teacher-learner  relationship  in  the
      province, however, notes that teacher deployment in the  Eastern  Cape
      province in not complemented with other packages.

4.16  The lack of discipline on the part of  educators  and  learners  is  a
      matter that needs urgent measures to reverse the decline in  the  case
      of Wonga-Lethu and the other 18 schools mentioned in 4.6 and 4.7.

4.17  It was noted with concern that  generally  across  provinces  learners
      are taught in the vernacular languages whilst they would  be  examined
      in English. The issue of the educators’ proficiency in  English  needs
      to be addressed.


   5. WATER SERVICE PROVISION


5.1   The Portfolio Committee interacted with the  representative  of  DWAF,
      and District and Local Municipalities, which are government structures
      concerned with the provision of water services.

5.2   Amatole District Municipality in the Eastern Cape is a coastal
      district municipality situated in the eastern mid-section of the
      Eastern Cape Province with a population size of approximately 1.6
      million and estimated land extent of 23 675 square kilometers. There
      are eight local “B” municipalities (Mbashe, Mnquna, Great Kei, Buffalo
      City, Amahlathi, Ngqushwa, Nkonkobe, and Nxuba) to which Amatole is
      the water service provider. Located within its boundary is the Buffalo
      City, which is a secondary city, providing its own water to citizens.

5.3   Prior to 2003, the Department of Water Affairs and forestry (DWAF)
      was the sole provider of water services. Since the introduction of the
      new system of local government, local municipalities have assumed
      responsibility for the provision of water, whilst the department
      remains the regulator. The process of changing the function of
      municipalities to service providers depends on resources and the
      competence and capacities of staff. It is recognised that some of the
      municipalities lack capacity but the district municipality has plans
      to augment the funding and capacity where there are shortages.

5.4   The Amatole District Municipality as the regulator has developed
      policies and by-laws, which have been gazetted. However, the challenge
      faced by the municipality is to enforce these by-laws.

5.5   The municipality is committed to the national targets as  set  out  in
      the government’s Plan of Action to ensure that communities have access
      to clean running water by  2010.  It  faces  huge  challenges  in  the
      Transkei to provide and develop sources of water.

5.6   Institutional relationships with  local  municipalities  in  terms  of
      section  83  of  the  Structures  Act  to  provide  support  to  local
      municipalities appears to be inadequate as it puts the  sole  emphasis
      on political responsibility. There is hope that the  Intergovernmental
      Relations Framework Act (IGRFA) will positive outcomes in this regard.

5.7    The  Committee  believes  that  in  the  delivery  of  water  related
      services, strong communication and co-ordination links  between  local
      municipalities, district municipalities and DWAF  must  be  maintained
      and where they do not exist needed to be initiated.
5.8   The Mopani District Municipality reported that in the period  1996  to
      2001 it experienced increased figures for non-access for water-related
      services due to population increases and migration trends.

5.9    The  district  municipality  further  reported  that  the  policy  of
      prioritising water provision has resulted in  budgetary  decreases  in
      other areas of services.


5.10   Again  regarding  the  devolution  of   water   services   to   local
      municipalities: the part to Mopani District Municipality was not ready
      to deliver services to the people due in capacity constraints.


5.11  It was also reported that DWAF is  not  responsive  to  the  needs  of
      municipalities despite existing service level agreements. DWAF appears
      to be refusing to refurbish the schemes before  transferring  them  to
      the  municipality.  Moreover,   DWAF   transferred   the   scheme   to
      BaPhalaborwa without transferring cost recovery infrastructure and  as
      a result BaPhalaborwa owes the Water Board R90 million.


5.12  The  Greater  Giyani  and  Greater  Letaba  Municipalities  have  been
      identified to be part of Project  Consolidate  and  hopes  to  benefit
      greatly from the project.

5.13  The overwhelming majority  of  government  structures  concerned  with
      water provision indicated that the economic status of the users impact
      on  their  ability  to  recover  costs.  80%  of  the   workforce   of
      BaPhalaborwa municipality has been retrenched from the mines. However,
      where supply of  water  is  consistent,  payment  is  normally  not  a
      problem.


5.14  The Committee discovered the following:


(     There are fears that the transfer of  staff  from  the  Department  of
   Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  (DWAF)  municipalities   may   result   in
   overstaffing at local level.
(      The  capacity  of  DWAF  schemes  are   designed   to   service   the
   reconstruction and Development Plan (RDP) housing schemes  in  areas  and
   not other informal settlements.
(     Some villages are receiving water for only 4  hours  per  day.  Others
   have no electricity and water supply due to various problems.
(     There are delays due to municipalities having to redesign the scheme.
   There is poor communication between DWAF and the District  Municipalities
   that result in the under-spending of funds earmarked for water supply.
(     DWAF transferred funds  (allocated  mostly  to  capital  projects)  to
   District Municipalities  as  Water  Services  Authorities  for  2003/2004
   financial year. These funds were not spent.
(     Funds collected by the local  municipalities  do  not  always  end  up
   being reimbursed to DWAF for operating the scheme.
(     There is a Service Level Agreement  (SLA)  between  the  District  and
   DWAF but it is difficult to enforce.
(     There is a capacity problem within the  municipalities  to  carry  out
   cost recovery of services delivered.
(     Sometimes Municipalities appoint contractors who are not qualified  to
   do the job without any documentation. This leaves  DWAF  with  no  option
   than remaining silent on problems with construction.
(     There are  different  service  delivery  standards  between  different
   government departments. There are,  for  example,  no  unified  standards
   detectable between sanitation  facilities  built  by  the  Department  of
   Public Works and those provided by DWAF.
(      Communication  and  co-ordination:  Provincial  departments  are  not
   communicating and not co-ordinating when they proceed with  the  transfer
   of functions.
(     There is an Energy Forum but it has  problems  because  ESKOM  changes
   electricity  units  without  consulting  the  Energy  Forum.  Free  Basic
   Electricity is therefore also a challenge to act on and deliver to  those
   who needs it most.
(     Allocations of free basic water and electricity, based on  the  number
   of indigent people in areas are problematic in instances where  the  area
   is constituted of people with mixed income levels.
(      The  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  made  by  the  Department  of
   Environmental Affairs delays project implementation.
(     Technical reports have to be approved by DWAF and they  further  delay
   project implementation.


   6. HOUSING DELIVERY SERVICES


6.1   The Portfolio Committee in the Eastern Cape met  with  the  provincial
      Department of Housing. The strategic objective of the Department is to
      support the capacity of local government  in  its  plans  of  building
      affordable houses that meet the special needs of the  most  vulnerable
      in our society through an integrated infrastructure development.

6.2   The plan of the Department is to address the backlog focusing on  both
      rural and urban areas. The two urban areas identified  are  Soweto  on
      Sea in the Nelson Mandela Metropolitan Municipality and Duncan Village
      in Buffalo City Municipality. The Department of Housing in the Eastern
      Cape faces the challenge of meeting the Millennium Goals  of  clearing
      slums by 2014 and offering sustainable human  settlement  to  all  our
      people. There are problematic areas regarding a  working  relationship
      with traditional leadership in the province but  these  are  less  are
      less pronounced than in KwaZulu Natal (KZN).

6.3   The Department of Housing in KZN claimed that it was  unaware  of  the
      visit by the Portfolio Committee and was, therefore, not in a position
      to meet it. After persuasion, the Head of the Department, reluctantly,
      agreed to meet and arranged discussions with the  Portfolio  Committee
      on challenges facing housing delivery in the province.

6.4   The Committee notes with regret that the department  in  KZN  was  not
      prepared to receive the Committee. The Committee, however, is  of  the
      view that such occurrences appear to point to  key  flaws  within  the
      communication structures in the department.

6.5   One of the major challenges facing housing delivery in the KZN  arises
      from the strained relations between  the  traditional  leadership  and
      elected  leadership.  This  relationship  needs  the  intervention  of
      politicians on a continuous basis to clarify the  distinct  roles  and
      functions of the traditional and elected leaders.

6.6   In Limpopo, service delivery standards  have  been  developed.   There
      are policies for service delivery, but there are challenges  with  the
      implementation thereof.


6.7   The absence of a  centralised  call  centre  in  KZN  was  noted  with
      concern. For the period 1994-1999 the housing development process  was
      performed by the Department,  which  played  a  role  as  one  of  the
      structures in the delivery chain,  but  with  effect  from  1999,  the
      Department is playing the role of  a  developer.  Municipalities  draw
      priority lists and identify beneficiaries for  housing  projects  that
      are  forwarded  to  the  provincial  housing  department.    Acts   of
      corruption have been identified.

   8. In dealing with Municipal  Infrastructure  Grant  Projects  (MIG)  the
      department in Limpopo noted a serious delay  in  developing  plans  by
      municipalities. Defaulters in the management  of  projects  are  dealt
      with according to the nature of the default, e.g. blacklisting for non-
      payment.


6.9   The Matlhoks project was mentioned as a typical case of projects  that
      are affected by communication and co-ordination problems. It was noted
      at the meeting that there is a need for this project  to  be  followed
      up.

6.10  The department of housing in the North-West  province  indicated  that
      for the 2003/2004 financial years it under-spent to an amount of  R142
      Million and are currently sitting with +-R610 Million for housing.  It
      was further pointed out that in an effort to address the deficiencies,
      a program has been put in place to  visit  all  21  municipalities  to
      empower them as developers so that the funds can be used.

6.11  When asked as to why the department has a housing  backlog  whilst  it
      claims to be sitting with R610 million, the Chief  Director  responded
      that the transfer of monthly funding by  the  National  Department  of
      Housing is not done within the allocated time period. This results  in
      material being bought on credit and the department failing to  pay  on
      time  with  the  results  that  suppliers  are  reluctant  to  deliver
      material. Construction workers who have not  been  paid  also  abandon
      projects.

6.12  When asked what  is  being  done  with  municipalities  that  fail  to
      deliver, the response was that such  municipalities  are  required  to
      return the responsibilities to the department.

6.13  Responding to what action the department  utilise  when  the  National
      Department fails to transfer monthly funding in time, the  North  West
      provincial department indicated that it is co-co-ordinating well  with
      its national counterpart. This is evidenced by  the  local  department
      being a member of all  the  task  teams  of  the  national  department
      concerned with housing delivery.
6.14   The  Portfolio  Committee  further  wanted  to  know  whether  skills
      transfer programmes between the department and contractors are  taking
      place. The department stated that this is  being  dealt  with  through
      tripartite  agreements  between  the  department,  municipalities  and
      contractors.


6.15  On the subject of the role  of  the  Housing  Corporation  in  housing
      delivery, the department revealed that  the  entity  in  question  was
      inherited from the past regime and its  role  was  mainly  to  provide
      rental housing e.g. flats  but  does  not  have  a  role  in  the  new
      dispensation on housing delivery.

6.16  When the Committee enquired about the  extent  of  progress  regarding
      the eradication of  bucket  system  along  the  Millennium  aims.  The
      department indicated that R1 Billion to R5  Billion  is  required  for
      rural sanitation in order to eradicate  the  bucket  system  from  our
      society. Funding is thus the main problem as some  municipalities  are
      not able to counter funds because they have very poor revenue bases.

6.17  Unfortunately,  because  the  Provincial  Housing  Department’s  Chief
      Directorate has just recently been staffed,  the  Portfolio  Committee
      could not get a detailed account of what caused backlogs in  the  past
      years.

   7. SOCIAL SECURITY PROVISION
7.1   The Portfolio Committee met with the provincial Departments of  Social
      Development and  the  Regional  Offices  of  the  Department  of  Home
      Affairs.

7.2   The Department of Social Development  in  the  Eastern  Cape  has  two
      components, the Social Grant and Development  components.  The  Social
      Grant component is in the process of  being  transferred  to  the  new
      Social Security Agency (SASSA). The target date  for  the  new  Social
      Security Agency is 6 April.

7.3   The objective of the Social Development component will be  to  provide
      protection to the most vulnerable and reducing  dependence  on  social
      grants. It wants  to  ensure  that  areas  of  social  protection  are
      focused.

7.4   The department is to focus on  income  generation  projects.  It  will
      also address issues of children in  conflict  with  the  law  and  the
      protection of the elderly.

7.5   Communication in the Department was found to be a problem  area.   The
      Social Services department in  KZN  has  experienced  an  increase  in
      litigation over the last few years. The litigations are in  connection
      with  non-approval  of  applications  for  social  grants   or   their
      termination.  Because  of  problems  it  encountered  with  the  State
      Attorney, it  opted  to  acquire  and  use  the  services  of  private
      practitioners. This is a case that the Portfolio  Committee  wants  to
      raise with relevant structures and such as the Department  of  Justice
      and Constitutional Development.

7.6   The Department in KZN has opted for a single service provider  to  pay
      out social grants to beneficiaries for the whole of the province. This
      is also a matter the Portfolio Committee feels should be examined.  In
      particular, the Portfolio Committee wants to investigate the issue  of
      whether it is appropriate that  the  service  of  actual  payments  of
      social grants should be privatised.

7.7    The  Portfolio  Committee  commended  the  Department  on  pay-points
      specifically with regards to the provision of shelters and chairs  for
      the beneficiaries. It felt, however,  that  there  should  be  a  more
      effective regulation of  traffic,  hawkers  and  moneylenders  in  the
      vicinity of the pay-points. In view of the fact that the beneficiaries
      are elders, disabled people and children arrangements should  be  made
      with the local clinics and day hospitals for paramedics,  nurses  and,
      or a doctor to be on standby for cases of emergency.


7.8   In the Limpopo Province, the Portfolio  Committee  was  able  to  meet
      both the department of Social Development as well as a social security
      pay-point in Ngove. The relevant recommendations regarding  these  are
      made in the sections detailing recommendations.

7.9   The  Committee  notes  with  regret  that  the  department  of  Social
      Development in KZN has enormous backlogs of  unprocessed  applications
      and this issue needs to be followed up on.

  10. The Portfolio Committee noted the outsourcing of  social  services  to
      private  contractors  performing  the  function  on  behalf   of   the
      department in KZN.

7.11  There appears to be slow progress  in  Msinga  in  the  past  7  years
      because  of  infrastructure  not  properly  exploited   due   to   the
      unwillingness  of  traditional  leaders.  The  Committee  feels   that
      traditional leaders in the  province  have  to  adapt  to  the  social
      structure of  the  wider  society.  The  traditional  leaders  in  the
      province appear to be blocking progress.

   8. UNANNOUNCED HOSPITAL VISITS


8.1   The Portfolio Committee made unannounced visits to hospitals  as  part
      of  observations  to  determine  compliance  with   the   Batho   Pele
      Principles. Visits were conducted in the Giyani Health Centre, Cecelia
      Makiwane, and Grey’s  Hospital,  North  Dale  Hospital  and  Bophelong
      Hospital.

8.2   The Portfolio Committee made an unannounced visit to Cecelia  Makiwane
      Hospital in the Eastern Cape.  It spoke to  the  medical  staff,  from
      doctors to nurses and general workers. It  also  to  patients  in  the
      maternity wards, it visited paediatric and the psychiatric wards.

8.3   The hospital showed clear signs of debilitation. However, it was  kept
      clean. The Portfolio committee was very impressed  by  the  commitment
      and passion by employees to the  provision  of  quality  service.  The
      overwhelming majority of the hospitals visited  raised  common  issues
      relating to staff retention, shortages and resources.

8.4   The North-Dale Hospital in KZN is a district hospital, which  services
      communities  from  Umgungundlovu,  Uthukela,  Umzinyathi,  Ilembe  and
      Sisionke. Northdale is a referral hospital that receives patients from
      the Primary Health Clinics and Community Health Clinics.

8.5   The Hospitals visited in the  province  appear  to  be  struggling  on
      staff retention, which point to a  need  for  improved  conditions  of
      work.

8.6   The Hospital just like the other rural  municipalities  visited  would
      like to see the hospital re-categorised from a small district hospital
      to take into account the geographical area it covers,  and  additional
      funding that goes with re-categorisation.

   9. THE WAY FORWARD


   There is need for:


(     A national co-ordinating  structure  to  deal  with  local  issues  of
   service delivery e.g. the housing delivery, and  deal  with  problems  in
   traditional leadership areas.
(     Regarding the flight of skills from hospitals,  led  by  the  PSC  and
   other appropriate state organs: A structure need to be established at the
   national level which, in terms of the Committee’s  observation,  emanates
   not  only  from  conditions  of  employment  but  also  from  our  policy
   framework.
(     Provinces need to be provided with a copy of  the  report  before  the
   following up on issues to afford them the  opportunity  of  studying  the
   findings and recommendations of the Committee.
(     A review of the issue of functions as they relate  to  the  Department
   of   Public   Works,   Education   and   local   government    structures
   (municipalities) in the area of classroom  construction  and  maintenance
   thereof should take place.
   Initiate bilateral meetings with SADTU and others  in  the  Eastern  Cape
   around IMT-related issues.


    10. RECOMMENDATIONS


   In this section, recommendations are grouped under appropriate numbered
   headings. Please note that each specific recommendation is bulleted.


   10.1. The building of schools, classrooms and clinics:
   1. The Committee recommends the following:
(     There is a need for the establishment of a  Provincial  Infrastructure
   Co-ordination Unit to co-ordinate  plans  of  various  institutions  like
   Eskom for provision of  electricity,  Department  of  Water  Affairs  for
   provision of water, Department of Education  for  provision  of  schools,
   Public Works for construction  of  the  said  classrooms  and  Roads  and
   Transport for provision of roads and transport routes.
(     Maintenance  of  school  buildings  could  be  incorporated  into  the
   Expanded Public Works Programme.
(     The volatile relationship between  the  Department  of  Education  and
   Public Works might have to be addressed at national  level  in  order  to
   ensure improvements in service delivery.
(     The provincial departments concerned must look  at  the  possibilities
   of reconciling the  socio-economic  imperatives  of  BEE  and  the  wider
   national democratic principles of a better life for all.
(     The Committee wants to note that the issue of BEE as it unfolds, is  a
   problem  and  that  the  standard  of  work  tends  to   compromise   the
   construction of schools. The Committee further wants to consider  whether
   the departments should pursue or glance the issue of BEE at  the  expense
   of adequate classroom construction.

   2. The provincial Department of Education in Limpopo and North West
   expressed a view that the function of schools being built can be
   expressed as their area of function. There is tension between the
   Department of Public Works and DoE regarding this. The view expressed is
   that DoE should be allowed to build schools while Public Works should
   take responsibility of its long term maintenance. Is there a need to
   review the role of Public Works? In this regard, the Portfolio Committee
   makes two recommendations:


(     DPSA to investigate relevance of division of responsibilities between
   the two departments concerned.
(     PSC in conjunction with CSIR to investigate a mechanism/capital
   project management tool that would assist DoE. This is also applicable to
   Housing.


3. The issue of school buildings and clinics that need to be erected
   is a serious one: The question of Health and DoE’s apparent
   failure to plan ahead and communicate needs and requirements with
   Public Works lies at the core of the tension around the quality of
   buildings.


(     The Portfolio Committee recommends that steps be taken to ensure that
   standards are set which would apply across the board.
   The Committee further recommends that the PSC investigate Education
   Development Trust Fund (EDTF) in North West and Limpopo. The key question
   that should drive this investigation is:
   Does the EDTF benefit education generally or certain individuals only?
   It is recommended that the PSC investigate the existence of EDTF in all
   provinces.


   10.2. Delivery of Water Services:


   In terms of the Water Services Act, the Department of Water Affairs and
   Forestry (DWAF) is the regulator and District and local municipalities
   are deliverers. These different roles are still being implemented. The
   truth of the matter is that there has been no transfer of staff from the
   national DWAF to municipalities. The quality of service delivery is being
   compromised by the slow progress in this regard.
(     The Portfolio Committee of Public Service and Administration
   recommends that these transfers be expedited.
   DWAF should extend water plants instead of putting up more bore holes.
(     The Portfolio Committee should meet the District and  BaPhalaborwa  on
   the water crisis as a matter of extreme urgency.
(     A way of channelling funding from ESKOM to municipalities needs to  be
   explored.
(      Regarding  problems  of  unemployment  around  BaPhalaborwa  due   to
   retrenchments: The municipality needs to be assisted to revive the  local
   economy.
(     DPSA should be approached to assist on a consultancy  basis  with  the
   much-anticipated staff transfers to municipalities from DWAF.
(     The Municipalities need to take stock of  their  readiness  to  handle
   the distribution of electricity to the indigent in all communities

(     The inter-sectoral committee  envisaged  in  Collaborative  Committees
   envisaged in Collaborative Committees should be pursued as a  vehicle  to
   promote communication between different levels of government as  well  as
   between departments.
(     There is a need to capacitate municipalities to be able  to  implement
   cost recovery of services delivered.
(      The  transfer  of  staff  from  DWAF  to  municipalities  should   be
   accompanied by a budget.
(     The possibility of making the infrastructure  transfer  from  DWAF  to
   municipalities needs to be explored by  an  inter-departmental  committee
   driven at Ministerial level as guided by the Inter governmental Relations
   Framework Act (IGRFA).
(     DWAF is requested to furnish the Portfolio Committee with  a  list  of
   municipalities that are unable to spend money that has  been  transferred
   to them.


   The Portfolio Committee would also need to interact with  the  Department
   of Minerals and  Energy  around  the  issue  of  collaboration  with  the
   municipalities on the supply of electricity. This would also  require  an
   interaction with relevant  stakeholders  involved  in  the  provision  of
   electricity  such  as  ESKOM,  Energy  Distribution  Industry  (EDI)  and
   National Energy Regulator (NER).


   10.3. Delivery of social security services:


   The issue of security at disability, foster care and pension pay out
   points.
   Absence of toilet facilities, medical facility, shelter at these points.
   Issue of transport.
(     Having noted these, the Portfolio Committee recommends that the
   inspectorate in different departments in regions do regular check up on
   vendors selling meat, medical items, etc.

(     There is a serious need for the appropriate placing of pay-points
   where people have to collect their social and disability grants. Current
   pay points are often located in inaccessible places that makes access to
   funds difficult and often dangerous.
(     The Portfolio Committee recommends that the Department of Social
   Development investigate this issue.


   In the North West there are no hospital boards as they were suspended due
   to investigations.
(     The Portfolio Committee recommends that they be re-established.


   There is serious disagreement in the local community in Swart Ruggens
   regarding the building of a hospital as there is a move to close the
   local clinic in the rural area so that people would have to travel very
   far for medical services. A similar problem exists in the Eastern Cape
   where staff and patients are up in arms as an orthopaedic clinic was
   moved from a rural to urban area, making it almost impossible for
   patients to access medical services. The subsequent answers provided by
   the MEC, is proof of the fact that issues are really not well
   communicated to the people.


(     The Portfolio Committee recommends that Provincial departments take
   note of this and address it. In addition, the Portfolio Committee
   requires a follow-up with the Department of Health nationally so that
   issues where people are not properly informed provincially and locally in
   provinces can be addressed. The problem of the huge shortage of medical
   doctors must in addition also be raised.


   The instrument used to state which hospital have rural allowance (as an
   incentive for medical doctors to work there) or not needs to be
   clarified, as well as the grading of hospitals where these are often
   converted into clinics, health centres.


(     The Portfolio Committee recommends a follow-up with the Department of
   Health nationally and would like to set up a joint committee meeting with
   the Portfolio Committee on Health in this regard.


   The Portfolio Committee recommends the establishment a mechanism to deal
   with Foster Care Grants. The Portfolio Committee further recommends that
   the Department of Social Development needs to communicate to the
   Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration the status of
   Foster Care Grants.


   Regarding  the  Limpopo  Province,  the  Portfolio  Committee  made   the
   following recommendations:


(     There is a need to encourage beneficiaries (especially  child  support
   grants) to receive their monies from other alternative methods.
(     The trading at the site of the pay point needs to  be  controlled  and
   co-ordinated to ensure that high level  of  ethics  are  uphold  and  the
   vulnerability of the beneficiaries are not taken advantage of.
(     The department needs to undertake awareness amongst  beneficiaries  to
   be aware of sharks, other unscrupulous traders.
Environmental health offices need to  monitor  the  activities  at  the  pay
   points.


   Inter-departmental collaboration need to take place at the social
   security pay-points to address and monitor various aspects that relates
   to social security of the indigent, such as visible policing, home
   affairs, trading, health, environment, etc.


   10.4. Housing Services:
   The underspending of budgets for houses to be built in the North West:
   The province put down a good plan to deal with these delays.
(     The Portfolio Committee requires regular feed back regarding the
   targets that Department set itself.


   10.5. Compliance with Batho Pele and Managing Discipline


 □ Provincial Departments of Education needs to report to the Portfolio
   Committee on their performances.  Also Members of Parliament
 □ with Constituency Offices in these provinces is to visit schools
   regularly to oversee these developments. Wonga Lethu and others must be
   visited again as well. Problem with management pulling together.


   This should be extended to the other 18 schools that failed to submit
   year marks. Schools in former Transkei must be visited to see what is
   going on in terms of Batho Pele and management.
(     The Portfolio Committee is to set up communication between DoE
   management and the South African Democratic Teachers Union (SADTU) in the
   Eastern Cape (The Portfolio Committee on Education should be engaged
   regarding such a visit).


(     The specific recommendation is to write to the Minister of Education
   and respective Members of Executive Councils responsible for Education in
   provinces about why those teachers guilty of not handing in year marks
   were not charged with misconduct. The Issue of teacher absenteeism on pay
   day with children being left alone on classrooms is a serious one that
   must be addressed urgently.


(     The PSC to investigate the recruitment of principals.


   A problem with communication between Department of Minerals and Energy,
   and Eskom has been noted as having negative influences on service
   delivery.


   The Portfolio Committee recommends that this be communicated to the
   Department of Minerals and Energy.


   11. CONCLUSION: TOWARDS EFFECTIVE OVERSIGHT


11.1  The Portfolio  Committee  convened  a  workshop  after  the  oversight
      visits to assess the issues that arose during the visits  as  part  of
      the preparation of this  report  to  Parliament.  It  held  a  one-day
      workshop on the 12th September 2005  in  Parliament  in  which  Public
      Service Commissioners who were part of the visits  also  participated.
      It was clear, after this assessment, that there is a need for  follow-
      up visits to these provinces and  institutions  in  order  for  us  to
      accomplish the mission of the oversight visit. The Portfolio Committee
      needed to give an opportunity to key  stakeholders  to  express  their
      views on issues that arose during the oversight visit.


11.2  With a view to taking action, the Portfolio Committee was of the  view
      that the institutions in the following action plan should  be  invited
      to a hearing on the delivery topics mentioned  below,  in  order  that
      they can express their views on  the  issues  that  arose  during  the
      oversight visit.

                                 ACTION PLAN


   |SUBJECT      |IMPLEMENTING AGENCY    |Comment                       |
|Classroom    |DWAF                   |The National Departments of   |
|Construction |DPLG                   |Water Affairs and Forestry and|
|             |Water Boards           |the Department of Provincial  |
|             |Eskom                  |and Local Government should be|
|             |EDI                    |given an opportunity to relate|
|             |NER                    |to the issues raised during   |
|             |                       |the provincial visits. The    |
|             |                       |Water Boards in some of the   |
|             |                       |provinces need to be          |
|             |                       |interacted with on the issues |
|             |                       |relating to the provision of  |
|             |                       |water. The Portfolio Committee|
|             |                       |would also need to interact   |
|             |                       |with the Department of        |
|             |                       |Minerals and Energy around the|
|             |                       |issue of collaboration with   |
|             |                       |the                           |
|             |                       |municipalities on the supply  |
|             |                       |of electricity. That would    |
|             |                       |also require an interaction   |
|             |                       |with the stakeholders in the  |
|             |                       |provision of electricity such |
|             |                       |as Eskom, EDI and NER.        |
|Social       |Safety & Security      |The Portfolio Committee would |
|Security     |Home Affairs           |need to interact with other   |
|             |Health                 |Departments, which are key to |
|             |                       |the provision of social       |
|             |                       |security services, such the   |
|             |                       |Departments of Safety and     |
|             |                       |Security, Home Affairs and    |
|             |                       |Health.                       |
| Housing     |Housing                |There is a need to interact   |
|Provision    |DPLG                   |with the National Departments |
|             |Land Affairs and       |of Housing, Land Affairs and  |
|             |Agriculture            |Agriculture and Provincial and|
|             |                       |Local Government on issues    |
|             |                       |that relate to housing, roles |
|             |                       |and functions of local        |
|             |                       |authorities, traditional      |
|             |                       |leadership and land.          |
|             |                       |                              |


   A NOTE OF APPRECIATION:


   The Committee wishes to convey appreciation for  the  warm  and  positive
   reception that all the stakeholders afforded it during the  time  of  the
   oversight visits in dealing with all areas concerning service delivery.


                         THURSDAY, 24 NOVEMBER 2005


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport


        a) The South African National Roads Agency Limited Declaration of
           Intent for 2005-2008.

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum for
         2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 194-2005].

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      a) Prosecutorial Policy and Directives relating to Prosecution of
         Criminal Matters Arising from Conflicts of the Past and which were
         committed before 11 May 1994, in terms of sections 21(2), 35(1) and
         35(2)(b) of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, (Act No 32 of
         1998).


      b) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
         Mr R Ameer, an additional magistrate at Pinetown Magistrates Court.


      c) Report on the provisional suspension from office with remuneration:
         Mr M S Makamu, a senior magistrate at the Benoni Magistrates Court.


      d) Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2004-2005.


4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


      a) Government Notice No 1038 published in Government Gazette No 28143
         dated 21 October 2005: Restrictions on the use of water for
         Agricultural, Domestic and Industrial purposes in the
         Luvuvhu/Letaba Water Management Area, in terms of the National
         Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).
   (b) Government Notice No 1057 published in Government Gazette No
       28167 dated 28 October 2005: Invitation to submit written
       comments on the proposed construction of Phase-2 of the
       Olifants River Water Resource Development Project and
       Environmental Impact Assessment relating thereto, in terms of
       section 110 of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
       1998).


                          TUESDAY, 29 NOVEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report:

         (a)      Report on the provisional suspension from office with
             remuneration: Mr R Ameer, an additional magistrate at Pinetown
             Magistrates Court.


         (b)      Report on the provisional suspension from office with
             remuneration: Mr M S Makamu, a senior magistrate at the Benoni
             Magistrates Court.


         (c)      Prosecutorial Policy and Directives relating to
             Prosecution of Criminal Matters Arising from Conflicts of the
             Past and which were committed before 11 May 1994, in terms of
             sections 21(2), 35(1) and 35(2)(b) of the National Prosecuting
             Authority Act, (Act No 32 of 1998).

     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         (a)      Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 2
             November 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
             terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management
             Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the
             tabling of the Annual Report of Telkom for 2004-2005.

     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         (a)      Letter from the Minister of Labour dated 1 November 2005
             to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
             65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1
             of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
             Report of the Information Systems, Electronics and
             Telecommunications Technologies Training Authority (ISETT
             SETA) for 2004-2005.

     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         (a)      Letter from the Minister of Home Affairs dated 4 October
             2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
             section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
             Annual Report of Home Affairs for 2004-2005.

     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
         Administration:

         (a)      Report of the Auditor-General on the Information Systems
             Audits performed at the National Treasury and the State
             Information Technology Agency for the financial year 2004-2005
             [RP 209-2005].

     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration:

         (a)      Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of
             the Management of Sick Leave Benefits at certain National and
             Provincial Departments [RP 215-2005].

     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         (a)      Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements
             of the Special Pensions Board for the year ended 31 March 2005
             [RP 217-2005].

     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         (a)      Special Report of the Auditor-General on the Status of the
             Delays in tabling of Annual Reports and consolidated financial
             statements of National Government for the financial year ended
             2004-2005 (as at 31 October 2005) [RP 225-2005].

     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education and the Portfolio Committee on Labour for consideration
         and report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:
         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
             Relations Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             222-2005].

     (10)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry
           for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
           Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries
             Sector Education and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 90-2005].

     (11)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy and the Portfolio Committee on Labour for
         consideration and report:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and
             Safety Inspectorate for 2004-2005 [RP 125-2005].

     (12)   The following paper is referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on the
           Auditor-General for consideration and report:
         (a)      Budget and Strategic Plan of the Auditor-General for 2006-
             07, tabled in terms of section 38(2) of the Public Audit Act,
             2004 (Act No 25 of 2004).

     (13)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Water Affairs and Forestry:

         (a)      Notice No 925 published in Government Gazette No 28058
             dated 23 September 2005: Release of State land at De Mond,
             Western Cape Province, which is no longer required for
             forestry purposes, made in terms of section 50(4) of the
             National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).


         (b)      Notice No 926 published in Government Gazette No 28060
             dated 23 September 2005: Water Tribunals Rules made in terms
             of section 148(5) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36
             of 1998).


         (c)      Notice No 939 published in Government Gazette No 28053
             dated 30 September 2005: Establishment of the Crocodile (West)-
             Marico Catchment Management Agency (Water Management Area No
             3) which covers the Northern part of the North-West Province,
             North-Eastern part of Gauteng, the South-West portion of
             Limpopo Province and a small portion of Western Mpumalanga and
             is bordered by Botswana on its North-Western side, made in
             terms of section 78(1) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No
             36 of 1998).


         (d)      Notice No 945 published in Government Gazette No 28053
             dated 30 September 2005: Proposal for the establishment of the
             Gouritz Catchment Management Agency, made in terms of section
             78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


         (e)      Notice No 944 published in Government Gazette No 28053
             dated 30 September 2005: Proposal for the establishment of the
             Olifants-Doorn Catchment Management Agency, made in terms of
             section 78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
             1998).


         (f)      Government Notice No 1038 published in Government Gazette
             No 28143 dated 21 October 2005: Restrictions on the use of
             water for Agricultural, Domestic and Industrial purposes in
             the Luvuvhu/Letaba Water Management Area, in terms of the
             National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (14)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
           Administration for consideration and report. The Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to
           the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Government
             Employees Pension Fund (GEPF) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2004-2005 [RP 45-2005].


     (15)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Transport for consideration:


           (a)   The South African National Roads Agency Limited
                  Declaration of Intent for 2005-2008.


     (16)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
           Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island
             Museum for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 194-
             2005].

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Housing

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Home Builders
         Registration Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 185-
         2005].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on its Oversight  hearing
    of Statistics South Africa (Statistics SA) Annual Report 2004/05,  dated
    8 November 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the annual  report
    of Statistics SA for  2004/05  and  the  related  presentations  by  the
    Statistician General and the senior management of the department reports
    as follows:

 1. Introduction

           The Portfolio Committee on Finance held a hearing on 10  October
           2005 at which the Statistician-General  and  a  team  of  senior
           managers presented the Statistics SA annual report for  2004/05.
           This was followed by a discussion of  issues  arising  from  the
           documents  and  presentations  during  which  members   of   the
           Committee  raised  a  number  of  issues.   The  Committee   was
           impressed by the format  of  the  annual  report,  which  was  a
           significant improvement on the previous year and which  achieved
           greater clarity in the presentation of substantive  issues.  The
           Committee however raised its grave concern with respect  to  the
           management of Statistics SA which substantive issues are  raised
           in the report.




           1.1    Strategic  focus  of  annual  report   and   linkage   of
                 performance to targets.

                 Statistics SA presented an annual report  that  facilitated
                 robust oversight as a result of  compliance  with  National
                 Treasury formatting and through clear linkages between  the
                 strategic  themes  raised  in  the   strategic   plan   and
                 performance.  However the annual report  could  be  further
                 improved if it provided greater details  in  the  Programme
                 Performance section especially where  targets  set  in  the
                 strategic plan are not achieved.

        2. Issues related to the General and Financial  Management  of  the
           Department

           The Committee expresses concern at the persistence  of  numerous
           problems related to the management of  the  department.  In  the
           Committees opinion these require urgent attention and should not
           be allowed to remain unresolved for a further year.




        1. Weak management capacity

                 During the engagement with the Committee, the  Statistician
                 General made  frequent  reference  to  lack  of  management
                 capacity  within  Statistics   SA.   This   challenge   was
                 frequently used to explain different aspects  of  the  poor
                 performance of  the  department  during  the  period  under
                 review.

                 In the Committee’s opinion this is  the  responsibility  of
                 the Statistician General,  both  in  terms  of  the  Public
                 Service Act and in terms of PFMA, as well as  in  terms  of
                 the Statistician General letter of appointment,  to  ensure
                 that  the  department  has  a  management  team  with   the
                 necessary capacity to guide and manage the department.  The
                 Committee also noted that the lack of  management  capacity
                 specifically, and the lack of capacity generally,  impacted
                 on every aspect of Statistics SA’s performance  during  the
                 period under review.

                 The Committee notes that the other  entities  reporting  to
                 the Minister of Finance, namely the National Treasury,  the
                 South African Revenue Service and the Development  Bank  of
                 Southern Africa, all faced legacy problems at the  time  of
                 the transition to democracy in 1994. But  since  then,  the
                 respective  heads  of  these  entities  have  succeeded  in
                 developing very strong,  competent  management  teams.  The
                 Committee  appreciates  that  there  may  be  circumstances
                 outside  its  knowledge  that  hampered  the   Statistician
                 General’s efforts to resolve the capacity  problems  within
                 Statistics SA.




        2. Under-spending

                 In  respect  of  financial   management,   the   department
                 acknowledged the continued trend of  under-expenditure  and
                 agreed that there was a need to strengthen planning systems
                 and that Census 2001 was still  creating  problems  in  the
                 organization. The Committee notes  that  it  is  cause  for
                 great  concern  that  current  problems  continue   to   be
                 attributed  to  previous   Census   especially   when   the
                 department  has  already  started  planning  for  the  next
                 Census.




        3. The large number of targets not reached

                 The Committee notes the many instances in the annual report
                 where targets identified in the  strategic  plan  were  not
                 met. Statistics SA explained that a lack  of  capacity  had
                 necessitated that focus on  achieving  fewer  targets.  The
                 department’s failure to deliver on the performance  targets
                 it set for  itself  reflects  poorly  on  the  management’s
                 capacity to plan properly (taking capacity constraints into
                 account), and to execute these plans.

                 The lack of management capacity is also  reflected  in  the
                 weak  working  relationship  with  SARS  related   to   the
                 collection of data from the business register.




        4. Failure to deal with suspensions




                 It is a matter  of  concern  that  issues  related  to  the
                 suspensions  of  senior  management  have  not   yet   been
                 resolved, some of which have been outstanding for more than
                 12 months.  The  Statistician  General  could  not  give  a
                 satisfactory  reason  for  the  delay  in  resolving  these
                 issues.




                 The  Committee  notes  that   the   issues   around   these
                 suspensions are impacting negatively on the performance  of
                 the department and therefore urges that  they  be  resolved
                 speedily.




        5. Supporting rural municipalities




                 The Committee inquired as to how much support was given  to
                 rural  municipalities  in  the  use  of   statistics.   The
                 department admitted they were unable to  reach  most  rural
                 municipalities, but indicated that they did  have  officers
                 in each province that provide  installations  and  training
                 and support around these installations.




                 The department commented on the difficulty they  have  with
                 publishing certain statistics collected  at  the  municipal
                 level and the fact that the Statistics Act  prohibited  the
                 department  from  publishing  certain  statistics  if   the
                 municipalities did not want  them  published.  It  was  not
                 clear whether the real problem was a  legal  problem  or  a
                 management  problem,  or  simply  that  certain  government
                 departments  or  municipalities  did  not  want  the   data
                 published  because  it  would  reflect   badly   on   their
                 performance.




        6. Evaluating Statistics SA web accessed information




                 The department indicated that it used  surveys  to  measure
                 user satisfaction  but  conceded  that  this  had  achieved
                 limited success, as users are not comfortable answering the
                 relevant questions. However the department did not  provide
                 any suggestions as to how they would address the issue.




                 In  response  to  the  issues  of  general  and   financial
                 management raised by the Committee, more specifically those
                 issues  raised  in  the   Auditor-General’s   report,   the
                 Statistician-General requested an  opportunity  to  respond
                 after engaging with the Auditor-General prior to responding
                 to the Committee.




                 The Committee needs to make it clear that  such  a  request
                 for deferment  is  unacceptable  and  that  in  future  the
                 Statistician-General should be more prepared to  deal  with
                 such matters in line with his responsibilities as  set  out
                 in the PFMA.

    3.      Issues related to statistics

1. Measuring and reporting on the quality of statistics



                 The Committee notes that despite  the  matter  having  been
                 raised during the previous year, the  department  has  made
                 little progress on  developing  measures  to  evaluate  and
                 report on the  quality  of  the  statistics  it  publishes.
                 However  Statistics  SA  indicated  that  plans  are  being
                 implemented  and  the  results  would  be  available   soon
                 although it had not yet finalized the  timeframes.  Reports
                 had been released on the measures to improve the quality of
                 statistics however it was conceded  that  this  information
                 should have been published in the annual report.




                 The  department  also  elaborated  on  its  intentions   to
                 integrate its data sets with those  of  other  departments.
                 The main  objective  of  these  plans  is  to  improve  the
                 statistics produced by  other  departments  so  that  these
                 statistics could become  official  statistics.   The  World
                 Bank supports these activities  and  consultants  from  the
                 World Bank are providing assistance, however no  timeframes
                 or specific outputs were  identified.   The  annual  report
                 showed many instances of targets for training members  from
                 other departments not being met and it  is  not  clear  how
                 much these  shortfalls  impacted  on  the  above  plans  of
                 integration.




                 The department also indicated  that  it  has  a  number  of
                 processes in place to harmonize and profile data sets, some
                 of which are collected from  the  business  register.  This
                 process has occupied the Stats SA for “some time”. It would
                 be important for it to identify the targets it will be able
                 to achieve.




                 The Committee  notes  that  reporting  on  the  quality  of
                 statistics  and  supporting  indicators  is  something  the
                 department has been working towards for some time  now  and
                 it would have expected more concrete progress to have  been
                 made, or at  least  more  specific  targets  to  have  been
                 provided.



              2. The presentation and definition of unemployment information



                 Stats  SA  confirmed  that  it  had   not   abandoned   any
                 definitions of unemployment including that of  “broad-based
                 unemployment” but rather it had added  new  definitions  to
                 describe the unemployed and  different  categories  of  the
                 unemployed e.g. those seeking and those who  had  given  up
                 seeking  employment.   The  department  conceded  that  the
                 presentation of the data may have created confusion to  the
                 public, but it had learnt from this experience and intended
                 presenting the information concerning different  categories
                 of the unemployed, e.g. those seeking and  those  who  have
                 given up  seeking  employment,  in  a  more  understandable
                 manner going forward.




 3. Measurement of GDP



                 The Committee noted that it  is  concerned  about  how  the
                 informal sector gets reported on in the GDP figures.



                 The department indicated that it had a number of approaches
                 to calculate the informal sector’s contribution to GDP that
                 included  regular  surveys  and  “diary  information”.  The
                 development of new  surveys  to  measure  activity  in  the
                 informal sector was also noted.  Statistics SA agreed  that
                 it needed to develop  stable  sampling  frames  to  provide
                 accurate information and that this  was  difficult  in  the
                 context of the informal sector.   Statistics  SA  has  many
                 plans in place to improve these areas and address the  many
                 challenges, however these plans are not currently producing
                 results.




 4. Progress with Community Surveys



                 The department commented  on  the  difficulties  they  were
                 facing with community surveys and the lack  of  consistency
                 in sampling frames and the lack of  standards  for  spatial
                 referencing.  It was reported that progress was  made,  but
                 did not provide any concrete measurements of this progress.



 4. Committee resolutions

           Based on its deliberations  the  Committee  took  the  following
           resolutions:



              1. The Minister of Finance must review the persistent lack  of
                 management  capacity  within  Statistics  SA,  taking  into
                 consideration factors that may  have  hampered  efforts  to
                 build a strong management team, and submit a report to  the
                 Committee setting out a  plan  of  action  to  resolve  the
                 problem.

              2. Before 18  January  2006,  the  Statistician  General  must
                 provide  the  Committee  with  a  comprehensive  management
                 report that responds  directly  to  issues  raised  by  the
                 Committee.  In that report the Statistician General  should
                 detail specific steps that will be taken to:
                     ▪ improve the general management of the organization,
                     ▪   improve   the   financial   management    of    the
                       organization,
                     ▪ put  in  place  proper  risk  management  within  the
                       department, and
               ▪ improve the planning systems of the department.


                 The management report must give timelines  and  appropriate
                 performance targets, so that the Committee will be able  to
                 monitor the implementation of the measures the Statistician-
                 General proposes taking.

              3.  The  Committee  requests  that  the   Statistician-General
                 furnish the Committee with a detailed report on all  issues
                 raised in the Auditor-General’s report.


              4. The Committee requests Statistics SA to supply  it  with  a
                 written report on the obstacles  it  is  encountering  with
                 regards to the  publication  of  statistics  obtained  from
                 municipalities.
              5. The Committee requests the Statistician General  to  supply
                 it with a written timetable for resolving the issues around
                 suspended senior  managers,  that  indicates  by  when  the
                 issues are likely to be concluded.  The  Committee  further
                 urges that the matters should be dealt with as speedily  as
                 possible  as  they  are   impacting   negatively   on   the
                 performance of the department.

              6. The department must continue to work on ways to  report  on
                 the  quality  of  statistics  reported  and   provide   the
                 Committee in writing with timeframes as to when  applicable
                 indicators will be developed and implemented.
              7.  The  department  must  provide  measurable   targets   and
                 timeframes rather than describing their progress in general
                 terms.

2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on its Oversight hearing  of
    the National Treasury (Treasury) Annual Report 2004/05, dated 8 November
    2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the annual  report
    of the National Treasury for 2004/05 and the  related  presentations  by
    the Director-General, the Chief Operating Officer and  select  heads  of
    divisions within the National Treasury, reports as follows:



     1. Introduction



        The Portfolio Committee on Finance held a  hearing  on  19  October
        2005 at which  the  National  Treasury  and  senior  managers  from
        National Treasury presented the annual report for 2004/05  for  the
        department. This was followed by a  discussion  of  issues  arising
        from the documents and presentations during which  members  of  the
        Committee  raised   a   number   of   issues.   Further   Committee
        deliberations took place in further scheduled Committee meetings.

 2. General

 1. Under-spending by the National Treasury

                 In response to the Committee’s inquiry regarding the under-
                 spending in a number of sub-programmes  NT  explained  that
                 there was no actual under-spending but rather a  result  of
                 measures taken by NT which had led to “savings”.

 2. Link to strategic plans


                 The Committee is of the view that all targets noted in  the
                 annual Report should be in line  with  National  Treasury’s
                 strategic plan.  The  Committee  did  not  accept  National
                 Treasury  explanation  that  in  “pursuit  of   perfection”
                 discrepancies arose when the strategic thrust of government
                 changed and this was not reflected in the strategic plan of
                 NT. Instead the Committee is of the opinion that there is a
                 need for NT to review its strategic plan regularly prior to
                 printing to avoid such discrepancies  between  targets  and
                 plans.


                 As it was explained  by  National  Treasury,  that  certain
                 targets  are  extremely  difficult  to  quantify,  but  now
                 sensitised to this, National Treasury  considers  it  as  a
                 challenge for future reporting on measurable objectives and
                 outcomes.

 3. Taking the Budget to the people



                 The Committee noted that the National  Treasury’s  goal  of
                 taking the budget to 200 people  is  inadequate  given  the
                 tremendous need to demystify the budget process.




                 National Treasury conceded that  this  was  inadequate  but
                 indicated it had taken several steps to meet the Minister’s
                 objective of making the budget more accessible  and  easier
                 to understand. Several measures had been  implemented:  One
                 had been the recent appointment  of  an  outreach  officer,
                 another measure  was  the  establishment  of  a  “Tips  for
                 Trevor” media and IT sites. A third measure  had  been  the
                 development and continual improvement of the budget  guide,
                 which identified salient issues,  and  fourth  the  regular
                 hosting of town hall meetings, and  school  meetings  where
                 the budget could be explained in greater,  more  accessible
                 detail to the public.
        3. Administration

          1. High vacancy rates



                 The Committee asked  what  measures  were  being  taken  to
                 ensure the high vacancy rates within the National  Treasury
                 were reduced.




                 The National  Treasury  responded  that  despite  the  high
                 vacancy rates, they had filled  209  posts  in  the  period
                 under review. It was also pointed out that  the  department
                 had adopted a project management approach  to  filling  the
                 vacancies that included developing supply through training,
                 advertising and aggressive recruitment,  revising  critical
                 management areas and extending the intern  programme.   The
                 department assured the Committee they are  doing  all  they
                 can to ensure that they retain staff,  but  explained  that
                 they have no control over the fact that  there  are  better
                 job opportunities outside of Treasury.



 2. Time taken to pay invoices

                 The Committee noted that the turn-around  time  of  invoice
                 payments  was  an  average  of  26  days.  Given  this  the
                 Committee was of the opinion  that  this  did  not  exclude
                 payments under and even more than 30 days. However National
                 Treasury  did  not  provide  specific  information  on  any
                 payments more than 30 days, which in terms of the  PFMA  is
                 deemed “late payments”. National Treasury  did  assure  the
                 Committee that the number of late payments was minimal  and
                 related to documentation problems.


 3. Quality of measurable objectives



                 The Committee noted that the measurable objectives for  the
                 Programme Administration are not of an acceptable standard.
                 The Committee  does  not  accept  the  National  Treasury’s
                 response  that  it  is  difficult   to   write   measurable
                 objectives for administration. In the  Committee’s  opinion
                 National Treasury should be leading the way in this regard.



 4. Economic Planning and Budget Management

 1. Delay on the Co-operative Banks Bill

                 The Committee expressed concern at the delay in the tabling
                 of the Co-operatives  Banks  Bill.  In  response,  National
                 Treasury indicated that bad timing had  caused  the  delay.
                 The donors supporting the co-operative banking  sector  had
                 withdrawn their support because the concept was rolled  out
                 while  the  Co-operative  Banking  Bill  was  still   being
                 drafted. It was  also  found  that  the  structure  of  the
                 proposed  banks  was   unsustainable   and   lacked   sound
                 governance measures.




 2. Infrastructure spending


                 In response to the Committee’s inquiry on the slow spending
                 on infrastructure and why such spending is  not  used  more
                 constructively, the National  Treasury  indicated  that  an
                 assessment had recently been undertaken on the  constraints
                 on spending.


                 The assessment found that within the departments of Health,
                 Education and of Public Works the biggest challenge  was  a
                 lack of project management skills. Furthermore the  skills,
                 which  are  required  to  perform   simple   administrative
                 management and checking on the progress of projects was not
                 available in these departments.


                 Another problem  raised  by  NT  was  “fiscal  dumping”  by
                 provincial departments, which occurred when the  department
                 became aware of its slow spending pattern. To avoid  under-
                 expenditure such departments would then “dump” excess funds
                 in  other  departments  or  even   municipalities   without
                 sufficient warning to  recipients.  Given  the  tight  time
                 frames and notwithstanding the need  for  additional  funds
                 the recipients of fiscal dumping would often be  unable  to
                 spend these funds.

                 However NT assured the Committee that this problem will  be
                 addressed beginning with the 2005/06  Division  of  Revenue
                 Act (DORA). New requirements in DORA will insist  on  three
                 year spending plans detailing  any  transfers  during  this
                 period to be published by all  (organizations)  departments
                 intending to transfer funds.


 3. World Bank and EU funding

                 The Committee noted that there were certain  projects  that
                 are being funded by the World Bank and the European  Union.
                 It enquired as to how long this  has  been  the  case,  the
                 conditions of the funding and how much funding the National
                 Treasury has secured from these sources.



                 The National Treasury noted  the  Committee’s  reservations
                 with regards to funding from these sources and assured  the
                 Committee that the National Treasury only  accepts  funding
                 for projects that fit in with its own strategic objectives.



 4. BEE and PPP initiatives



                 The Committee enquired as to the success of existing  Broad
                 Based  Black  Economic  Empowerment  (BBBEE)  and   Public,
                 Private  Partnership  (PPP)  programmes  and  whether   the
                 intended benefits of these initiatives are being realized.



                 The National Treasury acknowledged that fronting has been a
                 problem, but that the policy decision  to  blacklist  those
                 companies  and  individuals  guilty  of  this  practice  is
                 yielding results. However, it was not  possible  to  combat
                 instances where a fully owned black  company  obtains  work
                 through legitimate means and then sells it on  to  a  white
                 owned company. However, the Committee was assured that this
                 could be and was being addressed through blacklisting  with
                 regards to later tenders in which this practice occurred.



                 On the issue of PPPs, the National Treasury indicated  that
                 the development of appropriate capacity in the provinces to
                 manage PPP projects has been slow  and  therefore  the  PPP
                 unit in the NT is processing all  PPPs.  National  Treasury
                 through its PPP unit is also  training  interns,  who  will
                 return to the provinces.



 5. Relaxation of exchange controls



                 The Committee enquired whether the  National  Treasury  had
                 assessed the possible impact of relaxing exchange  controls
                 on the currency and whether these impacts would improve the
                 competitiveness of the currency.



                 The National Treasury indicated that the issue is evaluated
                 on an ongoing basis, but  that  it  is  not  clear  whether
                 relaxing  exchange  controls  will   actually   weaken   or
                 strengthen the Rand. The National Treasury  indicated  that
                 any future movement around exchange controls  will  consist
                 of calculated steps aimed at ensuring that any  changes  do
                 indeed benefit all South Africans.  The  National  Treasury
                 has no intention of simply following public opinion on  the
                 issue.



              6. Municipal Finance and Management Act (MFMA) implementation



                 The  Committee  questioned  the  value  of  the  measurable
                 objective which stated that  “94%  of  municipalities  have
                 MFMA  implementation  plans”,  which  did  not  necessarily
                 confirm specific progress with actual implementation.



                 The NT indicated that it provides the  MFMA  implementation
                 framework, but  the  achievement  of  implementation  plans
                 depended on the municipalities.
 5. Asset and Liability Management

 1. Re-imbursements to the Post Office



                 The Committee enquired as to  how  re-imbursements  to  the
                 Post Office fund were being handled and what measures  were
                 being taken to ensure these funds were properly managed, as
                 per directive and guidelines of the PFMA.



                 The National Treasury assured the Committee that there  was
                 an agreement in place that the money would not  go  to  the
                 Post bank account until all  the  conditions  are  met  and
                 therefore any fears of poor governance should  be  allayed.
                 The National Treasury indicated that  the  Dedicated  Banks
                 Bill will cover regulation of the Post Bank.



 2. DBSA’s area of operation



                 The Committee enquired as to whether the DBSA was operating
                 beyond the SADC region, and if this was  indeed  the  case,
                 whether the existing  legislative  framework  covered  such
                 operations.



                 The National Treasury indicated that if the DBSA  wants  to
                 operate outside of the SADC region they  only  require  the
                 approval of the Minister of Finance.



 3. Guarantees for Saambou debt



                 In response to the Committee’s inquiry  concerning  whether
                 any  approved  guarantees  were  for  the   resolution   of
                 Saambou’s financial problems, NT indicated that it  had  an
                 obligation to protect depositors’ interests.

 4. Road Accident Fund

                 Given the financial state of the  Road  Accident  Fund  the
                 Committee inquired  what  measures  National  Treasury  had
                 considered to address the issue. National Treasury  pointed
                 out that the Department of Transport  was  responsible  for
                 the RAF,  which  needed  to  be  restructured.  It  further
                 suggested the Committee pursue this with the department  in
                 respect of such plans and the monitoring measures in place.


 5. Guarantees for 2010

                 The Committee enquired why such large guarantees  had  been
                 granted in relation to  the  Soccer  World  Cup  2010,  and
                 whether  Parliament  should  not  have  been  involved   in
                 approving these guarantees.




                 The National Treasury  assured  the  Committee  that  these
                 guarantees were not typical guarantees in that  they  posed
                 no financial risk to the state.  They  arose  because  FIFA
                 insisted on guarantees that ensured they did  not  have  to
                 pay VAT and a set of specific fees. These  were  the  items
                 covered by the guarantees shown in the annual report.

 6. Financial Management and Systems

 1. Detailed regulation of supply chain management



                 The  Committee  enquired  as  to  why  the   supply   chain
                 management system in the MFMA is so detailed while the PFMA
                 hardly deals with the issue.

                 The National Treasury indicated that the  main  reason  for
                 the difference was that the MFMA was  developed  after  the
                 PFMA, and so benefited from the lessons learnt in  relation
                 to the latter. It was  noted  that  regulations  on  supply
                 chain management will be tabled to create  consistency  and
                 that the matter  will  also  be  dealt  with  in  the  PFMA
                 amendment bill. The Committee recommends  that  regulations
                 on the PFMA amendment Bill  be  put  before  the  committee
                 before it is processed.



 7. Financial Accounting and Reporting


           Through  prioritizing  the  backlog   in   the   submission   of
           consolidated financial statements  National  Treasury  has  been
           able to reach a stage where these statements will in  future  be
           submitted regularly and routinely.

 8. Provincial and Local Government Transfers

 1. Local government restructuring grant



                 The Committee focused on the utilization and criteria  used
                 to  measure  the   success   of   the   local   government-
                 restructuring grant. It was learned  that  NT  had  had  to
                 apply what it termed  “soft”  conditions  on  these  grants
                 otherwise no municipalities would use the funds. However it
                 assured the Committee that local government  accountability
                 mechanisms  should  ensure  that  these  funds  are   spent
                 correctly.



 2. Municipal quarterly spending figures


                 The NT confirmed that it would begin compiling  information
                 from municipalities, in a quarterly format, which would  be
                 submitted to parliament. However it would adopt a different
                 process  from  that  followed  in  provinces.  This  is   a
                 consequence of the reporting cycle of municipalities, which
                 is subject to accountability processes involving provincial
                 legislatures.


 9. Committee Resolutions



           Based on its deliberations the  Committee  makes  the  following
           resolutions:



              1. The National Treasury must develop a  set  of  measures  to
                 combat  the  problem  of  fiscal  dumping.  These  must  be
                 presented to the Committee before the commencement  of  the
                 next financial year. The  National  Treasury  needs  to  be
                 setting the example when it comes  to  the  development  of
                 performance measures. The National Treasury must prepare an
                 improved set of performance targets in its  next  strategic
                 plan, particularly in relation to Programme.
              2. The National Treasury  must  prepare  and  present  to  the
                 Committee a detailed plan of how it intends supporting  the
                 implementation of the MFMA.

              3. The National Treasury is requested to present its policy on
                 the management of contingent liabilities to  the  Committee
                 at a date to be agreed.

              4. The National Treasury must table the regulations on  supply
                 chain management before the committee for consideration.



3. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance  on  its  Oversight  of  the
    South African Revenue Services (SARS) Annual  Report  2004/05,  dated  8
    November 2005:



    The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the annual  report
    of SARS for 2004/05 and the related presentations  by  the  Commissioner
    and the senior management of SARS reports as follows:




 1. Introduction



           The Portfolio Committee on Finance held a hearing on 19  October
           2005 at which the Commissioner and  senior  managers  from  SARS
           presented the SARS annual report for 2004/05. This was  followed
           by a  discussion  of  issues  arising  from  the  documents  and
           presentations during which members of  the  Committee  raised  a
           number of issues. Further Committee deliberations took place  in
           further scheduled Committee meetings.




           Given  the  parliament’s  constitutional  function  to  exercise
           oversight it would be useful if  SARS  would  adopt  the  format
           developed by National Treasury for the  presentation  of  Annual
           Reports. This would enable SARS to focus more succinctly on  the
           key strategic issues.




           During its engagement  with  SARS  and  its  deliberations,  the
           committee raised issues around measures to reduce the  tax  gap,
           improve operational efficiency, the need  to  integrate  customs
           control areas with other organs and  departments  of  government
           and management of the tax “debt book”.




           The exceptional performance of SARS revenue  collections,  which
           are significantly beyond projections, is  a  reflection  of  the
           implementation of successful  measures  but  also  the  economic
           performance in South Africa.




              1. Strategic focus of annual report and linkage of performance
                 to targets.



                 The Committee is of the  opinion  that  the  reporting  and
                 oversight process could be further enhanced if SARS were to
                 provide specific details relating to the administration  of
                 the different kinds of tax returns and  other  interactions
                 with the public, and also provide a regional  breakdown  of
                 SARS in this regard. The structure used by SARS provides  a
                 sound  insight  into  strategic  developments  within   the
                 organization and should continue to  be  used  but  with  a
                 revised format corresponding to that developed by  National
                 Treasury (NT).



                 The  Committee  appreciates  the   information   on   SARS’
                 performance across the organization. However, the Committee
                 would like to see the reporting on performance being linked
                 back to specific performance targets that SARS  should  set
                 in its strategic plan. The  Committee  suggests  that  SARS
                 should look at the  performance  tables  presented  in  the
                 annual reports of departments and develop a similar  format
                 that meets the special needs of the organization.



 2. Revenue Collections



           While the Committee commends  SARS  for  its  increased  revenue
           collection it nevertheless remained of the view that the pursuit
           of more robust revenue forecasts would contribute to the broader
           strategic planning on the fiscus.



 1. Link to targets set out in strategic plan

                 The Committee was not able to detect any obvious flow  from
                 the strategic  plan  to  the  annual  report  and  in  many
                 instances it was difficult (if not impossible) to track how
                 measurable  objectives  in  the  strategic  plan  had  been
                 achieved. The use of scorecards to  report  performance  in
                 the annual report makes the process of reconciling plans to
                 actual performance difficult.




                 The  Commissioner  pointed  out  that  SARS  is   still   a
                 developing organization  and  was  currently  developing  a
                 charter of standards and quality of services that would  be
                 made  public  and   allow   for   better   evaluations   of
                 performance.




                 Although  SARS  is  not  subject  to  the  same   reporting
                 requirements as government departments, the Committee is of
                 the opinion that there  should  be  a  clear  link  between
                 targets and actual performance notwithstanding the  use  of
                 scorecards.




                 The Committee also expressed  their  interest  in  engaging
                 with SARS around the charter  of  standards  before  it  is
                 finalized.



 2. Divergence between revenue targets and outcomes



                 In response to the Committee’s call for improved  precision
                 in revenue forecast the Commissioner indicated  that  these
                 forecasts are made at a particular point in time and had to
                 take into account  a  range  of  variables  which  made  it
                 difficult to ensure 100%  accuracy.  SARS  also  factor  in
                 their revenue projections on economists future estimates of
                 what is likely to happen in the economy.




                 However for the period under review three main reasons  for
                 these revenue overruns were put forward. Firstly the  rapid
                 rate of growth in the economy and increases in  consumption
                 exceeded all expectations. Secondly there  is  better  than
                 expected tax compliance of South Africans and  thirdly  the
                 significant improvements  in  the  internal  processes  and
                 efficiency of SARS.

 3. The burden of tax

                 In response to the Committees comment on media reports that
                 the tax burden in South Africa  is  higher  than  in  other
                 comparable countries the Commissioner assured the Committee
                 that the media is misleading the public in this regard,  as
                 the comparisons they were making were not context specific.
                 Furthermore the middle income level tax-payer is not  being
                 squeezed.



 4. Non-contributing Large Business Clients



                 The Commissioner shared  the  Committee’s  concern  at  the
                 number  of  non-contributing  large  business  clients  and
                 confirmed that SARS  was  investigating  the  issue  on  an
                 ongoing basis  in  an  effort  to  close  down  these  tax-
                 avoidance schemes. Such clients employed a  number  of  tax
                 specialists. An example of advice been given was that large
                 business clients purchased loss-making companies to  offset
                 and reduce company tax obligations.




 3. Operational Review: Better taxpayer experience

           The  Committee  raised  a  number  of  issues  in  relation   to
           estimating  and  reducing  the  tax-gap.  First  how  does  SARS
           estimate the tax gap? Secondly to what extent  do  increases  in
           the number of registered  tax-payers  contribute  to  increasing
           revenue? Thirdly what is being done to reduce the GAP, and  more
           specifically to  combat  tax  evasion,  broaden  the  tax  base,
           eliminate tax havens, and  ensure  tax  is  collected  from  the
           informal sector.



 1. Estimating the tax gap



                 The Commissioner indicated that SARS  uses  internationally
                 recognized techniques to measure the extent of the tax gap.
                 These methodologies indicate that there  is  a  clear  link
                 between increasing tax-payer registrations and closing  the
                 tax gap, but that they cannot be used to work out a precise
                 relationship between the two variables.



 2. Reducing the tax gap



                 SARS  has  adopted  a  three-pronged  approach,  which  was
                 developed following extensive  international  research  and
                 comparisons, to close the tax-gap. The first prong of  this
                 strategy is to create awareness and reach out to people who
                 are unaware. This outreach includes everyone from those  in
                 the informal sector to  CEO’s  and  Chairpersons  of  large
                 companies. At the grass roots level this awareness campaign
                 is intended to inform people about  their  obligations  and
                 how they can pay tax. At the CEO  level  the  awareness  is
                 about promoting responsible tax  management  and  assisting
                 large companies to reduce tax risk.




                 The second prong of the strategy is to make SARS a  service
                 oriented organization. There is good evidence to show  that
                 people respond well to service. This is  reflected  in  the
                 training provided, the call-centres  established,  cultural
                 changes and organizational improvements. The third prong of
                 the strategy is to have a strong  and  visible  enforcement
                 arm. At present SARS has the capacity to contest smart  tax
                 evasion schemes, but the Commissioner noted that this is an
                 area they need to continually improve and build capacity so
                 as to remain one step ahead of the tax consultants.

                 The Committee welcomed the number of measures that had been
                 developed and adopted by SARS to reduce the tax-gap.




 4. Operational Review: Better operation efficiency



           The Committee inquired about the  actual  percentage  of  errors
           requiring revised assessments,  which  could  be  attributed  to
           mistakes made by SARS staff.

           SARS confirmed that the measures in  place  indicate  that  such
           errors are on a declining trend.  These  mistakes  are  measured
           manually in the absence of an automated system. SARS added  that
           they do have processes to monitor staff  and  that  staff  under
           perform  are  sent  for  further  training.  SARS   nevertheless
           acknowledged that they need to develop a system to monitor staff
           errors.




           SARS  also  added   that   better-informed   and   skilled   tax
           practitioners will also reduce the number of errors and SARS  is
           doing work with practitioners to help them reduce errors on  the
           part of practitioners.



 5. Operational Review: Customs



           The Committee raised a number of  issues  in  this  area,  which
           covered custom controls, including measures to combat  smuggling
           and the Auditor-General’s comments in this regard.



 1. Customs controls and ‘custom control areas’



                 In response to  the  Committees’  inquiry  on  measures  to
                 strengthen  custom  controls  and  speed-up  the  necessary
                 infrastructure development at border posts and the  failure
                 to meet such targets SARS acknowledged the  seriousness  of
                 the issue.




                 Regarding  the  development  of  infrastructure  at  border
                 control posts it was conceded that conditions were terrible
                 and that staff  were  subject  to  less  than  satisfactory
                 living circumstances.  However,  the  Commissioner  pointed
                 out that SARS was dependent on  the  Department  of  Public
                 Works for  the  development  of  infrastructure  at  border
                 posts.

                 The Commissioner also acknowledged that  the  standards  at
                 border control post in South  Africa  are  not  acceptable,
                 when compared internationally.  It was noted that Miami  in
                 the United States had implemented a practice where  customs
                 are responsible for  large  “customs  control  areas”,  and
                 where the operations of customs  takes  priority  over  all
                 other activities.  The Commissioner  suggested  that  South
                 Africa  should  develop  a  similar  approach,  with   SARS
                 exercising  primary  control  in  ‘customs  control  areas’
                 supported by other departments.

                 The   Commissioner   acknowledged   that   given    current
                 arrangements  this  would  require  the  agreement  of  the
                 Departments of Safety and Security and Trade  and  Industry
                 as regards jurisdiction.




                 The  Commissioner  told  the  Committee   that   once   the
                 departments have reached an agreement then SARS could focus
                 on modernizing and transforming equipment, ensuring greater
                 visibility and building the relevant capacity.  This  would
                 also enhance SARS’ ability to combat smuggling



 2. Combating smuggling



                 The Committee noted with concern the extent  of  smuggling,
                 and inquired about the measures being developed to  address
                 the problem.




                 Capacity constraints were at the core of the  challenge  to
                 combat smuggling and the Commissioner pointed out the  time
                 constraints linked to  its  anti-smuggling  capacity.  This
                 impact  on  the  collection  of  relevant  data   and   the
                 development of sufficient risk profiles in this area.




 3. Scanners



                 In response to the Committee’s  inquiry  on  the  delay  in
                 purchasing  and  getting  the  scanners  operational,   the
                 Commissioner indicated that the matter is tied up in a  PPP
                 process, which is managed by National  Treasury.   He  also
                 pointed  out  that  SARS  cannot  afford  to  purchase  the
                 scanners without additional financial support and therefore
                 have no alternative but to follow the present route.




 4. In-bond entries



                 The Committee asked what steps were being taken to  address
                 the Auditor-General’s comments on in-bond entries.




                 The Commissioner indicated that SARS had  made  substantial
                 progress in reducing the number of in-bond entries and that
                 it appeared in the report because they were working from an
                 initial large number.  However they have built capacity  to
                 improve controls and the matter would improve over time.




 6. Operational Review: Improved compliance and risk reduction

 1. Debt Book



                 The Committee raised a number of questions on the issue  of
                 the debt book, namely:

                     ▪  What  was  being  done  to  address  the  weaknesses
                       identified by the Auditor-General with regards to the
                       management of the debt book?
 ▪ What were the main reasons for the debt?
                     ▪ What was the extent of the debt, how much  of  it  is
                       recoverable and how much is being written-off?
                     ▪  What  impact  debt  has  on  SARS   operations   and
                       operational expenditure?

                 SARS had inherited a large number of legacy problems, which
                 needed to be  addressed,  while  still  servicing  a  large
                 number  of  clients.  The  Commissioner  acknowledged  that
                 existing procedures to manage the debt book were cumbersome
                 and needed refinement.  One of the legacy problems was  the
                 strategy of “cherry picking” incentives, which resulted  in
                 the debts which were easier to collect being targeted. This
                 led to the more difficult debts not  being  dealt  with  in
                 time, which often resulted in  it  becoming  impossible  to
                 collect such debts. The Committee was assured  that  a  new
                 system, which should be in place  by  next  year,  will  be
                 automated and cover each individual debtor.

                 The  Commissioner  indicated  that  SARS  is  using  credit
                 bureaus to provide data to trace debtors  and  professional
                 debt collectors  to  assist  in  the  collection  of  debt.
                 However SARS recognises it needs to build capacity in  this
                 regard, not only in terms of systems  and  skills  but  the
                 number of people to deal with debt.




                 The Commissioner acknowledged the possibility of  confusion
                 arising from the reporting on debt  but  pointed  out  that
                 this was due to the quasi-cash system  in  place  at  SARS,
                 which is not consistent with financial reporting  in  other
                 departments.




                 The  Commissioner  indicated  they  would  give  a  written
                 explanation of the different classifications of debt write-
                 offs. He also requested the Committee to assist the process
                 by providing appropriate enabling legislation.




                 The Committee accepted that SARS had a long way to go,  but
                 that  it  had  already  made  significant  improvements  to
                 improve compliance and was  taking  steps  to  reduce  risk
                 through more robust management of the debt book.

 7. Committee resolutions

           Based on its deliberations the  Committee  makes  the  following
           resolutions:



              1. SARS should develop an approach that would  ensure  greater
                 consistency in the flow of information from  its  strategic
                 plan through to its annual  report.    SARS  should  report
                 directly on their strategic plans and use  scorecards  only
                 as a means of setting targets in the strategic plan.
               2. SARS must engage with the Committee around the development
                  of the charter of standards and quality of services.
              3. SARS must present details  of  measures  it  is  taking  to
                 improve  the  accuracy  of  its  revenue   forecasts.   The
                 Committee suggests that SARS should join with the  National
                 Treasury and research the issue in detail, if this  is  not
                 being done already. The Committee would like to see a  plan
                 for such  research,  and  to  receive  information  on  the
                 findings of the research once it is completed.
              4. SARS, working together with  the  National  Treasury,  must
                 develop information  comparing  the  tax  burden  in  South
                 Africa with other comparable  countries.  This  information
                 should be presented in the SARS  annual  report  in  future
                 years,  so  that  the  public  can   obtain   the   correct
                 information on the issue.
              5. SARS must develop an  appropriate  system  to  monitor  and
                 track errors in assessments that can be attributed  to  its
                 staff.  Once  the  system  is  in  place,  SARS  must   set
                 appropriate targets in its strategic  plans  for  improving
                 performance in this regard, and report on the issue in  its
                 annual report.
              6. SARS must take control  of  infrastructure  development  at
                 border posts and contract directly with  service  providers
                 that are able to deliver the necessary services in a timely
                 manner.
              7. SARS, the  Department  of  Safety  and  Security,  and  the
                 Department of Trade and Industry must form a joint  working
                 group to investigate the use of  ‘customs  control  areas’.
                 This  group  must  report  back  to  the   Committee   with
                 recommendations on this issue before June 2006.
              8. SARS must develop appropriate performance  targets  in  its
                 strategic plan for the collection of debt,  and  report  on
                 the issue in its annual report.
              9. SARS, working together with  the  National  Treasury,  must
                 develop appropriate  framework  legislation  to  facilitate
                 debt collection and the write-off of debts.
 4. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on the Fact-    finding
    Visit to Advanced Technologies and Engineering Company, dated 25
    October 2005:

      The Committee, having undertaken the fact-finding visit on 19 August
      2005, reports as follows.

1.    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

   A delegation [Appendix A] of the Portfolio Committee on  Defence  visited
   Advanced Technologies & Engineering Co. (ATE), a defence-related company¹
   on  19  August  2005,  to  ascertain  the  state  of  business  at   ATE,
   specifically, and the defence-related industry, in general.


   ATE  upgrades  avionic  and  weapon  systems,  provides  full  integrated
   logistic support and develops and manufactures unmanned aerial  vehicles.
   ATE is an earner of foreign currency, with 70% of its  turnover  in  2005
   earned from exports. The delegation found that ATE is  a  technologically
   advanced company that contributes to the industrial base of South Africa.

2. BACKGROUND

   The local defence-related industry is of strategic  importance  to  South
   Africa, because it provides the equipment² to the South African  National
   Defence Force (SANDF), so that it can execute its constitutional mandate,
   i.e. to defend the Republic and its people. The type and quality  of  the
   equipment affects the combat-readiness of the SANDF,  which  necessitated
   the Portfolio Committee on Defence to visit defence-related companies  to
   establish whether these companies produced equipment that compliments the
   missions of the SANDF. The committee decided on ATE, because: (1)  it  is
   one of the five biggest³ defence-related companies in South  Africa;  and
   (2) it is one of the main suppliers to the SANDF.

3. FINDINGS

   The delegation found that:
     a. ATE, specifically, and the defence-related  industry,  in  general,
        contribute to  the  technological  and  industrial  base  of  South
        Africa.
     b. The defence-related industry is a big earner of foreign currency.

4. THE FOCUS OF ATE

   ATE is a private and independent company and was established in  1984  as
   part of an international military systems group. It has approximately 400
   employees, mainly engineers. The company regularly  subcontracts  to  the
   South African defence-related industry, e.g. when it provides upgrades to
   military helicopters or upgrades to gun sights, helmet  sights,  cannons,
   turrets, missiles, 20mm ammunition, radios and  electronic  warfare  (EW)
   equipment.

     1. Helicopters


        The current operations in the  helicopter  business  area  included
        integrated avionic systems for new and existing  helicopters  (e.g.
        the Rooivalk combat helicopter), complete helicopter  modernisation
        (e.g. the Russian Mi-24 and Mi-17),  as  well  as  full  integrated
        logistic support and technology transfer.


     2. Fighter Trainer Aircraft


        ATE was contracted by BAE Systems  to  work  on  the  avionics  and
        weapon systems of the light  fighter  trainer  aircraft  (i.e.  the
        Hawk)  of  the  South  African  Air  Force  (SAAF).  ATE  will   be
        responsible  for  the  design,  development,  integration,   flight
        testing and production of the above-mentioned systems.

     3. Unmanned Aerial Vehicle


       ATE has developed and manufactured the Vulture, an  unmanned  aerial
       vehicle (UAV). The  Vulture  can  be  launched  from  a  vehicle  in
       unprepared  terrain  within  30  minutes.  It  is  used  to   gather
       information: (1) for more accurate artillery firing and (2)  on  the
       movements of enemy forces (i.e. soldiers and vehicles). It is a 100%
       South African product.

     4. Main Battle Tank


       ATE improves the “night fighting capability” of main battle tanks by
       ensuring fast and accurate firing, whilst  on  the  move  and/or  at
       moving targets. It upgrades the  fire  control  system,  the  gunner
       sights, the commander sights and the stability of the turret.

5.    RECOMMENDATIONS

      The delegation wishes to make the following recommendations:
       1. The defence-related industry is sophisticated and strategic;  and
          therefore  ATE  and  other  South  African  companies  should  be
          encouraged to continue with high technology developments and  the
          increase of the South African content of their products.


       2. The Portfolio Committee should also  visit  other  defence-related
          industry companies and entities in South Africa.

   Report to be considered.


   NOTES

       1. The defence-related companies refer to companies that  concentrate
          totally or partially on the manufacturing of defence  or  security
          equipment.


       2. The  major  equipment  includes  armaments,  vehicles,  ships  and
          aircrafts, while the minor equipment includes boots, uniforms  and
          rations.


       3. The ‘big five’ are those  defence-related  companies  with  annual
          revenue of more than R250 million. They are:
        a. Denel
        b. Reutech
        c. ATE
        d. Grintek
        e. ADS (African Defence Systems)

   APPENDIX A -DELEGATION


       1. Mr S B Ntuli, MP           - Delegation leaders
       2. Dr G W Koornhof, MP
       3. Mr M S Booi, MP
       4. Mr G P Mngomezulu, MP
       5. Mr S Dodovu, MP
       6. Ms X C Makasi, MP
       7. Mr G Campher - Committee Secretary
       8. Ms M van Niekerk - Researcher


                         WEDNESDAY, 7 DECEMBER 2005



COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly



1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
   on the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill [B 36 - 2005]
   (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 7 December 2005:


      The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having
      considered the subject of the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws
      Repeal Bill [B 36 - 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it
      and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
      reports the Bill with amendments [B 36A – 2005].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on Study
   Tour to Northern and Eastern Cape Provinces, dated 15 November 2005:
   The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having conducted a
   study tour to the Northern Cape Province and Eastern Cape Province from 1
   – 5 August 2005, reports as follows:


   The delegation, under the leadership of the Chairperson of the Committee,
   Mr. E N N Ngcobo (ANC), included Mr. A R Ainslie (ANC), Professor I J
   Mohamed (ANC), Ms F Mahomed (ANC), Mr. S N Nxumalo (ANC) and Mr. Johnny
   Ramrock (Committee Secretary).


   Purpose of the study tour:


   To visit various Science Councils and monitor Department of  Science  and
   Technology Poverty Alleviation Projects.

   Visit to the  South  African  Astronomical  Observatory  (SAAO)  and  the
   Southern African Large Telescope (SALT), Sutherland, Northern Cape


   The South African Astronomical Observatory (SAAO)


   The South African Astronomical Observatory (SAAO), located in Sutherland,
   Northern Cape, is  South  Africa’s  national  facility  for  optical  and
   infrared astronomy, and forms part of the  National  Research  Foundation
   (NRF). The SAAO’s major focus  is  to  further  fundamental  research  in
   astronomy and astrophysics, national and international, by providing  and
   utilizing its astronomical facility.
   The Southern African Large Telescope (SALT)


   The Southern African Large Telescope (SALT), currently under construction
   in Sutherland, will be the  largest  single  telescope  in  the  southern
   hemisphere, with a hexagonal mirror array 11 meters  across.  SALT  is  a
   flagship project, intended to demonstrate that the frontiers  of  science
   are not entirely reserved for the developed world. SALT  will  provide  a
   first –class facility for fundamental research in Africa in a field where
   South Africa has a long history of excellence. It  will  strengthen  ties
   with researchers around the world, and provide  opportunities  for  young
   scientist and engineers in  a  stimulating  high-technology  environment.
   SALT will be able to record distant stars, galaxies and quasars a billion
   times too faint to be seen with the unaided  eye-as  faint  as  a  candle
   flame at the distant of the moon.


   Briefings:

   The Committee Delegation met with officials and staff of  both  SAAO  and
   SALT and was briefed on the  latest  construction  development  regarding
   SALT, which will be launch, officially in  November  2005.  Members  were
   also taken to the sites in the evening to observe SALT in action and were
   very impressed with the high technology used to operate the telescope and
   the output derived from it.


   Hydroponics, Beaufort West, Western Cape
   Hydroponics is a plant – growing method, without the usage of soil, in  a
   nutrient solution. It is a useful  method  of  conducting  research  with
   controlled condition of nutrients availability.


   The Hydroponics Project, in Beaufort  West,  is  a  Section  21  Company,
   managed by the CSIR, started in 2002. Funding was provided  by  both  the
   National (Department of Science and Technology) and Provincial  (Economic
   Development  and  Social  Services)  Governments.   The   Beaufort   West
   Municipality  also  provided  contribution   in   the   form   of   basic
   infrastructure, like clearing of land, connection to the municipal  water
   source and provision of discounted electricity and water.


   Woolworths and Pick & Pay are current  clients  of  the  project,  buying
   herbs like: fresh coriander, basil and spinach. New products  are  tested
   on a  regular  basis.  With  the  extended  production  capacity,  it  is
   envisaged that the company will deliver up to 1000kg of fresh  herbs  per
   week.


   The project currently employs some 60 people, the majority being women.

   Briefings:


   The Delegation met officials responsible for the project and was provided
   with a progress report. Members also met staff and were taken on  a  tour
   of the project. The Deputy –Mayor of Beaufort West, who also sits on  the
   Board  of  the  Company,  addressed  the  Delegation   on   the   working
   relationship with the Municipality. He  mentioned  that  the  last  major
   milestone in terms of  the  expansion  of  the  project  was  the  recent
   completion of a new packing room for packaged herb products. Some of  the
   challenges faced by the Company,  including  being  forced  to  implement
   short – time to avoid  lay-offs.  This  has  led  to  reduced  wages  and
   subsequent  unhappiness  amongst  staff.   The   Deputy-Mayor   and   the
   Chairperson of  the  Committee  officiated  during  the  opening  of  the
   Beaufort West Hydroponics Company Packaging Room.


   Members were also taken to the Central Karoo Leather (CKL) factory to see
   the leather products that are produced in the factory and  were  able  to
   interact with management and staff. The factory is a Poverty  Alleviation
   Project funded by the South  African  Government.  The  CKL  is  a  joint
   venture between the Department  of  Science  and  Technology  (DST),  the
   Council for Scientific and Industrial Research  (CSIR)  and  the  Central
   Karoo community. The vision is to develop Central Karoo  Leather  into  a
   sustainable business.


   Biodiversity: The African Coelacanth Ecosystem Programme


   A Coelacanth is a  marine  lobe-finned  fish  belonging  to  a  group  of
   primitive fish. It is called a Coelacanth because there is no spine,  but
   rather a hollow notochord, which is a  thick  walled  cartilaginous  tube
   filled with  an  oily  fluid.  Coelacanths  are  very  special  fish-true
   survivors.


   Coelacanths date back millions of years to well before the  time  of  the
   dinosaurs. They were believed to have been extinct for  over  70  million
   years. These unique prehistoric creatures provide an extraordinary window
   to the past, enabling us to look back in time. They also unlock the  door
   to the future, opening opportunities to explore deep reef ecology,  build
   capacity and sustain marine resources so that those who depend  upon  the
   sea will have a better future.


   The South African government launched a  coelacanth  programme  in  2002,
   after a colony of these “ living fossils” were discovered off  the  coast
   of KwaZulu-Natal. It is  now  one  of  the  flagship  programmes  of  the
   National Research Foundation (NRF).


   The African Coelacanth Ecosystem Programme, managed by the South  African
   Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity (SAIAB), at the University of  Rhodes,
   in Grahamstown, integrates physical and  biological  sciences,  harnesses
   engineering and technology, extends  collaboration  across  national  and
   international   borders   and   encourages   young   people   to   become
   knowledgeable. The Programme has also drawn together  countries  such  as
   the Comoros, Madagascar, Mozambique, South Africa and Tanzania to work as
   partners in order to sustain the marine resources they share.


   Briefings:


   The Delegation met with officials responsible for the Programme  and  was
   provided with a presentation on the  Coelacanth  Ecosystem  including  an
   update. Members were very impress with the work done in the Programme and
   noted  the  concern  raised  that  the  funding  for  the  Programme  was
   inadequate. The Committee agreed to discuss the matter with the  National
   Research Foundation (NRF).


   Vice-Chancellor of Rhodes University.


   The meeting with the Vice – Chancellor, Dr D R  Woods  and  the  Dean  of
   Research, Prof J R Duncan, provided the Delegation  with  an  insight  on
   where the university is regarding transformation.  Most  black  graduates
   are snapped up by the private sector and don’t go into teaching. A  large
   number, interested in science, take up chemistry as a major, resulting in
   the largest chemistry honours class in the country,  last  year.  On  the
   downside, the entrance into physics and  maths  tends  to  be  very  low.
   General research is done at a fundamental level. Fifty seven  percent  of
   students are women, fifty percent are black at post graduate level and of
   undergraduates 70% are black. The university also has a funding programme
   specifically  targeting  black  female  students  studying   science.   A
   mentorship programme has also started for students who are in their first
   year of Phd.


   The Committee was invited to the National Science Festival held  annually
   in March by the University and Sasol.


   The Delegation also visited various Science  departments,  including  the
   faculty of Pharmacy and the faculty of  Human  Kinetics  and  Ergonomics.
   Human Kinetics encapsulates the academic discipline that focuses  on  the
   scientific investigation of human movement. Ergonomics is the  scientific
   analysis of humans within their working environment.


   A brief stop at the Makana Meadery introduced Members to a project on bee
   keeping and the making of honeywine/mead. Makana Meadery  was  formed  to
   commercialize the traditional Xhosa honeywine/mead, iQhilika. As such  it
   has a research  focus  on  biotechnology,  a  marketing  focus  on  honey
   products and a beekeeping focus to provide honey for  brewing  and  sale.
   Makana Meadery is an entirely independent  company  operating  under  the
   auspices of Rhodes University.


   The Delegation ended their visit to the University with  a  meeting  with
   Science Postgraduate students. Most, and in particular  black  graduates,
   expressed frustration in not being  able  to  find  employment  in  their
   field. This frustration made many consider the option of emigrating.


   Members empathized with  the  frustrations  and  concerns  raise  by  the
   students  and  promised  to  bring  it  to  the  attention  of   relevant
   stakeholders, including the Department of Science and Technology and  the
   Department of Education.


   Recommendations

    • On SALT, the Committee recommends that the Department of Science and
      Technology (DST) interact with the Department of Education to try and
      facilitate school trips to the site.
    • On the Hydroponics Project, the Department of Science and Technology
      must monitor the cost involved and whether the project is commercially
      viable.
    • On the Coelacanth Ecosystem Programme, the Committee recommends that
      the Department of Science and Technology increase funding towards the
      project.
    • On Rhodes University, the Committee recommends that the Department of
      Science and Technology look into why so many Black science graduate
      students cant find employment.

   Acknowledgements:


   The Committee wishes to thank all the people that it met and interacted
   with during the study tour. The hospitality accorded to the Delegation
   made the task of the Committee much easier and affordable.


Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on Study
   Tour to Pretoria, Gauteng Provinces, dated 15 November 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having conducted a
    study tour to Gauteng Province from 15 – 19 August 2005, reports as
    follows:


    The delegation, under the leadership of the Chairperson of the
    Committee, Mr. E N N Ngcobo (ANC), included Mr. A R Ainslie (ANC),
    Professor I J Mohamed (ANC), Ms F Mahomed (ANC), Mr. S N Nxumalo (ANC),
    Mr. P Nefolovhodwe (AZAPO), Mr. B Mnyandu (DA), Mr. A Mlangeni (ANC)
    Mr. Johnny Ramrock (Committee Secretary) and Ms Nthabiseng Borotho
    (Committee Assistant).


    Purpose for the study tour:


    To visit various Science Councils and monitor Department of Science and
    Technology Poverty Alleviation Projects.


 Council for Mineral Technology (MINTEK)


 MINTEK was established in 1934 and it’s mandate is to serve  the  national
 interest through high  –  calibre  research,  development  and  technology
 transfer that promotes mineral technology, and to foster the establishment
 and expansion of small, medium  and  large  industries  in  the  field  of
 minerals and products derived from them. MINTEK’s vision is to be a global
 leader in mineral and metallurgical research, development  and  technology
 transfer. The mission is to serve South Africa  by  promoting  technology,
 industrial growth and human development. MINTEK reports to the  Department
 of Minerals and Energy. MINTEK is a Science Council and operates  more  or
 less like a parastatal that is why it also reports to  the  Department  of
 Science and Technology.

 Briefings:


 The Delegation was welcomed and given an overview, by the CEO  of  MINTEK,
 Dr Paul Jourdan. He shared the knowledge that the first  underground  mine
 in the world, was established by the San people.


 Presentations  were  also  made  on  Minerals   Policy   and   Sustainable
 Development for Small Scale Mining and the Kgabane Training Programme.


 The Committee paid brief visits to some of the other divisions, especially
 those  engaged  with  Poverty  Alleviation   Projects,   which   included:
 Pyrometallurgy, Mineralogy, Nanotechnology and Small Scale Mining.


 National Research Foundation ( NRF)


 Established in  1999,  the  National  Research  Foundation  (NRF)  is  the
 government’s national agency  responsible  for  promoting  and  supporting
 research and the development of high-level skills in  all  fields  of  the
 humanities, social and natural sciences, engineering and  technology.  Its
 mandate therefore positions it as a key agency  in  confronting  three  of
 South Africa’s major challenges  in  achieving  national  and  continental
 prosperity:

     •  A  robust  knowledge  culture  underpinned  by   quality   education
       accessible to all
     • Eradication of poverty and attendant diseases
     • Wealth creation not limited to a privileged minority.


 Briefings:


 Dr Khotso Mokhele, President of the NRF welcomed the Delegation and gave a
 background report of the institution. He mentioned that the main  task  of
 the NRF is  to  produce  quality  PhDs  who  can  drive  the  science  and
 technology systems in South  Africa.  Focus  areas  include:  support  for
 research institutions for the production of large numbers of quality PhDs.
 This will  include  the  support  programmes  for  placement  of  graduate
 students in the science  councils  and  industry  laboratories,  strategic
 placement of research equipment, support for improvement  of  outputs  for
 postgraduate students, as well as building research capacity in the higher
 education sector. All these activities will be undertaken  in  partnership
 with other stakeholders.  The creation of  centers  of  excellence  is  to
 become a major component of research  and  scientific  progress  in  South
 Africa. These initiatives will in future become  an  even  more  important
 part of the NRF’s challenges since it is  the  main  implementer  of  this
 initiative.

 The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)


 The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) was  established
 on October 1945 in terms of the Scientific Research Council Act  of  1945.
 The CSIR was accorded the status of a statutory body  outside  the  Public
 Service, with its main objectives  being:  “to  undertake  both  pure  and
 applied  research  for  the  development  of  the  natural  resources  and
 industries of the country; to train the personnel required for  scientific
 research within the country; to provide proper co-ordination  of  research
 throughout  the  country,  including  government  departments,   technical
 colleges  and  universities;  and  to  provide  for  the  collection   and
 dissemination of information with regard to research”.


 Briefings:


 The Delegation was met and welcomed by the  CSIR  President  and  CEO:  Dr
 Sibusiso Sibisi. Dr Phil Mjwara, Head  of  Group  Executive  Research  and
 Development and Strategic Human Capital Development, provided an  overview
 of the CSIR, since the CEO had to leave for an  urgent  meeting  with  the
 Deputy Minister, Mr D A Hanekom.


 Members of the Committee made visits to the CSIR Research and  Development
 Units and  National  Research  Centres,  including  Biosciences,  Material
 Science and Advanced Beneficiation, Defence, Peace, Safety  and  Security,
 National Infrastructures and Spatial Initiatives,  Natural  Resources  and
 the Natural Environment and the CSIR Wind Tunnel facilities that  included
 experimental aerodynamics.


 The Committee was impressed with what they saw and observed especially  in
 the division of aerospace, science and Wind Tunnel facilities are of world
 class level, and also the division of bioscience in  which  demonstrations
 were performed for the Committee’s observation  on  gene  manipulation  on
 plants.


 Department of Science and Technology (DST)


 The vision of the Department of Science and Technology (DST) is “to create
 a prosperous society that derives enduring  and  equitable  benefits  from
 science and technology” and the mission is  “to  develop,  coordinate  and
 manage a national system of innovation that will bring about maximum human
 capital, sustainable economic growth and  improved  quality  of  life  for
 all”. The  DST  is  responsible  for  putting  frameworks  in  place  that
 encourage people to develop excellent solutions with global  applications.
 It is responsible for promoting research and development and the effective
 application of science and technology in meeting local challenges.  It  is
 responsible for adding value to  projects  run  by  other  sector-specific
 departments and to achieve better results by applying the best  technology
 and innovation

 Briefings:


 Dr R Adams, Director-General of DST, addressed the  Delegation  on,  among
 other things, the relocation of the Department to the new building  within
 the CSIR precinct and South Africa to  host  the  International  Corporate
 Governance Network (ICGN) conference in 2007. Due to other engagements  in
 the Presidency, he had to leave and the briefing was subsequently lead  by
 Dr Paterson, the Deputy Director General of DST.


 Various other officials of DST also made presentations on their respective
 programmes in DST,  which  are  Science  and  Technology  Expert  Services
 (SciTES), Frontier Science  and  Technology  Programme  in  the  new  DST,
 Government Sector Programmes and Coordination and DST International.


 Dr Bernie Fanaroff, Project Manager, spoke about South Africa’s formal bid
 to host the largest radio telescope ever built, the Square Kilometre Array
 Radio Telescope (SKA). The programme aim to attract young people into high
 tech and science through exciting projects  and  also  to  bring  back  SA
 expatriates to work in South Africa.


 Council for Geoscience


 The mission statement of the Council for Geoscience is to be a world-class
 public organization, which provides excellent geoscience  information  and
 services for the benefit of the people of South Africa.


 The Council for Geoscience (CGS) is one of the National  Science  Councils
 of South Africa and is the legal successor of  the  Geological  Survey  of
 South Africa. The Council is  a  modern  institution,  boasting  excellent
 facilities and expertise, ranking among the  best  in  Africa.  The  CGS’s
 strength lies in its core of competent geoscientific and technical  staff,
 encompassing virtually all the disciplines of the geosciences.


 Briefings:


 The Committee was  met  and  welcomed  by  the  CEO  of  the  Council  for
 Geoscience (CGS), Mr Thibedi  Ramontja  who  also  provided  a  background
 report on the Council.


 This was followed with presentations  on  Water  Geosciences  (Hydrology),
 Seismic Monitoring and Tsunami Fail Safe Systems in South Africa, the role
 of the CGS in promoting the small-scale mining sector in South Africa  and
 Airborne Geophysical Operations.


 The  CGS  also  briefed  the  Committee  on  the  difficulties  they   had
 encountered when they took over the institution from the old management in
 terms of transformation. Advancement they had achieved recently is amongst
 some of the difficulties they had mentioned, was the ageing  equipment  to
 perform at a world class level in the country, lack of funding, etc.


   Achievements they had mentioned was the  implementation  of  their  human
   resource strategy, which they had developed, whereby  they  visit  higher
   institutions of learning in order to identify potential  candidates  whom
   they can support and develop for future human capital in the country  for
   geoscience. They later mentioned that this strategy has already  gone  as
   far as to send the candidates as mentioned above  overseas  for  advanced
   training in geoscience. They appealed to Parliament for support  in  this
   important social transformation strategy.


   iThemba LABS (Gauteng)


   The iThemba Laboratories is the leading nuclear science facility in South
   Africa. It reports to the Minister of Science and Technology through  the
   National Research Foundation (NRF) and focuses  on  the  following  three
   main areas of research:


     • Fundamental nuclear physics,
     • Treatment of cancer by means of radiation,
     • Radioisotope production, and
     • Is also engaged in the development of nuclear physics base techniques
       for research in the development of the diamond industry.


   The availability of proton and neutron beams  as  iThemba’s  key  feature
   places it in a position  of  significance  in  the  treatment  of  cancer
   patients, especially because proton and neutron beams are  not  available
   in any other part of South Africa.


   Briefings:


   The Delegation  was  met  and  welcomed  by  the  head  of  iThemba  LABS
   (Gauteng), Dr  I  Z  Machi  who  also  provided  a  report  on  what  the
   institution does.


   This  was  followed  with  presentations  on:  AMS  and  microprobe:  Ion
   Implantation and Environmental Isotope. The Committee was also  informed,
   by black nuclear scientist, on concern over the  lack  of  transformation
   within the institution and the problems experienced  as  a  result.   The
   Delegation was asked to raise the concerns with the Department of Science
   and Technology so that it can be addressed.


   Recommendations

    • The Committee recommends that the Department of Science and Technology
      provides the Committee with a full report on transformation at iThemba
      LABS (Gauteng), following many concerns raised in the Portfolio
      Committee’s Study Tour.


    • The Committee recommends that DST should provide support and
      leadership on CSIR efforts to sustain and develop some of its world-
      class divisions, such as aerospace science division (in particular
      Wind Tunnel facilities), bioscience division for genetic engineering
      research, just to mention a few points.

    • Committee recommends that a strategy in human resource be developed to
      absorb graduate students into the science system of South Africa.

Acknowledgements:


 The Committee wishes to thank all the officials and staff of the
 Department of Science and Technology and entities that were visited for
 assisting Members with their tasks and for contributing to the success of
 the study tour.


Report to be considered.


                          THURSDAY, 8 DECEMBER 2005


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


      a) Government Notice No 1040 published in Government Gazette No 28150
         dated 28 October 2005: Borrowing powers of water boards listed
         under Schedule 3 Part B of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
         (Act No 1 of 1999).


2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      a) Progress reports in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates
         Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993) on magistrates (M S E Khumalo; K
         Sulliman and M F Mathe) suspended for alleged misconduct.



                          MONDAY, 12 DECEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

        1) Patents Amendment Bill [B17B – 2005] – Act No 20 of 2005
           (assented to and signed by President on 8 December 2005); and
        2) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B37 – 2005] – Act No 21 of 2005
           (assented to and signed by President on 29 November 2005).


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1. Report of the Portfolio  Committee  on  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  on
    Legislative  Oversight  through  Annual  Reports:   the  Case  for   the
    Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, 2004/05
                              Public Hearings:
                  Alleviating Poverty – Delivering Services
                            12 – 14 October 2005

1. Introduction

Annual reports are the key reporting instruments for departments  to  report
against the performance targets and  budgets  outlined  in  their  strategic
plans, read together with the Estimates of National Expenditure  (ENE),  and
Budget Statement  Two  (for  the  provincial  sphere).  Annual  reports  are
therefore required to contain information on service delivery,  in  addition
to financial statements and the audit report. It is meant to be a  backward-
looking document, focusing on performance in the  financial  year  that  has
just ended.  It reports on how  the  budget  for  that  financial  year  was
implemented.

To gauge the performance of the Department of  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry
for the  2004/05  financial  year,  the  outputs  for  2004/05  and  2005/06
highlighted  for  the  four  programmes,  Administration,  Water   Resources
Management, Water  Services  and  Forestry,  will  be  correlated  from  the
following source documents:

    • Strategic Plan 2004/05 – 2006/07.
    • Estimates of National Expenditure.
    • Presentations at Public Hearings of the Portfolio Committee  on  Water
      Affairs and Forestry, 12 – 14 October 2005.
to that of the Annual Report 2005 and  other  source  documents,  so  as  to
assess the way in which DWAF functioned in the delivery  of  its  core  aim,
that is to:

         Ensure the availability and supply of water at national  level;  to
         facilitate  equitable   and   sustainable   social   and   economic
         development; ensure the universal and  efficient  supply  of  water
         services at local level; and promote the sustainable management  of
         forests.

Section 1: Significant Shifts in Departmental Policy and Programmes

    • Change from irrigation boards’ to water user associations.
    • Transfer of water service  operations  to  Municipalities.  There  are
      significant costs associated with the  transfer,  including  personnel
      costs and restructuring costs. This has resulted in an increase in  an
      expenditure on Administration in  the  DWAF.  The  transfer  of  Water
      Services should be completed by April 2006.

In September 2003, the Strategic Framework for Water Services was  approved.
The Framework updated the 1994 White Paper on Water  Supply  and  Sanitation
and ensured alignment between policy for water  services  and  the  evolving
municipal policy framework.
    • Commercial and  indigenous  forests  to  be  transferred  out  of  the
      Department.

Both the above will impact on the  staffing  structure  of  DWAF,  in  water
services and forestry, in particular.

    • In the 2003/04 financial year, the water sector faced  severe  drought
      conditions in many parts  of  the  country.  Fortunately,  late  rains
      somewhat alleviated the situation.  Extra  efforts  were  required  to
      implement  drought  emergency  works,  particularly  in  the   Western
      Highveld area, and the allocation of  additional  funds  late  in  the
      financial year necessitated rollovers  for  work  that  will  only  be
      completed during the 2004/05 year.

The drought was preceded by a particularly severe fire season  for  forestry
and agriculture. Overall, the  forest  industry  lost  30  176  hectares  of
plantation to fire, resulting in a  loss  of  4,5  million  tons  of  direct
production valued at R695,7 million and a loss of an  estimated  R3  Billion
worth  of  downstream  timber  products.  The  costs  of  firefighting   and
replanting amounted to R227 million. Departmental losses  represented  about
15% of the total. Further damage was only  averted  by  cooperation  between
all members of the forest industry family.  In  recognition  of  the  losses
suffered, the Department is working with organised forestry to find ways  to
temporarily exempt growers from water use charges for areas affected by  the
fires.

    • Water resources in South Africa are limited and highly  variable.  The
      country’s water resources would be sufficient to  support  social  and
      economic development for the  future  provided  they  are  judiciously
      managed,  and  wisely  allocated.   The  fundamental  objectives   for
      managing South Africa’s  water  resources  are  to  achieve  equitable
      access to water resources and their sustainable and efficient use.

The National Water Resources Management Strategy, (NWRS)  has  been  adopted
by Government to guide municipalities and local government on how to  better
manage water resources in South Africa. Municipalities and Local  Government
need to implement the NWRS with all urgency.

    • Catchment Management Agencies and Water User Associations

Catchment Management Agencies (CMAs)  and  Water  User  Associations  (WUAs)
have been established in certain  areas.  However,  other  areas  are  still
lagging behind.

The 2005 State of the Nation Address highlighted the following  targets  for
the sectoral Departments:

    • To ensure that within the next five years, all households  would  have
      easy access to clean running water.
    • During the current year, more than 300 000 households will be provided
      with basic sanitation.
    • Improve the capacity of Municipalities to ensure that  the  target  of
      providing sanitation to 300  000  households  per  year  is  met.  The
      targeted timeframe is 2007.
    • To ensure that by December 2004, through programmes undertaken by the
      Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF), government will
      provide clean and potable water to the 10th million South African
      since 1994.

    • Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG)

The President has pointed out that there  are  approximately  three-quarters
of households that are receiving the free 6 kilolitres of water  per  month.
These, however, are households  that  have  the  infrastructure  to  provide
potable water. A key resource for municipalities  to  improve  on  the  poor
infrastructure in other areas is the Municipal Infrastructure  Grant  (MIG).
In addition, municipalities should be encouraged to see how they could  make
use of the R85 billion1, which will be provided by the South  African  Banks
over a period of three years to finance infrastructure development in  rural
areas.

In addition, DWAF administers a R1.2  billion  grant  over  the  next  three
years that would go into the eradication of the bucket system.

    • Transfer of Water Schemes

Although transfers of water schemes have been completed  in  certain  areas,
other areas are lagging far behind.  DWAF had to  complete  these  transfers
this financial year (2005),  but  could  not  do  so.   DWAF  has  therefore
requested from Treasury to complete the transfers by 2006.
General Issues/Questions to Consider

To what extent have municipalities  and  local  government  implemented  the
NWRS?


Water losses remain a challenge.  The impact and cost of such  water  losses
must be quantified by municipalities, but they do not  appear  to  have  the
requisite capacity to do so.  Will DWAF intervene in this process?

How has DWAF monitored  the  progress  of  the  establishment  of  Catchment
Management Agencies.  What were some of the encountered problems?   How  are
these being addressed?

The Committee, in collaboration with DWAF should monitor  progress  made  by
municipalities in making optimal use of the MIG so that the  bucket  system,
and pit latrines, so commonly used in rural areas can be phased out.

Municipalities should be  encouraged  to  see  how  they  can  use  the  R85
billion, which will be provided by the South African Banks over a period  of
three years to finance infrastructure development in rural areas.

The transfer of water  schemes  should  be  completed,  and  DWAF  needs  to
provide a detailed progress report regarding the transfers.

How is DWAF playing a role in  facilitating  and  educating  municipalities,
and local government in capacity building programmes?


Section 2: Overview of Programmes as Reflected  in  the  Annual  Report  and
Presentations by DWAF

Programme 1: Administration

The programme provides for the  management  of  the  Department,  including:
policy formulation  by  the  Minister  and  senior  management,  centralised
administrative, legal and office support  services,  departmental  personnel
management, financial administration and information technology.

The two main components of programme 1 are corporate services and  financial
administration.

The Corporate Service component achieved the following:

    • Human Resource Development:

A strategy on the implementation of the Work Place Skills plan was  devised.
It will be implemented during 2005.  Negotiations on  the  incorporation  of
LGWSETA into the PSETA and ESETA. Pilot learnerships  implemented  in  water
purification, waste water treatment and water reticulation.

    •  Human  Resource  Management:  The  pension  management  process   was
      strengthened and the Performance Management and  Development  Strategy
      was implemented. Increased support to restructuring  process  in  line
      with Resolution 7 of 2002.

       • Communication:  Campaigns such as  Water  and  Arbour  weeks,  and
         other national campaigns such as  16  Days  of  Activism,  women’s
         month,  Heritage  and  World  Aids  Days  were   coordinated   and
         implemented. These formed part of the unit’s major activities with
         resounding successes marked by the participation  of  the  highest
         level in government.

       • Administration: The Unit is subdivided  into  district  divisions,
         namely:  provisioning  services,   office   services,   protection
         services, land requirements and land usage, and transport.  A  key
         activity was the National Treasury procurement integration process
         that  was  implemented  successfully.  Land  and  servitudes  were
         successfully acquired and affected persons were compensated.  Land
         is   being   acquired   for    the    raising    of    the    Flag
         Botshelo Dam. The acquisition should be finalised by  end  October
         2005. Approximately, 36 applications for development around 2006.

The Financial administration worked toward the following:

   •  The  department  budget  was  simplified  by  restructuring  from   8
     programmes to 4, thus making management  and  accountability  clearer.
     The Branch was able to implement the provisions of the Public  Finance
     Management Act (PFMA), which include separating  the  trading  account
     activities  from  the  main  Exchequer  account  activities,   opening
     separate bank accounts for these  different  activities,  as  well  as
     implementing procurement processes in line with the Act.
   • The  branch  developed  processes  to  implement  accrual  accounting,
     including a full asset management system in accordance with the  PFMA.
     The risks  affecting  the  department  have  also  been  assessed  and
     strategies have been developed to address them. A turn-around strategy
     is being implemented to address the audit qualifications.

Programme 2: Water Resources Management

The purpose of water resources management is to ensure  that  the  country’s
water resources are  protected,  used,  developed,  conserved,  managed  and
controlled in a sustainable and equitable manner  for  the  benefit  of  all
people.

The National Water Act (36 of 198) replaced  previous  legislation  with  an
equitable  system  of  administrative  authorizations  to  use  water,   and
Government became the public trustee of the nation’s  water  resources.  The
Department is responsible for administering all aspects of the new Act,  and
for the development and implementation of related policies,  strategies  and
regulatory instruments. It is also  responsible  for  planning,  developing,
operating and maintaining  the  water  resources  management  infrastructure
owned by  the  state,  and  for  overseeing  the  activities  of  all  water
management institutions. The role will change over time, as 19 new  regional
water  management  institutions  –   catchment   management   agencies   are
established. The  creation  of  a  national  water  resource  infrastructure
agency is also being considered to manage existing  national  infrastructure
and to develop new infrastructure.

The main achievements in Programme 2  as  highlighted  in  the  2005  Annual
Report reflect the following:

    • The National Water Resources Strategy was established in January 2005.
    • The process of establishing new international, national and catchment-
      based water management institutions progressed during this period, and
      moved the Department towards its ultimate role of sector policy  maker
      and regulator.
    • A  number  of  international  developments  and  agreements  regarding
      studies and establishment of joint basins were concluded.
    • The process of separating the management and  further  development  of
      national water resources infrastructure from its other activities with
      preparations for establishing a new Infrastructure Branch with  effect
      from 1 April 2005.  The establishment of a new  public  entity  –  the
      National Water Resource Infrastructure Agency commenced  and  will  be
      considered by Cabinet early in the next financial year.
    • Ten new water user associations were established and constitutions for
      a further four associations – for revitalised  irrigation  schemes  in
      Limpopo Province –  were  in  preparation.   Ten  existing  irrigation
      boards were transformed into water user associations,  and  a  further
      six  transformation  submissions  were   received   for   review   and
      processing. Progress was made in arrangements  to  transfer  operating
      and maintenance responsibilities for five government water schemes  to
      water user associations – Boegoeberg, Kakamas, Lower  Olifants,  Sand-
      Vet and Van der Kloof – but there  were  other  delays  in  finalising
      staff transfer agreements in three of the schemes,  whilst  the  other
      two requested deferral of  transfer  because  they  were  experiencing
      drought-related difficulties.
    • The fourth consecutive year of sub-normal rainfall throughout most  of
      the country  necessitated  continuing  support  to  municipalities  to
      deliver water services where sources – especially groundwater  sources
      had failed or were failing.
    • A five-year plan was developed to facilitate the  integration  of  all
      aspects of water  resources  monitoring,  covering  the  quantity  and
      quality of surface and  groundwater.  This  was  complemented  by  the
      development  of  improved  methodologies  to   determine   groundwater
      recharge, potential and use, and groundwater interactions with surface
      water.

Assessment of the Achievements of Programme 2:  Water  Resources  Management
as highlighted in the Annual Report

The key outputs and service delivery  trends  as  mentioned  in  the  Annual
Report also highlight the actual performance of this programme.  The  actual
performance column  in  the  Annual  Report  is  an  important  quantitative
indicator of progress made in Programme  2.  For  Programme  2,  the  actual
performance, highlights, amongst others, the following:

    • Subsidies granted to four groups of farmers.
    • Draft Policy for Water Allocation Reform for South Africa  to  achieve
      equity in access  to  the  use  of  water  resources  finalised  after
      consultation with key stakeholders.
    • Models are being set up for five catchments – modeling  will  be  done
      during compulsory licensing.
    • Internal Strategic Perspectives (departmental forerunners of catchment
      management strategies) completed for all 19 water management areas.
    • Validating  of  registered  water  use  and  verification  of  claimed
      existing lawful use substantially completed in the Vaal Catchment, and
      commenced in the Mhlathuze.
    • Commitments to bulk water users and water boards met.
    • 142 500 hectares of invasive alien vegetation cleared.
    • About 12 000 person years of employment provided.
Programme 3: Water Services

The  purpose  of  Programme  3  is  to  ensure  that  effective,  efficient,
sustainable and affordable water and sanitation  services  are  provided  to
the people of South Africa, as well as economic users.

In 2004/05, the Department continued to move from its role  of  construction
and operation of water and sanitation services to its regulatory role.  This
is indicated in the budget allocation for its Capex-programme  from  an  all
time high during 2003/04 of R1505,371 million  (including  donor  funds)  to
R587,018 million for 2004/05, reducing  even  further  to  R388,873  million
during 2005/06 and to R140,963 million for 2006/07.  This function has  been
taken over by the Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) programme.

On Operations and Maintenance, 95 schemes out of a  targeted  total  of  317
have been transferred out of DWAF, representing an annual budget  amount  of
R124,370 million.

During 2004/05,  the  sector  leadership  role  was  taken  forward  through
programmes including free basic water,  Masibambane,  participation  in  the
MIG programme and other support to Local  Government.   Many  Water  Service
Authorities (WSA’s)  benefited  from  DWAF  support  through  advice/support
services from the regional offices.

The 2005 Annual Report in its overview of access to basic  services,  states
that:

         During the year under  review,  water  supply  was  provided  to  a
         further 1,51 million  people,  and  sanitation  to  a  further  1,3
         million people.  There are currently 3,7  million  people  with  no
         access to a basic water supply, and a further 5,4 million who  have
         access to a water supply that does not meet the RDP service levels.
          There are still  16,0  million  people  without  access  to  basic
         sanitation infrastructure.




The main achievements in Programme 3, Water Services, as highlighted in  the
2005 Annual Report reflect the following:

    • Achievement of an  important  milestone  in  service  delivery  –  the
      provision of safe drinking water to the 10th  millionth  person  since
      1994. The sector has also achieved the  Millennium  Development  Water
      Supply goal by halving the backlog since 1994. it was also  the  first
      year that the bulk of  the  capital  funds  for  basic  services  were
      allocated   directly   to   municipalities   through   the   Municipal
      Infrastructure Grant (MIG) – the MIG  allocation  being  R2,3  billion
      (R1,5  billion  allocated  for  water  supply  and  R0,8  billion  for
      sanitation).  The Department has thus  focused  on  its  new  role  of
      sector leader with responsibility for policy, regulation,  information
      and support.
    • Regarding the capital programme,  DWAF’s  core  focus  was  to  ensure
      municipal  compliance  to   MIG   project   conditions,   to   support
      municipalities  in  the  eradication  of  service  backlogs,  and  the
      provision of sustainable services.
    • The Department continued to promote  the  eradication  of  the  bucket
      system and to replace it with more dignified and appropriate types  of
      sanitation services.  R1,2 billion, in addition to  the  existing  MIG
      allocation, has been negotiated and  committed  over  the  next  three
      financial years  to  ensure  that  the  bucket  system  is  completely
      eradicated.
    • Good progress was made on implementing  the  Strategic  Framework  for
      Water  Services,  as  approved  by  Cabinet  on  17  September   2003,
      especially on the development of Institutional Reform  and  Regulatory
      strategies.  The process of Institutional  Reform  has  proved  to  be
      especially challenging.
    • The new Water Services Regulation Directorate produced a  first  draft
      of the National Water Services Regulation Strategy, which will be  put
      through a rigorous internal and external consultation  process  during
      the next period.
    • As reported in the State  of  the  Water  Services  Sector,  there  is
      justified concern over the quality  of  water  supply  and  sanitation
      services at municipal level, especially around drinking water  quality
      and reliability of service.  This highlights  the  importance  of  the
      regulatory function and systems.
    • The implementation of Free Basic Water services programme  went  well.
      Approximately 95% of municipalities are now supplying FBW  to  all  or
      part of their municipal population.  This translates  to  69%  of  the
      total RSA population. The programme is making a huge difference to the
      poor (households with less than a R1000 income/month).  In  total,  23
      million poor get their basic water free of  charge.  The  Department’s
      provincial support units are still assisting municipalities  with  the
      implementation of the policy.
    • A Free Basic Sanitation policy has been drafted, and it is hoped  that
      as soon as it is approved, a formal FBS programme will be rolled out.
    • Health and Hygiene education and promotion continued to be part of the
      Department’s Water and Sanitation programme and efforts were to  embed
      it  into  the  MIG  projects  implemented  at  municipal  level.   The
      Departments of Health, Housing and DWAF have developed  a  health  and
      hygiene package that  will  not  be  part  of  Housing  Customer  Care
      programme.

Regional Operations

    • Transfers continued to take place within the Joint Policy position and
      there has been consistency in the implementation of the  policy  since
      adopted by the Inter Departmental Transfer Committee.  Assets  with  a
      present day value of R1250 million have  been  transferred  since  the
      inception of the programme.  In most cases, associated staff were also
      transferred or seconded to  Local  Government  or  relevant  receiving
      institutions.  A further 30 agreements have to be concluded  by  March
      2006.
    • The oversight role  played  by  the  South  African  Local  Government
      Association (SALGA), DWAF, DPLG and National Treasury helped to ensure
      that transfers happen within the agreed framework.  In  terms  of  the
      programme which includes the Division of Revenue  Act,  all  transfers
      should be effected by 30  March  2006,  with  all  conditional  grants
      (subsidies) phased out by June 2011 at which  stage,  the  conditional
      grants will be incorporated into the equitable  share  allocations  to
      local government.
    • The Department of Public Service and Administration  (DPSA)  issued  a
      circular on the transfer framework  to  facilitate  the  transfers  of
      personnel between spheres of Government.
    • DWAF is working  on  a  number  of  initiatives  to  ensure  that  the
      transition period following a  transfer  is  as  smooth  as  possible,
      including the drafting of an ‘after-care’ framework for staff who were
      transferred from DWAF.

Assessment  of  the  Achievements  of  Programme  3:   Water   Services   as
highlighted in the Annual Report

The key outputs and service delivery  trends  as  mentioned  in  the  Annual
Report also highlight the actual performance of this programme.  The  actual
performance column  in  the  Annual  Report  is  an  important  quantitative
indicator of progress made in Programme  2.  For  Programme  2,  the  actual
performance, highlights, amongst others, the following:

    • Basic water supply was provided to 1,51 million people.
    • Sanitation facilities were delivered to 1,3 million people.  This  was
      more than 300 000 households.
    • The MIG allocation for water supply amounted to R1 501 million and the
      DWAF  Water  Services  Supply  budget  was  R352  million.   The   MIG
      allocation for Sanitation services amounted to R778 million.
    • 9 100 bucket type toilets were replaced by either VIP’s or water borne
      units in the Free State.  R1,2 million, in addition  to  the  existing
      MIG allocation, has been negotiated and committed over the next  three
      financial years  to  ensure  that  the  bucket  system  is  eradicated
      completely.
    • 95% of municipalities have reported the implementation of a FBW policy
      and FBW reaches 75% of the population served by infrastructure.
    • The monitoring and oversight role of DWAF for Water  Boards  continued
      through a formal evaluation process,  including  appraisal  of  Policy
      Statements and Business Plans.

Programme 4: Forestry

The  Department  promotes  the  sustainable  management  of  South  Africa’s
indigenous  and  commercial  forest  resources.  It  aims  to  ensure   that
commercial plantations are regulated and managed in a sustainable manner  to
promote investment, employment, competition and black empowerment,  as  well
as rural development. It seeks to ensure that there is an  effective  system
to monitor, regulate and manage the protection and  use  of  South  Africa’s
indigenous state forests.

The 1996 White Paper  on  Sustainable  Forest  Development  focused  on  the
transformation of the forest sector to serve the needs of South  Africa  and
its people.  The National Forests Act (84 of 1998)  and  the  National  Veld
and Forest Fires Act (101 of 1998), which followed, impact on  the  work  of
the  Department.  A  great  deal  of  attention  has  been  focused  on  the
restructuring of the forests and plantations  run  by  the  Department.  The
process of disposing of the category A  or  large  and  economically  viable
plantations is largely complete. The disposal included substantial  elements
of black economic empowerment.

The main achievements in  Programme  4:  Forestry,  as  highlighted  in  the
2004/5 Annual Report reflects the following:
    • In terms of Plantation Forests, two leases of state  plantations  were
      concluded during the 2004/05 financial year.  These lease transactions
      are part of the restructuring of SAFCOL,  which,  it  is  anticipated,
      will be finalised during 2005/06 with the conclusion of the Komatiland
      forestry lease, which has been delayed while the proposed  transaction
      is considered by the Competition Commission.
    • The  transfer  of  the  Department’s  remaining  plantations  has  not
      progressed due to a number of challenges posed by the  need  to  reach
      agreement with key stakeholders.
    •  The  plantations  have  been  re-grouped  into  management   clusters
      reflecting their forestry potential in the context of their  transfers
      to communities.  These assets represent an important  opportunity  for
      strengthening and re-generating local economies  and  to  achieve  the
      objectives of BBBEE.
    •  In  terms  of  indigenous  forests,  an  important  aspect  was   the
      finalisation of the delegation to SANParks of the  management  control
      over approximately 97 000 hectares of State Forest land.

Assessment of the Achievements of Programme 4: Forestry  as  highlighted  in
the Annual Report

The key outputs and service delivery  trends  as  mentioned  in  the  Annual
Report also highlight the actual performance of this programme.  The  actual
performance column  in  the  Annual  Report  is  an  important  quantitative
indicator of progress made in Programme  4.  For  Programme  4,  the  actual
performance, highlights, amongst others, the following:

    • Revenue increased by 20,5% from 2003/04 from R39, 795 million to  R47,
      934 million.
    • A report is due in May 2006 on staff profiles.
    • The policy on transfers of indigenous approved.
    • All audits of leased plantations conducted.






Comments on Structure and Policies Guiding the Report and Presentations

General

*  The actual performance column  in  the  Annual  Report  is  an  important
quantitative indicator of progress made by DWAF.
*  A detailed reading  of  the  actual  achievements  for  programmes  could
provide  the  Committee  with  sufficient  information  to   undertake   its
oversight functions.
*  Questions on each of the  actual  performances  could  be  asked,  and  a
systematic programme  could  be  set  on  each  of  the  listed  performance
mentioned.
*  Although the Annual report provides  further  detail  on  the  number  of
people receiving access to basic water supply, water tariffs, water  boards,
etc. the report is silent on the challenges  faced  by  various  sectors  in
working toward implementing policies to provide basic water  and  sanitation
to all citizens.
*  Although all programmes summarise the achievements, no  mention  is  made
of the challenges encountered at various levels.  The document is silent  on
the mechanisms that DWAF or local government or municipalities would use  to
address the real concerns of people who need access to these services.
*  No mention is made of whether studies on creating a national database  of
service  providers  to  all  9  provinces,  which  would  account  for  each
household.  No mention is made of empirical studies, undertaken by  DWAF  or
municipalities to engage the level/degree of  satisfaction  of  services  by
people.
*  No mention is made  on  the  manner  in  which  DWAF  would  monitor  and
evaluate progress made in delivery of services.
*  Water losses remain a challenge.  The  impact  and  cost  of  such  water
losses must be quantified by  municipalities,  but  they  do  not  have  the
requisite capacity to do so.
*  In many instances, the outputs detailed in the Multi-Year  Strategy  Plan
2004/05 – 2005/06 and the Annual Report correlated.
*  None of the outputs or actual performance  input  in  the  Annual  Report
highlights  the  challenges  confronted  by  DWAF  itself  or  entities   in
fulfilling its mandate.
*  DWAF interacts extensively with the Portfolio Committee on Water  Affairs
and Forestry in Parliament.  This is not reflected  in  the  Annual  Report.
It is a serious omission, as  the  Portfolio  Committee  provides  a  useful
oversight function over DWAF, and its entities.
*   In  providing  information  on  the  Main  Achievements  of  programmes,
sentences are far too long and convoluted.   This  detracts  from  the  core
issues that need to be raised.
*  The report does not provide sufficient information  that  would  allow  a
picture of how DWAF, local government and other stakeholders are working  to
concretise its stated vision.

* The 2004/5 financial year was the last one in which  DWAF  provided  water
services. The 2005/6 AR should therefore  reflect  the  transfer  for  water
services to municipalities under the Municipal Infrastructure  Grant  (MIG).
This means that  reference  would  have  to  be  made  to  DWAF  as  sharing
responsibility  for   regulating   service   delivery   by   ensuring   that
municipalities are: properly focused on ending  the  backlog  in  sanitation
and water supply; adequately capacitated to deal with service delivery;
adequately  supported  to  ensure  maintenance  of  equipment  while   still
providing people access to clean water.

Related to the above, the issue of how the transfer  of  services  to  local
municipalities may affect reporting to parliament

Related to the role of DWAF in guiding and supporting  the  development  and
roll out of the MIG process, it is important to note  that  the  achievement
of DWAF’s stated KPIs depends on how  successful  the  local  municipalities
are in delivering services. The 2005/6-2006/7 multi-year SP  refers  to  (on
page 25) this as “well established, supported and maintained”. This must  be
interrogated. ANC MPs need more detail of the manner in which  this  process
is unfolding. “Well established, supported and maintained”  does  not  allow
the DWAF to share with ANC MPs the problems and challenges that is  emerging
from this multi-level, inter-departmental process.

There  is  unfortunately,  in  these  documents,  no  an   indication   that
particular areas have been identified as having greater needs  than  others.
This, in spite of the fact that there is a greater  need  in  under-serviced
areas of our country in urban, peri-urban and rural areas.

Overview of Programmes
Programme 1: Administration

It is within Programme 1, Administration, that much of the challenges to re-
arrange DWAF in appropriate ways to ensure  deep  transformation,  that  the
challenges lie. The challenge faced by DWAF has to do with  the  maintenance
and  transformation  of  a  government  department.   Maintenance   suggests
stability and maintaining the status quo. Transformation on the  other  hand
suggests action and a deliberative drive to re-arrange and restructure  into
another form. In the case of DWAF, these seemingly contradictory aspects  of
DWAF’s processes at this time have to happen for the  purpose  of  achieving
the same  developmental  objective:  that  of  ensuring  that  services  are
regulated properly and rolled  out  efficiently  and  decisively  to  ensure
transformation of areas where they previously were non-existent.  In  short,
these types of contradictions have to be managed within  the  department  to
ensure  that  South  Africans’  lives  are  improved  and  its  economy   is
consistently developing.

DWAF has to maintain a high level of managing water as resource,  regulating
service delivery and maintaining the affairs of water and  forestry  in  the
country. It does this while  simultaneously  restructuring  its  programmes,
sub-programmes and branches in order to  ensure  that  human  resources  are
efficiently utilized.  It  is  within  the  ambit  of  DWAF’s  programme  of
Administration that the tension between maintenance of the  system  and  its
transformation and restructuring is situated. This has to be managed  across
DWAF’s  three  line-function  programmes  (water  resource  management,  the
regulation of service delivery  and  regulation  of  forestry)  as  well  as
between different levels of government and  other  relevant  departments  of
government.

In some cases it involves a process of staff having to be re-positioned  and
placed within appropriate sub-programmes or across to other  departments  to
deal with, for  example,  the  transfer  of  water  services  to  the  local
government sphere. It is, however, the same staff whose  morale  has  to  be
kept up, who has to be capacitated and developed in spite of the  unpleasant
effects of being re-positioned elsewhere along the restructuring of DWAF.

This aspect of restructuring must not be  ignored  or  under-estimated.  The
sub-programmes  of  Labour  Relations,  Restructuring   and   Organizational
Management Support are key areas in which the maintenance of the system  and
restructuring  plays  itself  out.  The  AR  does  not  provide   sufficient
particularities in its details.  For  example,  it  uses  the  broad  Public
Service Labour Relations Sector as a measuring stick to  proclaim  that  its
management  decisions  affecting  DWAF  employees  were  “fair   and   above
average”. This does not provide a useful  enough  idea  of  the  intricacies
involved in restructuring that lies ahead. It is hope that the 2005  AR  and
its multi-year Strategic Plan dated 2005/6-2007/9 will provide  detail  that
gives more serious consideration to the complexities involved.

Programme 2: Water Resources Management

*  The National Water Resources Strategy has been adopted by  government  to
guide municipalities and local government on  how  to  better  manage  water
resources in South Africa.  Municipalities  and  local  government  need  to
implement the NWRS with all urgency.
*  The Water Resources programme has  cooperated  with  the  Departments  of
Agriculture to put in place an effective support programme for  agriculture,
focusing on the needs of emerging farmers.  This needs to be  evaluated  and
monitored.

Programme 3: Water Services

*  The restructuring in the DWAF further has  to  do  with  transforming  it
from service provider (of water in the case of Programme 3, Water  Services)
or manager (of Forests in Programme 4, Forestry) to being the  regulator  of
these line functions. That requires the transfer  of  equipment,  expertise,
and information and in some cases staff to appropriate  positions  at  other
levels of government or the department. It also means  that  such  transfers
require  interesting  but   crucial   inter-departmental   and   multi-level
government  cooperation.  DWAF,  the  Department  of  Provincial  and  Local
Government (DPLG), South African Local Government  Association  (SALGA)  and
Treasury as well  as  key  Departments  such  as  Education  (DoE),  Health,
Housing and in some cases Public Works, are involved.

Rather than to just list the  effects  of  the  restructuring  exercises  as
achievements,  it  would  be  useful  for  the  department  to  provide  the
Portfolio  Committee  with  a  detailed  picture  of  the  process  and  the
intricacies involved in them  in  each  of  its  four  programmes  and  sub-
programmes It is important to reflect on this as a  process.  We  understand
that it is broken up in the AR and SP into units that can  be  managed,  but
that in actual practice it is an on-going process. It is important  so  that
the AR would include reflection of challenges involved in giving  effect  to
the restructuring effort at other levels of government and society. In  this
way, the collective can be on the same level and challenges that  may  arise
in the future can be strategically anticipated. Related to this,  the  issue
of transferring delivery of services to water  services  authorities  (WSAs)
at municipality levels has to  be  identified  as  one  that  will  for  the
foreseeable future have effects on  the  DWAF  structures  as  well  as  its
annual audits. It will also have an impact  on  attempts  to  transform  the
department and populate it with much needed skilled personnel in key areas.

Programme 4: Forestry

Under Programme 4, the movement of indigenous forests  and  plantations  out
of the DWAF’s functional areas will also reduce staff numbers and result  in
the increase of its budget to ensure the transfer and redeployment process.
No main  achievement  for  forestry  was  recorded  in  the  Annual  Report.
Instead there appears to be a mismatch of information  on  page  35,  as  it
contains the  same  information  as  the  main  achievements  of  the  water
resources management.

Section 3: Financial Issues

3.1 Financial Components as reflected in the Annual Report, 2004/05

The Department’s total expenditure for the 2004/05 financial  year  amounted
to R7, 791 billion.  For the  past  two  years,  their  spending  level  was
approximately 99%.  Two  of  their  four  financial  statements,  the  Water
Trading Account and Equipment Trading Account,  received  qualified  reports
from  the  Auditor-General.  A  turnaround   strategy   to   address   these
shortcomings was developed.

In 2004/05, the Department continued to move from its role  of  construction
and operation of water and sanitation services to its regulatory role.

      Water Services

A reduction in the budget allocation for its Capex programme indicated  that
from an all-time high during 2003/04 of R1505, 371 million (including  donor
funds) to R587, 018 million for 2004/05, reducing even further to R388,  873
million during 2005/06 and to R140, 963 million for 2006/07.  This  function
has been taken over by the Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) programme.

On Operation and Maintenance, 95 schemes out of  a  targeted  total  of  317
have been transferred out of DWAF, representing an annual budget  amount  of
R124, 370 million.

The programme to transfer the water services works that  it  currently  owns
and/or operates to the relevant water services  authorities  has  made  good
progress. In terms of the programme, which is included in  the  Division  of
Revenue Act, all transfers should be effected by 31  March  2006,  with  all
conditional grants (subsidies) phased out by March 2012 at which stage,  the
conditional  grants  will  be  incorporated   into   the   equitable   share
allocations to local government.   By  the  close  of  the  financial  year,
transfers had been made to 25 of the 55 Municipalities affected with  assets
transferred valued at R1, 250 million.

      Sanitation

In the area of sanitation, an additional ring-fenced funds amounting to  R1,
2 billion were included in the MIG for a three-year programme commencing  in
2005/06 to eradicate the bucket system.

      Spending Trends

Programme 1: Administration: Underspending R16, 251 million

The Annual Report maintains that the underspending in this programme  should
not impact on service delivery. The reports states that the  saving  is  due
to delays in the transfer of  staff  to  municipalities  due  to  protracted
negotiations with receiving municipalities, and funds will  be  rolled  over
to the 2005/06 year.
Programme 2: Water Resource Management: Underspending: R29 913 million

The report maintains that the impact  of  underspending  in  this  programme
should not impact on service delivery.  The report notes  that  due  to  the
Bohlabela Municipality  responsible  for  this  emergency  project,  it  was
unable to make sufficient progress in the short time between the  allocation
of funds, and for the end of the financial year to enable the Department  to
transfer the funds to them.  Contracts were  concluded  and  orders  placed,
but the deliveries and/or payments could not  take  place  before  31  March
2005.

Programme 3: Water Services:  Underspending: R0, 001 million

No impact on service delivery.

Programme 4: Forestry: Underspending:  R0, 001 million

No impact on service delivery.

    2. Financial Components as Highlighted by DWAF’s Presentation
    1. Report of the Auditor General on the Financial Statements

Vote 34:  Exchequer Account – unqualified  audit.   Emphasis  of  matter  in
respect of:
    • Asset and inventory management.
    • Internal controls.
    • Value for money audits with regard to management of fleet services and
      the outsourcing of information systems.
    • Information systems audit of the network security.
    • Late submission of the audit report.

Water Trading Account:  Disclaimer  of  audit  opinion.   Qualifications  in
respect of:

    • Financial statements.
    • Property plant and equipment.

Emphasis of matter in respect of re-submission of financial statements.

Equipment  Trading  Account:   Adverse  audit  opinion.   Qualifications  in
respect of:

    • Property plant and equipment and related depreciation.
    • Retained earning.

Emphasis of matter in respect of the re-submission of financial statements.

National Forest Recreation and Access Trust:  Unqualified  audit.   Emphasis
of matter in respect of:

    • Operation of the National Forest Recreation Trust.
    • Progress with previous Standing Committee on Public  Accounts  (SCOPA)
      resolutions.

    2. Annual Financial Statements: Financial Management Improvement Plan

The department has developed a turnaround strategy to  address  shortcomings
related to:

    • Capacity.
    • Financial policies and procedures.
    • Financial training:
    • Development of Risk Management Strategy.
    • Standardisation of business processes across the
                  department.
    • The department is developing the financial system for
            trading
    • entities to operate accrual accounting.
    • Standardisation of business processes across the
            department.
    • Improved record keeping.
    • Fraud prevention plan strategy has been developed and
           approved by the Audit Committee.
    • Addressing previous audit queries.




Comments on the Financial Component

A key issue that arose from the hearings is the importance of  collaboration
and cooperation amongst stakeholders, levels of government  and  the  people
to whom the services must be rendered.

Transfers are not as effective as should be and for  the  Annual  Report  to
claim that delays in the transfer  of  staff  to  municipalities  would  not
impact  on  service  delivery  is  misleading.    The  spending  trends  and
explanations given for under spending was  unacceptable  to  the  Committee,
and raises issues of the extent to which the  Department  is  evaluating  or
monitoring the progress made by municipalities on the delivery of  services.


While the Portfolio Committee noted  the  comments  made  by  the  Director-
General to effect turnaround strategies to address problems  with  qualified
reports, the Committee raises strong concerns that the  financial  component
of DWAF has not been resolved in the last six years.

Section 4: Entities

4.1 Overview of Public Entities as Reflected in the Annual Report

The following public entities report to the department:

    • Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority (PFMA Schedule 2 Major Public Entity)

No grants are made to the Authority, as it is funded from income on  tariffs
levied on the sale of water and other loans.  Where  other  parties  benefit
from services provided, the TCTA is empowered to recover the costs  of  such
services.

    • Water Research Commission (PFMA National Public Entity  Schedule  3  –
      Part A)

No grants are made to the Commission as its work is  funded  by  a  levy  on
water users.

    • Water Boards (PFMA National Government Business Enterprises Schedule 3
      – Part B)

The water boards were established as water service providers that report  to
the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry.  The primary function  of  these
boards is bulk water service provision within  their  supply  areas.   Water
Boards have been set up to  be  financially  independent  institutions.   In
terms of section 34(1) of the Water Services Act, water boards must  strive,
amongst others,  to  be  financially  viable.  In  this  respect,  they  are
required  to  repay  and  service  their  debts;  recover   their   capital,
operational  and  maintenance   costs,   make   reasonable   provision   for
depreciation of assets, recover the costs associated with the  repayment  of
capital from revenue over time; and make  reasonable  provision  for  future
capital requirements and expansions.

The impact of their financial performance on the  Department  has  therefore
been limited.  Apart from providing seed  funding  for  some  of  the  newly
formed water boards and operating  subsidies,  where  they  have  undertaken
specific functions on behalf of the Department, the Department has  only  in
exceptional circumstances had to provide financial  assistance  to  some  of
the water boards.

Other Entities

    • Komati River Basin Water Authority

The Komati River Basin Development Project is a  joint  development  between
South Africa and Swaziland in terms of the treaty  on  the  development  and
utilisation of the water resources of the Komati River  Basin,  ratified  in
1992. In terms of the treaty, funding of project costs is guaranteed by  the
South African government and the Department is responsible  for  payment  of
these costs.

    • National Forest Recreation and Access Trust

The only source of revenue for the Trust is interest earnings.

Organisations to which transfer payments have been made

    • Grants to Municipalities:  Reasons for Transfer Payments

Transfer payments are made to municipalities in  accordance  with  the  exit
strategy  of  the  Community  Water  and  Sanitation  Programme   from   the
department to Local government as detailed in the Division of  Revenue  Act.
Transfer payments are made to ensure that Local  Government  have  funds  to
implement those projects  identified  in  Water  Service  Development  Plans
(WSDPs).

Departmental Agencies and Accounts

    • Glukstadt Irrigation Board

The Glukstadt IB defaulted on a loan to Land Bank,  guaranteed  by  DWAF  as
well as a state loan granted in the 80s. The Land Bank obtained a  judgement
against the Irrigation Board, but was unable to  recover  anything,  as  the
board had no assets. Land Bank demanded the final  settlement  payment  from
DWAF.

    • Impala Water User Association

DWAF had to pay shortfalls in instalment repayments  as  a  result  of  some
members of the Impala WUA refusing to pay their instalments on a loan  taken
from Rand Merchant Bank. The loan is guaranteed by DWAF  for  an  amount  of
R150 million. The basis of their refusal is  a  challenge  to  the  National
Water Act.  The case will be heard in the Court of  Appeal  during  November
2005. Also included in the above is an amount of R553 104, which  is  DWAF’s
contribution to cover its agreed portion of the legal cost for  the  various
court actions.

    • Kalahari East Water User Association (WUA)

Kalahari East WUA obtained a Land Bank loan in  1989  amounting  to  R77,  4
million guaranteed by the Government. The above portion of the loan  had  to
be written off for which National Treasury made funds available.

    • Blyde River 800

Payments of interest on the portion of  the  Land  Bank  loan  allocated  to
Blyde  800  project,  which  will  provide  opportunities  for  high   value
irrigation farming for historically disadvantaged farmers.

    • Lower Blyde River Water User Association (WUA)

The WUA defaulted on  a  loan  taken  from  Land  Bank,  guaranteed  by  the
Government. In order to prevent interest accumulating at some
R250 000 per month, it was decided to settle the loan, but to continue  with
legal action against the WUA to recover the outstanding debt.

    • Kanon Eiland Water User Association (WUA)

Judgement was granted against the WUA for the settlement of a  debt  of  R12
million, guaranteed by the Government.  The  judgement  could  only  realise
half the amount owed and DWAF was asked to honour the balance  in  terms  of
the guarantee.

Section  5:  Case  studies  of  entities   performance   as   reflected   in
presentations

 1.  Water Boards

In terms  of  the  role  of  water  boards,  the  committee  requested  that
submissions focus on its role in service delivery, with a specific focus  on
delivery of services to the poorest of  the  poor.   The  following  targets
were used as a guideline to inform the discussions:

    • Water supply to all South Africans by 2008.
    • Functioning basic sanitation by 2010.

Amatola Water Board2

In 1997, the Amatola Water, a state owned  entity,  was  created  to  render
bulk water supply services within its area of authorisation.  This  includes
the  Amathole  District  Municipality  and  portions  of  the  Chris   Hani,
Ukhahlamba and Cacadu District Municipalities in the Eastern Cape  Province.
Currently, AW renders primary service of bulk water provision to  the  local
municipalities of Buffalo City,  Ngqushwa,  Nkonkobe  and  Amahlati  located
within the Amathole District Municipality. AW manages water services  assets
to the value of R250 million that can produce a total of  102.74  megalitres
per  day.    Secondary   services   that   include   technical,   financial,
institutional  and  environmental  services  are  rendered  throughout   the
Eastern Cape Province on a project-by-project basis.

In terms of the provision of water supply to all South Africans by 2008,  AW
noted the following direct benefits to the poor:

    • In the 2004/05 financial year, 21.36  million  kilolitres  of  potable
      water was produced. Of this, an estimated  24%  benefited  rural  poor
      households  in  the  local  municipalities,   mentioned   above.   The
      distribution of the remaining 76% of the potable water is  not  within
      the control of Amatola Water, but can be sourced from  the  respective
      municipalities that received the water.
    • Water service capital projects  to  the  value  of  approximately  R81
      million for the Amatola District Municipality, of which 85% focused on
      the elimination of the water backlog,  and  upgrading  existing  water
      infrastructure.  This function benefits the poor through the  delivery
      of water services in an efficient,  cost  effective  and  professional
      manner. Amatola also supports the District Municipality to utilise its
      limited human resource base more effectively for all its functions.
    • Consumers benefit directly from Amatola  Water’s  capital  expenditure
      programme.
    • There is a continuous awareness programme via radio programmes, school
      tours and National Events.

In terms of the indirect benefit to the poor of water supply  by  2008,  the
following was noted:
    • Amatola has been appointed by the Chris  Hani  and  Amathole  District
      Municipality  to  provide  a  transfer  management  service   to   the
      Municipalities  for  the  transfer  of  assets  and  staff  from   the
      Department of Water  Affairs  and  Forestry,  for  the  water  service
      provision function.
    • Strategic planning is a continuous process  at  Amatola  Water.   This
      component of planning ensures that Amatola  Water  is  always  aligned
      with the service delivery vision of the Water Service  Authorities  it
      serves.  This alignment is  vital  to  the  effective  utilisation  of
      limited financial and human resources.
    • The Working for Water Project is a multi-faceted programme  to  ensure
      South Africa’s water resources are maintained.  AW has  been  involved
      in the programme through the eradication  of  water  hyacinth  on  the
      Laing Dam, Wriggleswade Dam and Kubusi River in the Amathole  District
      Municipality in 2004/05.
    • A crucial factor in service delivery is working relationships  between
      key role players and Amatola participates in strategic forums such  as
      the South African Association of Water Utilities  and  the  Integrated
      Water Service Management Forum of the Eastern Cape Province.
    • Training is a key tool in achieving one of Amatola’s corporate values.

Namakwa Water Board

The water scheme was constructed during the 1970s, and the Board  came  into
existence in 1982.  The scheme  consists  of  an  extraction  point  on  the
Orange River at Henkries Mouth, purification works at  Henkries,  a  booster
pump station at Doringwater, and approximately 130 kilometres  of  pipeline,
which gravitates to Springbok.  Another 120 kilometres of  pipeline  stretch
from Springbok to Kleinzee.

The Board is a bulk supplier of water to the  Nama  Khoi  Municipality.  The
communities  served  are  the   Steinkopf,   Okiep,   Concordia,   Nadabeep,
Bulletrap,  Carolusberg,  Springbok  and  Kleinzee.  The   estimated   total
population is approximately 50 000.

The total water sales per annum is the following:

    • 1.9 million kilolitres amounting to 160 000 kilolitres per month.
    • Raw water supplied to Dadelryk at Henkries is at a  total  of  77  243
      kilolitres per annum.
    • The total water sales amounts to R6.5 million per annum.
    • Total income is R7.4 million and total expenditure is R8.6 million.
    • The current water tariff is R2.99 + V.A.T.
    • The budget budgeted for the deficit as its contribution to keep  water
      affordable for the poor  consumer.  The  deficit  was  funded  through
      surplus funds of the Board.

The composition of the Board is as follows:

Initially, there were 8 Board members,  but  currently,  there  are  only  5
members. The term office of the Board expired, but the Minister  granted  an
extension of the term  of  office  to  afford  Nama  Khoi  Municipality  the
opportunity to conduct a section  78  assessments.  Nama  Khoi  Municipality
will thereafter be the  water  service  provider.  Namakwa  is  one  of  the
smallest boards in the country. The workforce consists of 32  personnel,  of
which 5 are women.

The upgrading  of  water  networks  of  7  kilometres  of  pipeline  between
Henkries and Doringwater at a cost of R7 million, financed by  a  loan  from
the Development Bank of South  Africa.  At  completion,  the  pipeline  will
increase the supply capacity of the network.

The following challenges were noted:

    • Upgrading of the existing old pipeline (Eenriet – Okiep).
    • The maintenance of infrastructure.
    • Possible expansion of the pipeline to supply water to Kamiesberg.
    • Control of pollution that occurs upstream.
    • The pumping costs are high.
    • Need to reduce water losses and pipe bursts.

Magalies Water

Magalies Water is a state owned  Water  Board  providing  a  wide  range  of
related water and sanitation services and operates in  four  provinces  that
include Gauteng, Limpopo, Northwest and Mpumalanga.  The area  of  operation
is in the extent of 34000  kilometres.  The  Board  of  Magalies  Water  was
originally established by  Government  Notice  234  of  1969,  with  various
subsequent amendments to both its name and area of supply.

In 2004, Magalies experienced growth and  moved  in  the  areas  of  service
delivery, especially the Bulk, Scientific Services  and  Retail  Operations.
Magalies Water provides water services to a wide range of stakeholders  that
include municipalities, urban, peri-urban, rural communities,  mines,  state
entities and commercial industries across an area of  34  000  km²  in  four
provinces.   Magalies  Water  manages  approximately   35   000   individual
households under contracts from the municipalities.

The overall business performance (2004/2005) reflected the following:

    • Exceeded several of the Key Performance Benchmarks and targets that it
      set for itself in 2004/05. These benchmarks  were  attained  in  areas
      such as water quality, revenue, and  debt  management.  The  challenge
      however,  still  exists  as  far  as  cost  recovery  in  the   retail
      environment is concerned.  Further initiatives  are  constantly  being
      pursued with  Municipalities  in  order  to  jointly  deal  with  cost
      recovery whilst ensuring continuous provision  of  water  to  affected
      communities and consumers.
    • The management of  rural,  urban  and  peri-urban  schemes,  involving
      internal reticulation, constitutes the Retail Operations of the Board.
      An agreement has been reached with the City  of  Tshwane  Metropolitan
      Municipality for the provision of all retail services within the areas
      of Temba/Hammanskraal. The board assists the Local Municipalities with
      tariff setting and development of bylaws.
    • Magalies Water, together  with  ABSA  and  Bigen  Africa  successfully
      concluded a contract with the Rustenburg Water Services Trust, for the
      provision of bulk sanitation and potable water services  functions  on
      behalf of the  Rustenburg  Local  Municipality.  In  respect  of  bulk
      sanitation  services,  Magalies  Water  manages  the   operation   and
      maintenance functions of the Rustenburg Sewage Treatment Works and the
      Boitekong Sewage Treatment Works.

Mhlathuze Water Board

Mhlathuze Water focused on strategic alliances that would provide  solutions
through sharing of expertise and resources in a  sustainable  manner.  Their
competencies included programme management, technical support on  management
of bulk and retail water and sanitation schemes,  water  quality  management
and corporate governance.

Mhlathuze Water served five  areas:   City  of  uMhlathuze  (Richards  Bay),
uThungulu District Municipality, Ilembe District Municipality,  uMkhanyakude
District Municipality and Zululand  District  Municipality.  Their  regional
initiatives involved implementing  projects  for  the  Department  of  Water
Affairs and Forestry. They had thus far  implemented  schemes  reaching  470
000 people. They were also involved in two projects to reach  a  further  30
000 people. This project was still awaiting approval.

The following challenges were noted by Mhlathuze Water:

    • Lack of sharing experience.
    • Unreliable water resources.
    • Some areas are difficult to service.
    • Sanitation had not been part of their planning.
    • Seasonal droughts in Mlubatuba posed further problems in servicing the
      region.

Mhlathuze Water forwarded the following recommendations:

    • Municipal structures needed greater capacity.
    • A more proactive  role  should  be  played  by  Sector  Education  and
      Training Authorities (SETAs), and the Department of Water Affairs  and
      Forestry had to do more work on the free basic water scheme.
    • A new national initiative was needed to encourage consumers to pay for
      water services above the free limit.

Sedibeng Water Board

Sedibeng   Water   maintained   that   their   long-term   strategies    for
sustainability were reflected in their annual report, and  these  had  shown
progress on all strategic imperatives. The Board achieved  cost  savings  of
20% on their budget, but their revenue declined by 7% due to a reduction  in
water demand and unpaid equitable shares.  The  Board  had  achieved  a  net
surplus of R13,8 million. The maintenance expenditure went  1%  over  budget
and capital expenditure amounted to R14,2 million.

Sedibeng noted that the maintenance of water quality was at Class 1,  except
for periodic colour,  iron  and  manganese  concentrations.   Water  quality
could be improved to meet Class 1 standards at 95%  of  the  time,  but  the
cost implications would be enormous for consumers.

Customer satisfaction had been maintained through weekly  interactions  with
ward  committees  and  an  improved   response   time   and   reduction   of
interruptions. This had led to a reduction in complaints.  They also  had  a
customer satisfaction monitoring system in place.

Sedibeng assisted in water and wastewater testing and analysis.   They  also
had an HIV/AIDS awareness campaign and provided  anti-retroviral  treatment,
which began in March 2005. Sedibeng was environmentally  conscious  in  that
there was a constant monitoring of discharges. Corporate social  investments
had amounted to R1, 5 million, and concentrated on food  parcels,  donations
to schools and orphanages and learnerships.

Bloem Water Board

The Board provided bulk water  services,  and  its  primary  focus  was  the
implementation of projects on behalf of the Department of Water Affairs  and
Forestry, and relevant municipalities in  Ukhahlamba  District  Municipality
(Eastern  Cape),  and  Mangaung  Local   Municipality   (Free   State).   As
implementing agents, they were responsible for the preparation  of  business
plans, procurement of service providers, and ensuring implementation.  Their
role in service delivery consisted of providing access  to  water  services,
community participation and training and empowerment.

In the Botshabelo, Thaba Nchu and Mangaung municipalities, Bloem Water  paid
R6,1 million in local labour salaries and provided  temporary  jobs  to  226
individuals per month.  In the Herschel Rural Water Supply programme,  total
salaries paid to local labour amounted to R9, 84  million,  while  employing
132 individuals on average per month.

On the issue of training and empowerment, Bloem  Water  had  paid  R400  000
toward accredited training  in  the  Botshabelo,  Thaba  Nchu  and  Mangaung
districts. R34 million was paid to local emerging contractors.  The  Hershel
Rural Water Supply programme provided  on-site  skills  training  to  9  504
labourers. Total training costs amounted to  R500  000.  Selected  community
members were also trained in pump station operation and maintenance.

Bushbuckridge Water Board

Bushbuckridge Water Board was established in 1997  in  accordance  with  the
Water Services Act, Act 108 of 1997. Their  primary  responsibility  is  the
provision of bulk  water  services  to  other  water  service  institutions.
Busbuckridge currently operates  in  Bohlabela  District  Municipality,  and
parts of Mbombela Municipality area  (serving  approximately  1,  2  million
people)

Bushbuckridge Water highlighted the following areas of services and some  of
the encountered challenges:

    • The socio-economic profile of the service  area  is  characterised  as
      rural small villages and dense villages with total population  of  826
      000 and 374 000 people, respectively.
    • The present water supply systems comprise ground water, river  schemes
      and treated water supply.
    • Service levels vary from village to village, from RDP house connection
      with waterborne sanitation.
    • The drought has intensified over  the  past  5  years,  and  this  has
      negatively affected both ground and surface water resources.
    • Cost recovery for services rendered  remains  a  huge  challenge,  and
      therefore DWAF subsidies play a major role in sustaining water  supply
      to communities.
    • Equitable distribution of available potable water is still a challenge
      due to unauthorised connections, growing water  demand,  and  capacity
      constraints related to infrastructure.

The activities in achieving  the  2008/10  targets  in  the  development  of
infrastructure comprise the following:

    •  Refurbishment  of  boreholes  (R20m)  targeting   a   population   of
      approximately 250 000 people in the Bushbuckridge area.
    • Upgrading of Hoxane water treatment works  (62m)  from  26  Ml/day  in
      order to reach the communities of Nsikazi North (200 000  people)  and
      parts of Bushbuckridge South (150 000 people).
    • Construction of the 45 km transfer pipeline to  convey  treated  water
      from Inyaka works further north up to Acornhoek.

The activities in achieving the 2008/10 targets in  operations,  maintenance
and distribution, comprise the following:

    • Operations and maintenance are conducted such  that  production  costs
      are minimised while maximising quantity without compromising quality.
    • The total average monthly volume of water produced and distributed  to
      the population of 1, 2 million people indicates a projected water  use
      of 100 litres/ca. per day. In reality, this is not the  case,  as  BWB
      developed equitable distribution plans for Nsikazi  and  Bushbuckridge
      areas.
    • The average monthly cost  for  Operations  and  Maintenance  currently
      stands at R2, 7 m.

The  major  threats/opportunities  facing  service  delivery  comprise   the
following:

    • The incorporation of the Bushbuckridge  area  to  Mpumalanga  Province
      will open up opportunities  for  BWB  with  regard  to  extending  the
      customer base.
    • Poor recovery of costs  for  services  rendered  results  in  lack  of
      budgets to implement capital projects (refurbishment,  realignment  of
      schemes for optimal use).
    • The intensifying drought affecting surface and  underground  resources
      leaves BWB with no option but to fast track  the  development  of  the
      Inyaka and Hoxane Regional Schemes.
    • Lack of guaranteed operational grants/subsidies relating to  operation
      and maintenance threatens service delivery.
    • Delays in signing of water services  provider  agreements  with  water
      services authorities impacts on service delivery.

Some  recommendations   highlighted   by   Bushbuckridge   encompassed   the
following:

    • Sustainability of water services hinges  on  effective  and  efficient
      management of the services through optimisation of  all  resources  to
      minimise operating costs and loss while  maintaining  a  good  quality
      product.
    • Targets can only be achieved if all spheres of government cooperate in
      the development of sustainable water services.
    • The activities toward achieving the targets must be undertaken  in  an
      integrated and sustainable manner so as  not  to  deplete/degrade  the
      environment.

Rand Water Board
Rand Water services the Gauteng, portions of the North-West, Mpumalanga  and
Free State Provinces.  Rand Water  has  embarked  on  the  following  three-
pronged strategy to attain service delivery in water and sanitation:

    • Addressing backlogs in water and sanitation services in its  area  of
      service and beyond.

Rand Water has embarked on a prorate that has the following objectives:

           • Understand the inadequacy of water service provision in clearly
             defined areas within and in areas that are in  close  proximity
             to its areas of service.  This  means  gathering  data  on  the
             following:
             •   Population  numbers,  household  sizes,  personal   income
               profiles and  employment  status  –  all  derived  from  the
               national census data.
             • Status quo access to water and sanitation in  terms  of  set
               norms and standards.
             • Municipal ability to extend coverage.
             • Bulk infrastructure availability.
             • Growth projections – population growth and demand growth.
             • Assessment of Rand Water’s current ability to  provide  bulk
               water services.

Once this information has been collected  and  analysed,  Rand  Water  would
have a scientific basis for making practical proposals on how it  could,  in
the medium term, that is, over the next 3 – 4 years extend the  coverage  of
water and sanitation services to all the people within, and in areas  within
close proximity to its areas of services.

    • Working with DWAF  in  improving  water  and  sanitation  services  to
      municipalities in its areas of service.

Most  municipalities  within  the  areas  of  service  do  not  comply  with
environmental standards for sewerage effluent  discharges.   The  result  is
that raw  sewerage  is  discharged  into  the  environment.   Examples  are:
Emalahleni, Maluti-aPhofung, Govan Mbeki,  Emfuleni,  Midvaal,  Randfontien,
Westonaria, Merufong Kungwini and Parys.

Common  problems  with  these  municipalities  are   sub-standard   effluent
quality, plant capacity and poor  condition  of  treatment  facilities,  and
little capacity to handle and dispose of sewerage.  What  is  needed  is  an
assessment of the treatment works to enable them  to  put  an  end  to  this
environmental pollution. The total cost for undertaking this  assessment  is
R2 million.

Of the municipalities that RWB  approached,  only  Midvaal  and  Randfontein
accepted assistance, and have since seen a significant  improvement  in  the
operation of their treatment works and in the training  and  development  of
their staff.   Emfuleni  has  signed  an  interim  service  contract,  which
enables the municipality to comply with standards  with  the  assistance  of
RWB.  All other municipalities either do not have the funding to  help  them
comply or have stated that they do not need assistance.

The key implication of  discharging  raw  or  untreated  sewerage  into  the
environment is  that  it  directly  influences  the  quality  of  raw  water
sources.  The  deterioration  of  water  sources  increases  the   cost   of
purification, which raises the end price of drinking water to consumers.

RWB raised the problems  that  municipalities  have  with  accessing  enough
funds with which to acquire assistance to  buy  purification  services  from
water boards, such as, Rand Water Board  with  DWAF.  The  response  was  to
raise it with municipalities themselves as  transfers/grants  form  National
Government is inadequate, and does not allow WSAs  to  ensure  good  quality
water in a sustainable manner to customers.   In  the  absence  of  adequate
funding, the  cost  of  water  will  continue  to  become  unaffordable  and
excessive.

    • Working directly with municipalities to improve water and  sanitation
      service delivery.
Municipalities have a shortage of skills in terms of unaccounted for  water,
implementation  of   upgrading   and   refurbishment   projects,   increased
accessibility, improving payment levels and the reduction  of  unpaid  water
volumes. RWB has over the past few years approached municipalities to  offer
assistance in this  regard.   In  spite  of  the  success  of  collaborative
efforts between RWB and municipalities, some  municipalities  still  do  not
take advantage of the services that water boards offer them.

The following challenges were noted by  Rand  Water  to  provide  clean  and
healthy water to all citizens:

    • Municipalities are responsible for the delivery of water  services  to
      communities. The  problem  is  that  they  do  not  seem  to  be  held
      accountable. Little is done to rectify specific areas of non-delivery,
      lack of capacity and funding.
    • Water service providers should not  be  allowed  to  supply  water  to
      people without testing it for its compliance to quality standards.
    • The legislative framework within which  water  boards  operate  is  an
      obstacle. The  recent  conferring  of  the  status  of  water  service
      authorities  on  municipalities  has  had   unintended   consequences.
      Municipalities, have in general, used this authority to  look  at  the
      provision of water services in  a  selfish  manner,  thereby  ignoring
      regional provision and efficiency. Rand Water highlighted the  Western
      Highveld as an example – the current  infrastructure  is  regional  in
      nature, which means that it  provides  water  to  the  entire  region.
      However, individual municipalities in the region have convinced  DWAF,
      by virtue of their water  service  authority  status,  to  carve  this
      structure up and transfer them  to  individual  municipalities.   Such
      action can and will, in the long term, work  against  the  sustainable
      and equitable provision of water to the region.  The  danger  is  that
      access to water will be severely impacted on. The current expansion by
      ran Water of bulk infrastructure is left to  continue  as  it  is.  It
      appears as if DWAF itself is powerless to intervene and stop this ill-
      informed transfer of assets.   Authority  without  accountability  can
      never be good for improved service delivery.

Umgeni Water Board

Established in 1974,  Umgeni  Water  is  one  of  Africa's  most  successful
organisations involved in  water  management  and  the  largest  bulk  water
supplier in the province of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. It is  one  of  the
largest catchment-based water utility in  Southern  Africa,  supplying  some
340 000 kilolitres of clean, safe  drinking  water  to  almost  4.8  million
people  annually.  Its  main  customers   include   eThekwini   Metropolitan
Municipality,   Ilembe,   Sisonke,   Umgungundlovu    and    Ugu    district
municipalities, and the Msunduzi and Mngeni  local  municipalities,  amongst
others.
Progress towards implementation within Umgeni Water’s area of operation

    • Mgeni Regional Scheme – Comprises of a number of sub-components,  viz.
      A planning  investigation  into  the  proposed  future  infrastructure
      requirements to upgrade the main spine has just been completed.
    • The Umbumbulu Bulk Pipeline is currently being constructed.
    • Pre-feasibility  level  planning  of  an  extension  of  the  Wartburg
      Pipeline has commenced.
    • Detailed feasibility planning of the Richmond pipeline is scheduled to
      start in August.
    • North Coast Regional Scheme  -  Detailed  civil  design  is  complete.
      Servitude registration and the environmental assessments are currently
      underway for the North Coast Bulk Pipeline.
    • Mvoti Regional Scheme - Pre-feasibility level planning of this  scheme
      has recently commenced.
    • South Coast Regional Scheme - Construction of the upper portion of the
      South Coast Bulk Pipeline is scheduled to commence  early  next  year.
      Design and environmental assessments are currently underway.
    • Mzintlava Regional Scheme - External consultants  have  recently  been
      appointed to undertake a reconnaissance level  planning  investigation
      based on the conceptual scheme initially presented.  This  study  will
      also guide the configuration of the adjacent schemes.


    •  Mooi  Regional  Scheme   -   The   pre-feasibility   level   planning
      investigation of the Greater Nottingham Road area, which includes  the
      Mooi regional bulk pipeline to Msinga, has been completed.

The Umgeni Water Board has seen a profit turnaround from a R37 million  loss
to a R55 million profit. Revenue  had  increased  by  11%.  Cash  flow  from
operations had increased by R125 million.  Net  debt  had  been  reduced  by
R300 million. Umgeni Water  was  characterised  by  affordable  tariffs  and
sound management principles to eliminate water backlogs.

By 2008, all local citizens within  Umgeni’s  area  of  service  would  have
access to water.  By 2010, sanitation would be available to all  households.
 Umgeni will work  toward  linking  water  resources  and  water  supply  to
provide sustainable water solutions.

Overberg Water Board

Overberg Water, compared to other organisations,  is  a  small  organisation
and financially not in a position  as  bigger  enterprises  to  bring  about
massive changes. However, Overberg plays a significant role  in  its  region
to ensure quality services. Overberg Water  has  the  basic  structural  and
systems  infrastructure  to  provide  quality  services,  and  to   play   a
supportive role. It operates high quality production  plants,  does  quality
control,  distribution,   maintenance,   water   conservation   and   demand
management, and other direct services.

Although  comprehensive  agreements  between  the  Water   Authorities   and
Overberg Water need to be  concluded  as  a  matter  of  urgency,  there  is
reluctance on the part of authorities to respond. One of the issues is  that
the Authorities only  want  short-term  contracts,  whereas  Overberg  Water
requires long-term contracts to enable it to make financial investments.

The principle of  institutional  reform  is  of  crucial  concern  to  Water
Boards, as they need  clarity  on  their  position  in  order  to  take  the
necessary steps to prepare for service delivery, which is not  a  short-term
undertaking.

Botshelo Water Board

The  Board  operates  and   maintains   reticulation   systems   under   the
jurisdiction of  different  Water  Services  Authorities.   The  Board  also
operates Sewage and Water Treatment Plants,  which  also  fall  outside  its
area of jurisdiction.  Within  the  areas  of  jurisdiction,  the  Board  is
responsible for the maintenance of  boreholes,  in  order  to  provide  safe
drinking water for consumers in rural areas.
Retailing of water, including cost recovery is carried out in the  following
urban and rural areas, together  with  the  operations  and  maintenance  of
their reticulation systems for the following areas of four municipalities:

    • Ditsobotla:      Ditsobtla Municipality/Central District
                       Municipality.
    • Ganyesa:         Bophirima District Council.
    • Madikwe:         Zeerust Local/Central District Municipality.
                    • Molopo:           Mafikeng Local  Municipality/Central
                      District
                       Municipality.

Asset management is undertaken through preventative maintenance system  with
the aid of computer software (PRAGMA SYSTEM).  This has  been  the  strength
of Botshelo in maintaining its assets. This  computerised  system  helps  to
effectively plan, monitor, control and report.

Botshelo supplies bulk water to two Water  Service  Authorities,  which  are
Moses-Kotane Local Municipality. Within the Central  District  Municipality,
Botshelo Water  supplies  directly  to  Ditsobotla  Local  Municipality  and
Mafikeng Local Municipality.

|Municipality         |2004/05 – million Kl |2003/04 – million Kl |
|Mafikeng Local       |                     |                     |
|Municipality         |12,213               |12,535               |
|Ditsobtla            |                     |                     |
|Municipality         |2,670                |2,520                |
|Central District     |                     |                     |
|Municipality         |0,130                |0,013                |

Central District Municipality is supplied from Mafikeng and  Mmabatho  Water
Works for its peri-urban areas  around  Mafikeng  town,  while  Verdwaal  in
Itsoseng  is  supplied  by  Itsoseng  bulk  from  local  dolomite  Aquifers.
Mafikeng Local Municipality is  supplied  from  both  Mafikeng  and  Mmbatho
Water Works. Ditsobotla Local Municipality is supplied from  local  dolomite
Aquifers.

In terms of bulk assets, it is expected  that  all  water  treatment  plants
will  be  transferred  from  DWAF  at  no  cost  to  Botshelo   Water.    An
investigation into the conditions of  the  assets  has  been  completed  and
submitted to DWAF.  Botshelo Water is expected to take over  the  operations
of the Upper Bulk Water Supply Scheme, from  DWAF,  which  will  reduce  its
dependence on subsidies.

Botshelo is committed  to  enter  into  municipal  partnerships  with  water
services  authorities,  and   partnerships   with   other   water   services
institutions in order to raise  capital  to  develop  large  resources,  and
water services infrastructures in the region.

In terms of retail water sales, Botshelo Water supplied  water  directly  to
consumers in urban and rural areas.  The distribution of these consumers  in
Botshelo Water’s area of jurisdiction is as follows:   A  sliding  scale  of
tariffs has been applied in order to make  water  more  affordable  for  the
majority of consumers.  This activity is subsidised by DWAF,  to  an  amount
of R34,632 m annually (paid monthly at R2,886 m).  This subsidy  contributes
to the difference between the cost of supply to consumers and cost  recovery
effected from the consumers.  Water for this activity is  produced  in  Bulk
Water Treatment Plants of Botshelo Water.  Strict quality  control  measures
are applied on a continuous basis to ensure that the highest  water  quality
standards are met and maintained.

In terms of cost recovery, water loss and demand management,  the  following
was noted:

    • Cost recovery has been low due to a lack  of  infrastructure  systems.
      Statutory measures are taken  on  an  ongoing  basis  to  improve  the
      recovery rate.  Illegal connections continue to  impact  adversely  on
      water loss management efforts.  Most of the illegal  connections  have
      been  regularised,  except  in  Dinokana  and  Driefontein.    Amnesty
      programmes have been developed  and  implemented  in  order  to  bring
      illegal connections into the billing net.
    • A major capital investment will be required to establish cost recovery
      infrastructure in rural areas.  Water process loss in Bulk  Supply  is
      in the order of 2 – 10%.
    • In the retail activity, water losses are in the order of  15%  due  to
      unauthorised connections. Reticulation systems in certain areas are in
      need  of  refurbishment/upgrading.  The  inadequate  bulk  source   in
      Lehurutshe still adversely affects cost recovery. Large infrastructure
      investment plans will be more actively promoted in the next  financial
      year.

Lepelle Northern Water

The Board operates 8 purification plants in 5 WSAs in the Limpopo  Province.
The Board worked on a five-year planning cycle, which included  security  of
supply during  droughts.  The  board  provided  assistance  and  support  to
municipalities. Their financial  position  had  been  consolidated  and  the
gearing levels had been  reduced.   Municipal  debt  remained  a  challenge.
There had been  no  proper  costing  of  the  free  basic  water  policy  by
municipalities.

The challenges highlighted by Lepelle incorporated the following:

    • Authority function  is  often  confused  with  provision  function  by
      municipalities.
    • Transfer of assets that take effect before finalisation of section  78
      process.
    • Insufficient water resources in certain areas.
    • MIG funding policies a constraint  to  sustainability  of  schemes  as
      envisaged in SFFWS.
    • No proper costing of FBW policy by municipalities.
    • Administration of indigent policies is problematic.
    • Municipal debt poses a challenge.
General Comments on Water Boards emanating from presentations
    • A disparity is noted in the manner in which Water Boards are  managed,
      operationally and financially.
    • Some water boards assist in providing a transfer management service to
      the Municipalities, for the transfer of  assets  and  staff  from  the
      Department of Water Affairs and Forestry.
    • Major contributor to service in the sector.
    • Mandate and promises around Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
    • Some areas in various provinces have 2 or 3 Water Boards operating  in
      one province.  There appears  to  be  a  skewed  distribution  of  the
      quality of  services  offered  as  competing  interests  override  the
      fundamental objective, that is, of providing services to communities.
    • Cost recovery in the retail environment is a big problem.
    • Some Water Boards borrow substantial amounts  of  money  from  various
      banking institutions, whilst others manage to work out  strategies  to
      recover them.
    • In terms of  infrastructure,  water  boards  did  not  talk  of  their
      linkages to the Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP)  to  facilitate
      the process.
    • Some water boards highlighted  the  transfer  of  DWAF  personnel  and
      infrastructure.
    • Some new water user associations have problems with staff shortage.
    •  Capacitating  and  skilling  municipalities  so   that   reticulation
      services, amongst others, are efficiently taken over in the future.
    • The quality of water in some regions was highlighted.
    • Tariffs charged differ from province to province.
    • The costing of free basic water provision is not sufficiently detailed
      and therefore it can impact on the delivery of other water services.
    • Over time, the competencies of some  water  boards  in  terms  of  its
      overall function has shifted, not only focusing  on  bulk  and  retail
      water  but  offering  capacity  and  skills  to   municipalities   and
      communities.
    • Cost recovery for services rendered remains a  huge  challenge,  hence
      DWAF subsidies play  a  major  role  in  sustaining  water  supply  to
      communities.
    • Equitable distribution of available potable water is still a challenge
      due to unauthorised connections, growing water  demand,  and  capacity
      constraints related to infrastructure.
    • Lack of guaranteed operational grants/subsidies relating to  operation
      and maintenance threatens service delivery.
    • There are delays in the signing of water services provider  agreements
      with water services authorities.
    •  Payment  of  subsidies  and  equitable  shares  by   Water   Services
      Authorities.
    • A move toward partnering with other water boards or water utilities on
      joint ventures to identify the most effective  sanitation  models  and
      processes.  Joint task teams would be established to conduct  research
      and publish information regularly on findings.
    • Catchment areas need to be assessed.  Water boards in the  context  of
      financial, technical systems, there is a major place at this point  in
      South Africa.
    • Efficiency issues in catchment areas need to be examined.

 1.  Water User Associations

Vaalharts Water User Association

The Vaalharts Water User Association was established in 2001.  The  Minister
approved the constitution of the Water User Association and  certain  powers
and duties in terms of the National Water Act have  been  delegated  to  the
Vaalharts Water User Association.

The principle function of Vaalharts WUA is to supply bulk raw water  in  the
most economical way, according  to  the  lawful  entitlement  of  all  water
users, within the borders of the operational area of the  Association,  with
the least possible losses and disruptions.
The Association does not supply  purified  water  to  any  water  user,  but
supplies raw water to Water  Service  Authorities  such  as  municipalities.
The Association does not supply any sanitation infrastructure  or  services.
Irrigation water represents 96. 2% of the total amount of water supplied  by
the Association, and Industrial and Household water, 3.8%.  This  forms  the
basis of the Association’s income.

The infrastructure (irrigation  canals,  storm  water  drainage  canals  and
appurtenant structures) is more than 60 years old and  enormous  amounts  of
monies are needed for maintenance and refurbishment.  The infrastructure  is
well monitored to avoid disruptive failures, and to  curb  water  losses  as
far as possible.  The fragile financial well being  of  the  Association  is
closely linked to the  volatile  agricultural  environment  from  where  its
revenue comes from (96.2% of its water sales).

No major growth is expected within the borders of the Association’s area  of
operation, and henceforth growth in revenue will mainly be  in  raising  the
water tariff.  This,  on  the  other  hand,  can  only  be  done  if  it  is
affordable to the water users.

Great Fish River Water User Association (Eastern Cape)

The functions to be performed by the Association in its  area  of  operation
are:

  • To prevent water  from  any  water  resource  and/or  waterworks  being
    wasted.
  • To protect water resources and/or waterworks.
  • To prevent any unlawful water use.
  • To remove or arrange to remove any obstruction unlawfully placed  in  a
    watercourse and/or waterworks.
  • To prevent any unlawful act likely to reduce the quality  of  water  in
    any water resource.
  • To exercise general supervision over water resources and/or waterworks.

The duties of the WUA are as follows:

  • To comply with the National Water Act.
  • Collect water rates and pay over to DWAF.
  • Administration/Financial service to sub-areas.
  • Take action against default players.
  • Make inputs regarding water tariffs.

The area of operation consists of 32 624. 9 hectares, which is divided  into
17 Sub-Areas. The WUA distributes water via each Sub-Area  to  approximately
330 commercial farmers.
The Water tariffs in sub-areas comprise R270.00 – R690.00  per  hectare  per
year. Payable to DWAF: R15.6 million per year.
The Sub-Areas Tariffs comprise R50.00 – R130.00 hectares per year.

Some of the problems experienced by the WUA are:

  • The payment of water and sub-areas tariffs.   Most  of  the  ‘emerging’
    black commercial farmers experience lack of funds.  At this point,  the
    WUA pays DWAF on behalf of some  farmers,  and  the  WUA  recovers  the
    outstanding rates at a later stage when funds become available.
  • Some farmers do not have the experience to  farm  an  irrigation  farm.
    Training in irrigation farming is a necessity.
  • It is important that government/DWAF  assist  those  farmers  with  the
    rates in subsidies.
  • Although DWAF has a scheme for the subsidisation of the DWAF  component
    of the water tariff, the actual process to access  this  has  not  been
    spelt out, which in reality means that there  are  no  subsidies.   The
    Historically Disadvantaged Individual farmers in this jurisdiction  are
    thus billed for their full quota of water, whether they use it or  not.
    In normal circumstances, unpaid bills are handed over  to  lawyers  for
    collection.  This, however, could spell economic disaster for a new HDI
    farmer trying to break even in a highly  competitive  market.  The  WUA
    tries to sell off the unused amounts of water of the HDI farmers to the
    bigger commercial farmers, and this alleviates the financial burden  of
    the newcomer.
Some of the challenges experienced by the WUA are:

  • To see that there is a high level of payment for water.
  • To see that water is used more effectively.
  • To keep any increase in raw water pricing to a minimum.
  • To upgrade canal systems.
  • To encourage farmers to get basic domestic water to the staff  residing
    on their farms, and also provide sanitation facilities and  electricity
    where such basics are not in place.

Some of the achievements highlighted by the WUA are:

  • The WUA was the first irrigation board to be transformed into a WUA  in
    the Eastern Cape.
  • Although the process followed to transform in  terms  of  the  National
    Water Act complied with the guidelines used at that stage, the  WUA  is
    of the opinion that the revised guidelines are  far  more  advanced  in
    promoting true democratisation and empowerment for  the  transformation
    process.
  • The WUA sees the compilation of a Business Plan as a means  to  advance
    democratisation and empowerment issues not covered in detail  in  their
    Constitution.  The WUA has already put a tremendous amount of work into
    compiling the Business Plan as this has  some  far-reaching  intentions
    regarding democratisation, empowerment and  the  encouragement  of  the
    settling of resource-poor  farmers  of  previously  disadvantaged  race
    groups on irrigation farms served by this WUA.  WUAs have been informed
    that DWAF may be employing a Professional Service Provider to  help  in
    the compilation of the Business Plans.

Letaba Water User Association

The Association’s management committee comprised  14  members,  representing
irrigators in all  three  of  the  zones  of  the  association.   Irrigation
entitlements consisted of 12, 989 million cubic  metres  from  the  Ebenezer
Dam, and 105,  028  million  cubic  metres  from  the  Tzaneen  Dam.   These
entitlements were available to new entrants for irrigation agriculture,  but
most of these entitlements were under utilised.  If land claims were  to  be
settled and the entitlements purchased by the state, the figure  could  rise
to  70%.   Previously  disadvantaged  persons  had  access  to  a   sizeable
percentage of irrigation entitlements and this was bound to grow.

The total annual entitlements were 168, 500 million  cubic  metres,  of  the
three major dams  in  the  area  by  50  million  cubic  metres  per  annum.
Following  requests  during  1983,  the  Department  of  Water  Affairs  and
Forestry undertook a major study for a fourth major dam in the  area  –  the
Nwamitwa Dam.  The water this proposed dam would impound could result in  an
additional 53 million metres of assured draft,  which  would  eliminate  the
current  shortfall.  The  Water  User  Association  was   concentrating   on
stabilising the supply of water to all  farmers  by  relentlessly  promoting
the building of the Nwamitwa Dam.

Kakamas Water User Association

Kakamas has as its water users the local authority,  emerging  farmers,  and
irrigation, domestic,  industrial,  environmental  and  recreational  users.
Their management committee comprise 15 members.

The Association is a bulk water supplier and did not supply  purified  water
or any sanitation infrastructure.

Orange-Riet Water User Association

Orange-Riet is a multi sectorial Water User Association in the  Free  State.
The Association supplies water users in their  management  area.  Only  bulk
water is supplied to municipalities, therefore the WUA  is  not  responsible
for sanitation service.

However, development of new areas for  emergent  farmers  are  high  on  the
priority for Orange-Riet, and the availability of water for 3  000  hectares
from the Orange River in the Free State can be  utilised  very  economically
and productively to help eliminate and uplift  people  in  the  Orange  Riet
management area.

The  Association  supplied  water  to  five  towns,   small-scale   farmers,
industries and diamond  diggers.   A  telemetry  system,  use  of  satellite
images and minimum payment of  85%  reduced  losses.   Water  saved  through
water conservation and demand management is used for emerging farmers.   The
management committee comprised 17 members, of which 3 are female.

Impala Water User Association

In terms of section 98(4) of  the  National  Water  Act,  Act  36  of  1998,
existing Irrigation Boards must  transform  into  Water  User  Associations.
The Impala Water User Association (Impala) was  established  on  12  January
2001.

The area of operation of Impala includes the catchment of the  Bivane  river
from the inflow into the Bivane Dam and the balance of the catchment of  the
Pongola River, within  the  boundaries  of  South  Africa,  from  the  Upper
Pongola Weir situated on the farm Bendor 211 HT on the north  bank  and  the
farm Verdruk 26 on  the  south  bank,  both  inclusive,  downstream  to  and
including the farm Sunland 72HU on the north bank and the  farm  Klipfontein
740 on the south bank.

Impala may also operate in any other water  resource  situated  outside  the
area mentioned above.  This may happen if Impala is asked to  provide  water
resource to accompanying areas which DWAF or the responsible  authority  may
require the Association to control, situated in the  water  management  area
number 6 in the KZN and Mpumlanga provinces.

The purpose and functions of Impala can be summarised as follows:

    • The distribution of water to farmers, industrial use,  a  municipality
      and other smaller users  from  its  source,  the  Pongola  and  Bivane
      Rivers.
    • The monitoring and protection of the water resource and environment in
      its area of operation.
    • The maintenance and upgrading of the  water  distribution  system  and
      works.
    • The monitoring and control of the volume of water flowing into and out
      of the area of responsibility and water use.
    • The implementation of an effective administrative system and functions
      in order to manage its affairs, and the  changing  and  collecting  of
      water use charges from legitimate water users.

Apart from the normal execution of its primary functions as outlined  above,
the following additional areas are also addressed to achieve the  objectives
of the organisation:

    • Institutional development through building relationships with  various
      stakeholders, work opportunities and sub-contractor optimisation.
    • The taking up  and  execution  of  ancillary  functions  in  terms  of
      catchment management activities, such as:
    • Resource protection.
    • Erosion control.
    • Alien plant control.
    • Water quality monitoring.
    • Pollution prevention.

The challenges noted by Impala were the following:

   • The construction of Bivane Dam.
   • The settlement of emerging farmers.
   • Water supply to the rural areas.

Central Breede River Water User Association

One of the principal objectives of  the  Association  was  to  regulate  the
distribution  and  division  of  raw  water  in  the  Breede   River.    The
municipality of Worcester discharged wastewater into the Breede  River.  The
resultant pollutant affected all water users.

Although the Association had wanted to implement initiatives like the  Water
Allocation  Reform  programme  to  help  previously  disadvantaged  beginner
farmers, bureaucracy had hampered progress  and  the  affected  public  were
frustrated.

General Comments on Water User Associations from Presentations

The upkeep of infrastructure by the WUAs is emerging as a problem and  needs
addressing.

It emerged from the hearings that there are tensions between  water  boards,
water user associations  and  municipalities.   It  often  relates  to  WUAs
proposing  to  strengthen  service   delivery,   which   often   cannot   be
accommodated by municipalities due to problems.
 In some instances, some WUAs show no sign of transformation.  They  do  not
actively deal with the task of including  the  previously  disadvantaged  in
their associations.  The presenters stated that legislation and  regulations
prevented  them  from  including  people  other  than   farmers   in   their
associations.  This problem must be highlighted.

Those who own land perceive themselves as  having  strong  rights  to  water
usage than those who do not own land. This issue  presents  a  challenge  to
DWAF as sector leader.

DWAF has to deal with the transformation of WUAs.
A key question on the issue of WUAs:  What was the thinking  behind  setting
up WUAs?  Are WUAs living out the mandate that the Act states  if  they  are
only looking after the interests of big users?

It  seems  as  if  the  devolution  of  powers  to  local  associations  and
governments can have unintended consequences.  While the intention  is  good
and consistent with  empowering  people  to  democratically  participate  in
structures, the outcome is often unfortunately one in which the  poorest  of
the poor remain marginalised.
In terms of its functions, associations usually  regulate  the  distribution
and  division  of  water.   In  some  cases,  WUA  point  out  the  problems
encountered in environmental pollution of water, but the problem persists.

There are also disparities in the manner in which  Water  User  Associations
operate, which is defined by the nature  of  jurisdiction.  In  some  cases,
some WUA’s provide raw water to irrigation farmers  and  purified  water  to
all households and people within the respective areas.


Some WUA’s argue that  although  they  have  attempted  to  assist  emergent
farmers with water supplies, the process is rather slow in attaining this.

The growing demand for water for waterborne sanitation will  impact  on  the
future of water user associations in terms of maintenance and operations  of
infrastructure.

The role of water user associations’ with emergent  farmers  needs  in-depth
studies to ensure the sustainability of this process.

Land claims issues have an impact on the role and functions of the WUA’s.

Section 7: Inter-Governmental Cooperation

7.1 South African Local Government Association (SALGA)

    • SALGA continues to play a key role  in  supporting  municipalities  to
      achieve the targets set  out  in  the  Strategic  Framework  of  Water
      Services.
    • A major focus is to  ensure  that  water  and  sanitation  support  is
      properly targeted to municipal needs as well as addressing the
    • In terms of challenges, SALGA pointed out that sanitation remains  the
      biggest challenge in water service delivery.

            Challenges - Sanitation

    • Whilst municipalities are addressing sanitation  at  household  level,
      special attention must  be  paid  to  sanitation  on  farms,  informal
      settlements and bucket eradication.
    • The former DWAF subsidy did not help much towards  bucket  eradication
      were waterborne was being sought as an alternative.

            Critical Issues – Water Services Provider Support

    • In terms of water services provider support,  much  support  has  been
      given by DWAF in initiating and leading excellent support  programmes,
      such as WSPD support, section 78 support, MIG  support,  institutional
      support, support to putting policies and bylaws in  place.   The  most
      pressing need is to support the service provision  function,  ensuring
      good operations and maintenance,  water  quality  management,  revenue
      collection, WSP  business  planning,  asset  management  and  customer
      relations.
    • A clear support strategy for water services providers is needed.
Achieving the water and sanitation targets, SALGA noted the following:

    • Questions have been raised about  the  feasibility  of  achieving  the
      water and sanitation targets for 2008 and 2010, respectively.
    • These targets are not only the responsibility of local government, but
      also the responsibility of the entire sector.
    • Realistic plans are needed for each municipality to determine what can
      or cannot be achieved within the target timeframes.
    • Political decisions are needed in terms of those  municipalities  that
      will not be able  to  meet  the  targets  within  existing  conditions
      (municipality capacity, water services challenges, current  resources,
      etc.)
    • A crucial question asked by SALGA was:  will the targets be changed or
      will  national  and  provincial  government  be  coming  forward  with
      contingency plans?

            Consolidated Support Targeted to Real Needs

    • Consolidation of support across sectors remains a challenge.
    • Whilst Project Consolidate has various outputs, it aims to achieve,  a
      plan needs to be consolidating  sector  support  from  the  provincial
      level to municipalities.
    • Many instruments are still being used to  assess  municipal  capacity.
      However, these instruments are generic- need to study the  results  of
      these assessments to build the capacity they need.
    • Institutional building and capacity building  requires  resources  and
      funding. Access to such resources needs to be facilitated to speed  up
      sustainable local government.

More detail is  needed  on  the  role  of  SALGA  in  building  capacity  at
municipalities.

Section 3: Reflections and Recommendations

Reflections on the Annual Report in Relation  to  Presentations  and  DWAF’s
New Role as Sector Leader

In terms of the above inputs, and DWAF’s new role as sector  leader  in  the
water area, it does not necessarily mean that the expertise and guidance  of
DWAF has to be completely invisible. The following  issues,  emanating  from
the presentations were noted:

    • Representivity in the transformation of the water users’  associations
      and boards were of particular concern.
    • Disparities were noted between the management and financing  of  water
      boards.
    • There were varying service delivery and the provision  of  free  basic
      water,  particularly  due  to  inadequate   infrastructure   in   less
      advantaged areas.
    •  The  need  to  bring  together  dispersed   skills   and   fragmented
      organisations into a coherent water sector.
    • The Catchment Management Agencies are still lagging behind.
    • Whilst some boards  had  borrowed  money  from  various  institutions,
      others had managed to develop coping strategies.
    •  Capacity  had  been   a   much-discussed   issue,   particularly   by
      municipalities.
    • Quality of water was a matter of concern.
    • Cost recovery had also been a frequently discussed topic.
    • The equitable distribution of drinkable water had often been mentioned
      in many reports.
    • Water services agreements were another area that had  frequently  been
      discussed, especially the role of tariffs,  municipalities  and  water
      boards.
    • On the issue of associations, most discussions related to:
    • The functions, regulations, distribution and allocation of
           water.
         • The growing demand for water and waterborne sanitation  and  the
           impact of this on the water user association.
         • The operation, maintenance  and  the  infrastructure  needed  by
           water user associations to effectively supply basic services.
         • The impact of land, land claims affected the way in which  water
           boards are composed.  This is an area that needed further  study
           as the land and water issues were indivisible.

Comments

As sector leader, DWAF can still play a role on the issue  of  water  boards
borrowing substantial amounts of money from outside financial  institutions.
 This relates to cost recovery, and the  involvement  of  private  financial
institutions in public  service  delivery.    It  is  perhaps  an  important
period for DWAF to engage with the private sector on  its  role  in  service
delivery.

On the issue of diversity of tariffs, and within  a  developmental  context,
the ‘water retail environment’ cannot cause further hardship for  the  poor.
DWAF, as sector leader needs to indicate how it plans to play  a  regulatory
role in this regard.

DWAF stated that regulation happens at 2 levels –  DWAF  and  municipalities
regulate.  This begs the following questions:

- Who monitors and regulates nationally?
-  Does  the  Department  ensure  that  municipal  regulations  conform   to
nationally stated guidelines as the sector leader?
- What evaluation and monitoring tools has DWAF  initiated  to  address  the
above?

The Annual Report and DWAF’s responses to the above  at  the  hearings  were
inadequate.  Oversight visits  provided  a  picture  of  municipalities  not
following an integrated  approach  as  they  do  not  view  the  process  of
delivery as one that demands interaction with national, regional levels,  as
well as one that requires co-operation with different  departments  (Health,
Education, Public Works and Housing, etc.) to  ensure  quality  services  to
the people.

The 2005 Annual Report was not very forward-looking.  It does not deal  with
the  challenges  experienced  and  alternative  solutions   to   encountered
problems.  DWAF states its new  role  as  sector  leaders,  but  the  Annual
Report does not speak of what the role means in  the  current  context.   It
stresses the fact that DWAF is no longer the service provider, but does  not
highlight the enormous challenges  involved  in  shifting  to  playing  that
role.

Recommendations

The following recommendations from the members of  the  Portfolio  Committee
and presentations emerged at the 3-day public hearings:

Financial Issues

    • The Portfolio Committee requires DWAF to  provide  it  with  quarterly
      reports dealing with the following:
      • The role of DWAF as sector leader  in  rectifying  the  problems  of
        asset and inventory management as identified by the Auditor-General.
         Specifically, DWAF needs to state the plans to:
        • Strengthen stock counts at regional offices.
        • Sort out its ledger card system.
        • Verify its assets.
        • Ensure that all assets are bar-coded.
  • The role of DWAF in putting in place  an  appropriate,  documented  and
    approved policy and  procedure  framework  that  would  strengthen  the
    weaknesses noted in the AG’s comments on internal control.  These  deal
    specifically  with  the  undefined  basis  on  which   allocations   of
    transactions were made to the Water Trading Account  that  resulted  in
    uncertainty regarding the accurate allocation of expenses  incurred  on
    behalf of this account.

DWAF’s Ongoing Role in the Water Sector

    • SALGA emphasised the important  role  that  DWAF  played  in  building
      institutional capacity for water services, and  argued  strongly  that
      this role should continue.
    • Particularly challenging is building provision capacity.
    • Integrated management will need to tackle sectoral agencies protecting
      their traditional roles and responsibilities, as well as the  problems
      of overlapping or conflicting  legal  mandates  and  responsibilities.
      The limited array of senior and powerful advocates for the concept  of
      IWRM make it difficult to alter  the  well-entrenched  existing  water
      governance systems, which tend to reflect sectoral approaches.
    • Collaboration across the water sector was a major problem.  While  the
      Water Summits were supposedly held to bring together  stakeholders  to
      work out proposals to improve relationships,  it  is  clear  from  the
      hearings that the relationship between water boards and municipalities
      are fraught with  tension.   DWAF  needs  to  address  these  problems
      strategically.
    • As water-related services are extended to promote  public  health  and
      food production, uncoordinated institutions can be confusing and  lead
      to water resources depletion.  It is equally  alarming  that  in  many
      countries, a large number of water supply and sanitation projects  and
      water management policies continue to be developed in  isolation  from
      each other.
    • Effective water governance requires change in attitudes and  behaviour
      among individuals, institutions, professionals, decision-makers  –  in
      short, among all involved. Participation by the public or stakeholders
      is an important tool in implementing such changes  as  it  facilitates
      more informal decision-making and eases conflict resolution.   It  can
      also guarantee that voices of relatively  powerless  groups,  such  as
      women and indigenous people, are heard.  Participation  offers  people
      the opportunity  to  meet  their  responsibilities,  as  well  as  the
      opportunity to claim their rights.
    • Key aspects of sustainability include  empowerment  of  local  people,
      self-reliance  and  social  justice.   These  reflect  concern   about
      principles of equity, accountability and  transparency.   One  way  to
      incorporate these principles into real-life management is to move away
      from conventional forms of water governance, which have  usually  been
      dominated by a top-down approach,  and  professional  experts  in  the
      government and the private sector,  and  move  towards  the  bottom-up
      approach, which combines the experience, knowledge  and  understanding
      of various local groups and people.

Transformation of Water User Associations and Boards

  • Transformation in WUAs:  Link the  issue  of  transformation  in  Water
    Boards and Water user Associations  as  the  necessary  foundation  for
    policy goals  to  be  reached.   An  urgent  look  at  how  boards  and
    associations  represent  the  interests  of  all  people  need  to   be
    undertaken.
  • Link the issue of transformation of  WBs  and  WUAs  as  the  necessary
    foundation for policy goals to be reached.
    • Water Service Providers (WSP) support requires a new approach to  what
      was used to build WSA capacity.
    • The provision function is about managing  a  water  services  business
      where we provide services to our  communities  –  services  that  meet
      their needs.
    • The provision function has to be sustainable  –  it  requires  ongoing
      business planning,  measures  to  ensure  compliance  with  standards,
      mechanisms for customer satisfaction, plans for improvement,  and  has
      to be financially viable.
    • Experience in running good water services provider’s lies within  some
      municipalities and water boards – how does one harness this experience
      into our support initiatives?
    • There is currently a gap in support provided  –  it  does  not  extend
      sufficiently to water services providers.

Municipalities as Water Service Providers

    • Municipalities that are WSPs are best placed to determine  the  nature
      and targets of WSP support.
    • Municipalities with expertise and experience in the WSP functions need
      to shape the WSP Support Strategy.
    • Although the Constitution provides municipalities with  the  authority
      to be water user authorities who regulate.  A strong recommendation is
      that this be discussed in a joint Portfolio Committee meeting with the
      Department of Provincial and  Local  Government  (DPLG)  and  DWAF  to
      discuss the Intergovernmental Relations Framework.  This  meeting  can
      discuss issues of what it means to be a regulator, where  intervention
      can take place and where not.
    • It has been recommended that the challenges  faced  by  municipalities
      and other stakeholders, be addressed  by  the  formation  of  steering
      committees between regional DWAF, WUAs, municipalities and SAWU. These
      steering committees would then address the problem.  It  is  important
      that DWAF updates the Portfolio committee in  its  quarterly  reports,
      regarding these attempts.
    • Municipality capacity remains a challenge for many municipalities.
    • Pressures on local government  to  both  extend  services  and  ensure
      sustainable service delivery. This requires  sustainable  institutions
      that have adequate human resources, skills and expertise, as  well  as
      the necessary systems in place.

Transferral of Schemes by DWAF

    • The schemes transferred by DWAF need  to  comply  with  water  quality
      standards.
    • There is a shortfall in the rehabilitation funding and this impacts on
      the rehabilitation of the schemes.
    • After Care Transfer processes are inadequate and this impedes  service
      delivery.

Five categories, according to the United Nations Department of Economic  and
Social  Affairs  publication,  Governing  Water   Wisely   for   Sustainable
Development, deserve special attention:

    •  Water  resource  assessment:  comprising  data  collection  networks,
      environmental impact assessment techniques and risk management  tools,
      for example, for floods and droughts.
    • Communication and information: raising awareness  is  often  a  potent
      instrument for improving management, particularly when accompanied  by
      opportunities for informed stakeholder participation.
    • Tools for water allocation and conflict resolution:  allocation  could
      be done through a mix of regulatory and market  instruments  based  on
      valuation of costs and benefits; and conflict resolution  tools  could
      provide guidance on  issues  of  upstream  versus  downstream,  sector
      versus sector and human versus nature.
    • Regulatory instruments: including direct controls  such  as  land  use
      plans and utility regulation, as well as economic instruments (prices,
      tariffs, subsidies and others) and encouragement  of  self-regulation,
      for example, by transparent benchmarking.
    • Technology: both new and traditional technologies might provide  scope
      for progress, within the water sector as well as in others that affect
      water demand.
References

Substantive input by the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs  and  Forestry
at the Public Hearings, 12 – 14 October 2005

Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, Annual Report 2005

The Estimate of National Expenditure Actual Expenditure  (2004/05)  and  the
Budget Allocation (MTEF 2005/06 – 2007/08)  amount  for  the  Department  of
Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF)

Presentations made at the Public Hearings:

    • Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
    • Amatola Water Board
    • Bloem Water Board
    • Mhlathuze Water Board
    • Bushbuckridge Water Board
    • Magalies Water Board
    • Rand Water Board
    • Botshelo Water Board
    • Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority (TCTA)
    • Great Fish River Water User Association
    • South African Local Government Association
    • Overberg Water board
    • Central Breede River Water User Association
    • Umgeni Water Board
    • Lepelle Northern Water Board
    • Vaalharts Water User Association
    • Impala Water User Association
    • Kakamas Water User Association
    • Orange-Riet Water User Association



                          TUESDAY, 13 DECEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 13 December 2005:


            i) National Credit Bill [B 18D – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
               76)
           ii) Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 23D – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 76).

     (2)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 13 December
         2005:


            i) Electronic Communications Bill [B 9B – 2005] (introduced as
               Convergence Bill [B 9 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)
           ii) Diamonds Amendment Bill [B 27B – 2005] (Reintroduced)]
               (National Assembly – sec 75)
          iii) Diamonds Second Amendment Bill [B 39B – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 76)

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Messages from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly:


      1) Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly


         Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council
         of Provinces on 13 December 2005 and transmitted for consideration
         of Council’s proposed amendments:


             i) Children’s Bill [B 70B – 2003] (National Assembly – sec 75)
                (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings and
                Committee Reports, 7 December 2005, p 3102)


                 The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
                Social Development of the National Assembly for a report on
                the amendments proposed by the Council.


            ii) Independent Communications Authority of South Africa
                Amendment Bill [B 32B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)
                (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings and
                Committee Reports, 23 November 2005, p 3066)


                 The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
                Communications of the National Assembly for a report on the
                amendments proposed by the Council.


           iii) Precious Metals Bill [B 30B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
                75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings
                and Committee Reports, 14 November 2005, p 2755)


                 The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
                Minerals and Energy of the National Assembly for a report
                on the amendments proposed by the Council.


            iv) Nursing Bill [B 26B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)
                (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings and
                Committee Reports, 7 December 2005, p 3101)


                 The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
                Health of the National Assembly for a report on the
                amendments proposed by the Council.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 2 – Parliament of
        the Republic of South Africa for 2004-2005, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
            Vote 2 for 2004-2005.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and Intellectual
         Property Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2004-2005, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
         2005.

3.    The Minister for Public Enterprises


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
         Company Limited (SAFCOL) for the year ended 30 June 2005, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for the year ended 30 June 2005.


      b) Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Limited for the 9 months
         period ended 31 March 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the 9 months period ended
         31 March 2005.

4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Botshelo Water for the year
        ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2005.
      b) Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuck Ridge Water for the
         year ended 30 June 2005.


      c) Report and Financial Statements of Albany Coast Water for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 2005.


      d) Report and Financial Statements of Amatola Water for the year ended
         30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2005.


      e) Report and Financial Statements of Lepelle Northern Water for the
         year ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
         2005.


      f) Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
         2005.


      g) Report and Financial Statements of Namaqua Water Board for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 2005.


      h) Report and Financial Statements of Overberg Water for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
         2005.


      i) Report and Financial Statements of the Pelladrift Water Board for
         the year ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended
         30 June 2005.

      j) Report and Financial Statements of Rand Water for the year ended 30
         June 2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2005.

      k) Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
         2005.

      l) Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni Water for the year ended
         30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2005.

National Assembly
1.    The Speaker


      a) Letter from the Minister of Public Enterprises dated 22 November
         2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Reports of
         South African Forestry Company Limited (SAFCOL), Alexkor and Denel
         for 2004-2005:

      Late Tabling of Annual Financial Statements of Safcol, Alexkor and
      Denel to Parliament


            1. The letter dated 18 October 2005 from the Acting Speaker, GQM
               Doidge, MP has reference.


            2. In terms of section 55(1)(d) of the Public Finance Management
               Act, 1999 (hereafter called “PFMA”), Alexkor, Denel and
               Safcol are required to submit their annual financial
               statements and annual report within five months of the end of
               a financial year, to National Treasury, to the Executive
               Authority responsible for the SOE as well as to the Auditor-
               General.

            3. Safcol’s financial year-end is currently 30 June 2005.
               Therefore Safcol is still in compliance with the required
               timelines prescribed by the PFMA regarding submission to
               Executive Authority. The Statements should be delivered to
               the Department Parliamentary Office before the end of
               November whereafter it will be prepared for submission to
               Parliament for distribution to the Members of Parliament.

            4. The delay in the submission of Denel’s AFS was due to the
               concern raised by the auditors on the issue of a material
               irregularity in terms of Section 20(5) of the Public
               Accountants and Auditors Act, 1991, regarding the solvency of
               Denel. This matter delayed the auditing process, and was only
               resolved upon receipt of a letter from the Minister of
               Finance, dated 29 July 2005 concurring with the issuance of a
               guarantee in the amount of R 765 million by the Minister of
               Public Enterprises.

            The Statement should be delivered to the Departmental
            Parliamentary Office before the end of November whereafter it
            will be submitted to Parliament for distribution to the Members
            of Parliament.


            5. The delay in the submission of Alexkor’s AFS was due because
               of difficulty in determining the exact figure for Alexkor’s
               Environmental Liability, which had to be reflected in the
               AFS. Alexkor has indicated that they have sent their AFS to
               the printers in October 2005, but could not give a certain
               date by which these would be submitted to the Parliamentary
               Office in Cape Town.


            It has however been communicated to Alexkor that they deliver
            550 copies of its AFS to the Parliamentary Office by 30 November
            2005.


            6. I trust you will find the above in order.


            Yours Sincerely


            Alec Erwin, MP
            Minister of Public Enterprises


 COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the Precious
    Metals Bill [B 30B - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 13
    December 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered the
      Precious Metals Bill [B 30B - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75) and
      proposed amendments of the National Council of Provinces
      (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 14 November 2005, p
      2755), referred to the Committee, reports the Bill with amendments [B
      30C - 2005].

 Report to be considered.

2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the Nursing Bill [B 26B –
    2005 (Reprint)] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 13 December 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the Nursing Bill
    [B 26B – 2005 (Reprint)] and proposed amendments of the National
    Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 07
    December 2005, p 3101), referred to the committee, reports the Bill
    with an amendment [B 26C – 2005].

 Report to be considered.


3. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development on the
    Children’s Bill [B 70B – 2003] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 13
    December 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Social Development, having considered the
    Children’s Bill [B 70B – 2003] and proposed amendments of the National
    Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 07
    December 2005, p 3102), referred to the committee, reports the Bill
    with amendments [B 70C – 2003].

 Report to be considered.


4. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the Independent
    Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment Bill [B 32B – 2005]
    (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 13 December 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
    Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment Bill [B
    32B – 2005] and proposed amendments of the National Council of
    Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 23 November
    2005, p 3066), referred to the committee, reports the Bill with
    amendments [B 32C – 2005].

 Report to be considered.
-----------------------




